##### Contents

-    Preface
-    1 Gauge-fixing 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity
    -    1.1 Riemannian manifolds in two dimensions
    -    1.2 The partition function in conformal gauge
    -    1.3 An interpretation in terms of propagating strings
-    2 Liouville Theory
    -    2.1 Classical Liouville Theory
    -    2.2 The Lobachevskiy plane
    -    2.3 The semi-classical spectrum of Liouville theory.
    -    2.4 The mini-superspace approximation.
    -    2.5 Quantum Liouville theory
    -    2.6 The dual state space
    -    2.7 The structure of the Verma modules
    -    2.8 The operator product expansion
-    3 Boundary conditions in Liouville theory
    -    3.1 The boundary state formalism
    -    3.2 The FZZT boundary state
    -    3.3 The ZZ boundary states
-    4 The (p,q) minimal model coupled to Quantum Gravity
    -    4.1 The (p,q) minimal model
    -    4.2 The (p,q) minimal model coupled to Quantum Gravity
    -    4.3 The FZZT and ZZ-branes
-    5 The generic FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude
-    6 The nature of ZZ-branes
    -    6.1 The one-point function on the pseudo-sphere
    -    6.2 The FZZT-ZZ and ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitudes
    -    6.3 The nature of ZZ-branes
-    7 ZZ branes from a worldsheet perspective
    -    7.1 Dynamical triangulations
    -    7.2 The cylinder amplitude with fixed distance
    -    7.3 ZZ-branes from a worldsheet perspective
-    8 Conclusion and discussion
-    A The one and two point functions in the upper half plane
-    B Identities used in the derivation of the cylinder amplitude

## Preface

In the twentieth century Physics was revolutionized by two very
different theories, Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity. General
Relativity was developed by Albert Einstein in 1915/1916 and completely
altered our understanding of space and time. A truly deep discovery made
by Einstein is that the fundamental degrees of freedom in Nature are
essentially geometrical. According to General Relativity we may
formulate all laws in Nature in terms of differential geometry. The
successes of General Relativity are many. General Relativity is the
basis of the cosmological standard model, which predicts the birth of
the Universe at a finite time in the past and describes the evolution of
the Universe. The discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation
by Penzias and Wilson in 1965 and the more recent measurements of the
anisotropy in this background radiation revealing the density
fluctuations of the Universe at early times probably compromise the best
evidence so far for the Big Bang model of the Universe. Quantum
Mechanics was developed in the first half of the twentieth century and
concerns Nature on or below the atomic scale. The foundation of Quantum
Mechanics was developed by Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Max Planck,
Louis De Broglie, Albert Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger, Max Born, John von
Neumann, Paul Dirac, Wolfgang Pauli and others. According to (the
Copenhagen interpretation of) Quantum Mechanics the fundamental laws
governing Nature are probabilistic rather than deterministic as in
classical Physics. Even though we know the initial state of a physical
system we cannot predict the outcome of a given experiment with
certainty. We can only predict the probability of a given outcome. The
discovery of Quantum Mechanics has had a crucial impact on both
Chemistry and modern day technology. The models of the electron
configuration within atoms and molecules obtained from Quantum Mechanics
explains the structure of the periodic table and explains how individual
atoms combine into chemicals and molecules. The invention of
semi-conductor devices such as the transistor has truly revolutionized
our modern day society. The development of Quantum Mechanics has led to
Quantum Field Theory and has so far culminated in the formulation of the
standard model in particle physics, which describes three of the four
known interactions in Nature binding matter together. The standard model
has been verified numerous times in accelerators all around the world.

Einsteins theory of Gravity is a classical theory. Given the energy
momentum tensor and a set of suitable boundary conditions we may in
principle determine the gravitational field from Einsteins field
equations. Thus, General Relativity cannot be the fundamental theory of
Gravity and we need to formulate a quantum theory of Gravity, in which
we reconcile the probabilistic nature of Quantum Mechanics with the
geometrical nature of General Relativity. The formulation of a quantum
theory of Gravity is probably the first step toward a unified theory of
all known interactions in Nature, that is a theory of “everything”.
Moreover, a quantum theory of Gravity would allow us to study the
evolution of the Universe all the way back to the moment of big bang.

In this thesis we will study 2 dimensional euclidean Quantum Gravity, in
which case General Relativity simplifies due to the topological nature
of the Einstein-Hilbert action. 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity serves as a
toy model, from which we hope to gain some insight, which will help us
formulate a theory of Quantum Gravity in higher dimensions. In
particular we will consider non-compact geometries in this thesis, which
are clearly of fundamental importance to a quantum theory of Gravity. In
chapter 1 we discuss how Liouville theory emerges in the process of
gauge-fixing 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. In chapters 2 and 3 we
discuss Liouville theory and so-called FZZT and ZZ boundary conditions
in Liouville theory. In chapter 4 we consider the @xmath minimal model
coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity and discuss the spectrum of
physical closed string states and the so-called FZZT and ZZ branes. In
chapter 5 we calculate the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude for all pairs of
Cardy matter states in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity and discuss the structure of these cylinder amplitudes.
In chapter 6 we discuss the ZZ branes and propose a particular
interpretation of the so-called principal ZZ branes. In chapter 7 we
study a transition from compact to non-compact worldsheet geometry and
show, how the boundary conditions obtained in this limit are related to
the ZZ branes. In the chapters 1 - 4 and the sections 7.1 and 7.2 we
review the nessecary background material. In the chapters 5 and 6 and in
section 7.3 we present the results obtained by the author of this thesis
in collaboration with his academic adviser. Finally, I would like to
thank my academic adviser Prof. Jan Ambjørn for introducing me to the
fascinating world of Quantum Gravity and for having faith in me.

## Chapter 1 Gauge-fixing 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity

### 1.1 Riemannian manifolds in two dimensions

In this thesis we will consider both compact and non-compact
two-dimensional connected and oriented Riemannian manifolds. We will
often refer to these manifolds as world-sheets. Every oriented
two-dimensional real manifold is a complex manifold of complex dimension
1. If the manifold is also compact, we refer to the manifold as a
Riemann surface. [ 1 ]

Two manifolds are homeomorphic, if there exists a homeomorphism between
the two, that is if we can deform one into the other by a continuous
transformation. Two homeomorphic manifolds are topologically
indistinguishable. The group of homeomorphisms defines an equivalence
relation and thus introduces a partition of the set of manifolds into
equivalence classes of manifolds with the same topology. Any
two-dimensional compact, connected and orientable surface can be
continuously transformed into a sphere to which we have added a number
of handles and a number of holes. The particular numbers of handles and
holes added to the sphere depend uniquely on the surface we consider.
Hence, the topology, that is the equivalence class discussed in the
above, of a two-dimensional compact, connected and orientable surface is
completely characterized by the number of handles and the number of
connected boundaries of the surface. The different equivalence classes
are characterized by so-called topological invariants, which are
properties of the differentiable manifolds invariant under
homeomorphisms. An important topological invariant of a manifold is the
Euler number. The Euler number @xmath of a two-dimensional compact,
connected and orientable surface is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the number of connected boundaries @xmath and the genus
@xmath , that is the number of handles of the surface. [ 1 , 2 ]

If two parametrizations of two Riemannian manifolds are related by a
coordinate transformation, that is the two manifolds are related by a
diffeomorphism, then the two manifolds are physically indistinguishable.
Indeed, the physics cannot depend on our choice of parametrization.
Thus, we identify Riemannian manifolds up to diffeomorphisms, that is
the group of diffeomorphisms partitions the set of Riemannian manifolds
into physically distinct equivalence classes.

Let us for simplicity consider a connected, compact and oriented
manifold of genus @xmath without boundaries and let @xmath be the space
of metrics on this manifold. A Weyl rescaling of the metric @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The space of metric modulo Weyl rescalings and diffeomorphisms
continuously connected with the identity is a finite dimensional space
called Teichmüller space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Teichmüller space is @xmath -dimensional in the case of the sphere,
@xmath -dimensional in the case of the torus of genus @xmath and @xmath
-dimensional in the case of the torus of genus @xmath , @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1
In this thesis we refer to the real dimension of a given space. There
exists so-called large coordinate transformations, which are not
continuously connected with the identity. The large coordinate
transformations and the identity transformation form a group known as
the modular group

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

These large coordinate transformations relate different points @xmath in
Teichmüller space. If we identify points in Teichmüller space under the
modular group we obtain a compact space known as moduli space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

An equivalence class in moduli space is referred to as a conformal
structure. From each conformal structure @xmath in moduli space we
choose a representative @xmath known as the fiducial metric. [ 1 ]

Let us consider the group of compositions of Weyl rescalings and
diffeomorphisms in more detail. This group is not a direct product of
Weyl rescalings and diffeomorphisms, a fact, which is crucial in the
continuum formulation of euclidean 2D Quantum Gravity. Indeed,
diffeomorphisms exist, under which the metric transforms by a Weyl
rescaling as in ( 1.2 ). These are the conformal transformations and
they form a group, the conformal group. [ 1 ] The conformal group as a
abstract group ² ² 2 Isomorphic groups correspond to the same abstract
group. is independent of the particular metric on the manifold.
Actually, the conformal group is completely determined by the topology
of the manifold. However, the particular realization of the group off
course depends on the particular metric on the manifold. It is easily
seen from eq. ( 1.2 ), that a conformal transformation preserves angles,
while changing the scale locally.

Let us take a closer look at the particular realization of the group of
conformal transformations in the case when the metric is proportional to
the unit metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under the infinitesimal coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

the metric transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under an infinitesimal Weyl rescaling the metric transforms according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Demanding that the coordinate transformation corresponds to a Weyl
rescaling, we obtain the following two equations concerning the
generator of the diffeomorphism

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which we recognize as the Cauchy-Riemann equations. Hence, if we
introduce complex coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

we realize, that an infinitesimal holomorphic coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a conformal transformation in the flat region of our manifold.

### 1.2 The partition function in conformal gauge

Let us couple some matter to 2D euclidean gravity. This is achieved by
expressing the action @xmath governing the matter fields @xmath and
valid in special relativity in a covariant manner,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The principle of general covariance assures us, that we have obtained an
action for the matter fields valid in general relativity. Let us for
simplicity consider the topology of a compact, connected and oriented
manifold of genus @xmath without boundaries. For this topology we
formally define the euclidean partition function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the euclidean Einstein-Hilbert action modified by a
cosmological term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gravitational constant, @xmath is the Ricci scalar
and @xmath is the bare cosmological constant. In the partition function
( 1.15 ) we integrate over the space of matter configurations and the
space of metrics @xmath defined on the considered topology. Using the
Gauss-Bonnet theorem, which in the case of a compact Riemannian manifold
@xmath with a boundary @xmath reads [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the geodesic curvature of the boundary @xmath and @xmath
is the line element, we realize from eq. ( 1.1 ), that the euclidean
Einstein-Hilbert term in the gravitational action only depends on which
topology we consider and we may express the gravitational action as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euler number and @xmath is the area of the
Riemannian manifold with metric @xmath . Hence, as long as we consider a
fixed topology we may leave out the euclidean Einstein-Hilbert term in
the gravitational action and we are left with a quite simple
gravitational action in 2D Quantum Gravity depending only on the area of
the Riemannian manifold in consideration. ³ ³ 3 Notice, pure classical
euclidean gravity in 2 dimensions is actually ill-defined, since the
Riemannian manifold, which minimizes the classical action, has vanishing
area.

As mentioned previously configurations related by coordinate
transformations are physically equivalent. Thus, both the actions and
the measures appearing in the partition function should be invariant
under diffeomorphisms such that physically equivalent configurations
give the same contribution to the partition function. From eq. ( 1.16 )
and the above discussion it is clear that both the action governing the
matter degrees of freedom and the gravitational action are invariant
under diffeomorphisms. In order to define a measure, that is an
infinitesimal volume element in the corresponding space of
configurations, we should first define a metric on the space of
configurations, that is for each configuration we should define an inner
product on the the linear space of infinitesimal deformations of the
particular configuration. The metric allows us to introduce a notion of
angles between deformations and length. ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the case of a finite
dimensional space the metric defines the infinitesimal volume element
explicitly. However, in the present case of an infinite dimensional
space of configurations it is hard to construct a volume element
explicitly from the metric although attempts have been made. [ 3 ]
Fortunately, we only need to determine various Jacobians, which we may
obtain from a particular Gaussian integral over the tangent space of
deformations. [ 1 ] If the line element of a given deformation is
invariant under diffeomorphisms, then the corresponding measure will
also be invariant. [ 1 ] In the space of metrics @xmath we define the
local metric by the line element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive real number. [ 4 ] This line element is
clearly invariant under diffeomorphisms. Similarly, a suitable metric
should be defined on the space of matter configurations such that the
matter measure is invariant under diffeomorphisms.

Each physically distinct configuration should only contribute once to
the partition function. This is formally implemented by dividing the
partition function by the volume of the group of diffeomorphisms, @xmath
. However, we wish to fix the gauge explicitly in order to obtain a more
well-defined partition function. Any given metric @xmath may be related
to the fiducial metric @xmath at some particular point @xmath in moduli
space @xmath by a Weyl rescaling and a diffeomorphism. Hence, instead of
integrating over the space of metrics @xmath in the partition function (
1.15 ) we may integrate over moduli space, the space of Weyl rescalings
modulo conformal transformations and the space of diffeomorphisms @xmath
. We implement the integration over Weyl rescalings modulo the subgroup
corresponding to conformal transformations of the metric by integrating
over the entire group of Weyl rescalings and then dividing the partition
function by the volume of the conformal group. Under this change of
variables the measure transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Jacobian @xmath may be expressed in terms of Fadeev-Popov
ghosts as ⁵ ⁵ 5 Actually, the above expression for the Jacobian is not
entirely correct. As we will discuss shortly we have not fixed the gauge
symmetry completely. In order to the fix the gauge symmetry completely
we need to consider the partition function with some operators inserted
and then we may fix the residual symmetry by fixing the positions of
some of these operators. Moreover, in this case the Jacobian becomes
more complicated. In addition to the factor @xmath the integrand in the
Jacobian also contains a factor

@xmath (1.21)

for each metric moduli @xmath and a factor @xmath for each fixed
coordinate @xmath . The interested reader is referred to the extensive
literature on this subject such as [ 2 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the ghost action is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above ghost action @xmath is a traceless symmetric Grassmann
tensor field and @xmath is a Grassmann vector field. Using the
invariance of the actions and the measures under diffeomorphisms we may
perform the integration over the group of diffeomorphisms obtaining the
volume of the group of diffeomorphisms, which cancels the same factor in
the denominator. We are left with the partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have explicitly included the dependence of the measures on the
metric. [ 5 ]

We define a classical conformal field theory as a field theory defined
by an action invariant under the composition of any given conformal
transformation and the corresponding inverse Weyl rescaling leaving the
background metric ⁶ ⁶ 6 In this context the background metric refers to
the metric of the world-sheet. This background metric should not be
confused with the background metric of target space in string theory.
unaltered. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Notice, we define a conformal transformation as a
diffeomorphism, under which the metric transforms by a rescaling in
accordance to eq. ( 1.2 ). Some authors prefer to define a conformal
transformation as the composition of a diffeomorphism, under which the
metric transforms according to ( 1.2 ), and the corresponding inverse
Weyl rescaling of the metric. A given action typically descends from an
action invariant under all diffeomorphisms including conformal
transformations as defined in this thesis. Classical conformal field
theories typically distinguish themselves from other theories by being
invariant under Weyl rescalings of the metric. Hence, changing the scale
locally maps one solution to a given classical conformal field theory
into another solution. It is easily seen, that the ghost action actually
defines a classical conformal field theory. This follows from the fact,
that the ghost action is invariant under diffeomorphisms and the fact,
that the ghost action is invariant under Weyl transformations of the
metric due to the traceless and symmetric nature of the ghost field
@xmath . In this thesis we will only consider matter field theories
given by an action, which classically defines a conformal field theory,
that is the matter actions will be invariant under Weyl rescalings of
the metric. We wish to factor out the dependence of the measures on the
Weyl factor in order to make the dependence of the partition function on
the Liouville field @xmath explicit. In [ 5 , 2 ] it is argued that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the central charge of the conformal matter theory and
where the Liouville action @xmath is given

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar. In particular, in [ 6 ] it is shown
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

With regard to the Liouville measure @xmath the corresponding analysis
is much more complicated due to an implicit dependence of the Liouville
measure on @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 The local metric in the space of Liouville
configurations @xmath is given by the line element

@xmath (1.28)

The implicit dependence of the line element on @xmath through the metric
@xmath complicates calculations. Yet, one simply assumes that the
Liouville measure transforms in a way similar to ( 1.27 ) and ( 1.25 )
and thus arrives at the ansatz [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have rescaled the Liouville field @xmath in order to obtain the
conventional Liouville action

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.30)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants to be determined in the following.
From [ 7 ] we expect the cosmological constant @xmath to be divergent in
the cutoff introduced in the calculation of the Jacobians. However, we
may absorb @xmath into the bare cosmological constant @xmath in the
gravitational action ( 1.16 ) obtaining a finite renormalized
cosmological constant @xmath , which is a free parameter of the theory.
The final expression for the partition function is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Liouville action is normalized according to ( 1.30 ). The
development of a partition function formalism for 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity was pioneered by Polyakov in [ 8 ] .

In the above partition function we integrate over the entire group of
Weyl rescalings instead of integrating over the group of Weyl rescalings
modulo the subgroup corresponding to conformal transformations of the
metric. Thus, we have not fixed the gauge completely. We are left with a
residual gauge symmetry, namely the invariance of the partition function
under conformal transformations. This conformal symmetry is crucial in
the continuum formulation of 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. The rescaling
of the metric under a conformal transformation may be viewed as a
transformation of the Liouville field. The fiducial metric does not
transform under conformal transformations. Both the matter and the ghost
sector indeed define quantum conformal field theories. ⁹ ⁹ 9 That is,
both the measures and the actions are invariant under conformal
transformations of the ghost and matter fields. The central charge of
the ghost theory is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

With regard to the Liouville sector we first consider the case @xmath .
In this case the action ( 1.30 ) and the Liouville measure define a
quantum conformal field theory, which is known as the linear dilaton
theory, with central charge [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now turn on the cosmological constant @xmath . The Liouville sector
should remain a quantum conformal field theory even for non-zero values
of the cosmological constant @xmath . Turning on @xmath should
correspond to a marginal deformation of the linear dilaton theory to
quantum Liouville theory. We will study quantum Liouville theory in more
detail in the next couple of chapters. However, for the purpose of
completing the gauge-fixing procedure let us mention here, that the
condition of marginality implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition and the so-called Seiberg bound eq. ( 2.59 ) determine
the value of @xmath . The marginal deformation of the linear dilaton
theory into Liouville theory does not alter the value of the central
charge @xmath . [ 5 ]

In the partition function ( 1.24 ) the Liouville field only enters
through the metric @xmath . Taking the rescaling of @xmath into account
the partition function ( 1.31 ) should be invariant under the
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

leaving the actual metric @xmath invariant. If we redefine the Liouville
field as @xmath , we recognize the invariance of the partition function
under the above transformation as the condition, that the partition
function ( 1.31 ) should be invariant under Weyl rescalings of the
fiducial metric. Indeed, the partition function should be independent of
our choice of the fiducial metric. In [ 5 , 2 ] it is argued that the
partition function @xmath of a given quantum conformal field theory
transforms as ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Eqs. ( 1.27 ) and ( 1.25 ) may be considered as
special cases of ( 1.36 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

under a Weyl rescaling of the metric @xmath , where @xmath is the
central charge of the theory and the Liouville action is normalized
according to ( 1.26 ). Hence, under a Weyl rescaling of the fiducial
metric the partition function ( 1.31 ) transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the total central charge. Demanding that the partition
function is invariant under Weyl rescalings of the fiducial metric we
obtain the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which fixes the value of @xmath . Given the above discussion we somewhat
understand the physical significance of the linear term in the Liouville
action. This term is needed in order for the coupled theory to be
independent of our choice of the fiducial metric.

The uniformization theorem states, that we may choose a fiducial metric
@xmath from each equivalence class @xmath in moduli space proportional
to the flat metric @xmath , that is @xmath , given that we parametrize
the manifold on an appropriate coordinate region and impose the
appropriate periodicity conditions on the coordinate region depending on
@xmath . [ 1 , 2 ] We may choose @xmath independent of @xmath , that is
@xmath depends only on the topology of the manifold. The conformal
structure is encoded in the coordinate region on which we parametrize
the manifold and in the periodicity conditions imposed on the coordinate
region. This choice of the fiducial metric is known as the conformal
gauge. [ 2 ] For a generic topology the factor @xmath do not belong to
the group of globally defined Weyl rescalings. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 f may for
instance be zero at some point in the coordinate region. Hence, for a
generic topology we may not choose the fiducial metric flat everywhere,
that is @xmath . Indeed, this would contradict the Gauss-Bonnet theorem
( 1.17 ). In the case of the torus of genus @xmath or the cylinder, we
may actually choose the fiducial metric flat everywhere. [ 2 ] The
general approach to dealing with the factor @xmath in the fiducial
metric is to absorb @xmath into the Liouville field @xmath by a
transformation similar to ( 1.35 ). The new Liouville field inherits the
boundary conditions on @xmath . Instead of integrating over
configurations of the Liouville field corresponding to Weyl rescalings
of the fiducial metric, we are now integrating over Liouville
configurations satisfying some explicit boundary condition ensuring that
@xmath belongs to the space of metrics defined on the given topology.
Due to this approach we end up dealing with the flat metric @xmath ,
when imposing the conformal gauge. In the case of the sphere and the
disc we may parametrize them either on the extended complex plane or the
upper half plane. In both cases the above procedure leads to the
boundary condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the Liouville field. [ 9 ]

In complex coordinates ( 1.12 ) and introducing complex derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may express the ghost action ( 1.23 ) in unit gauge, @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We treat @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
as independent fields in the partition function. [ 2 ]

### 1.3 An interpretation in terms of propagating strings

In this thesis our main focus will be on understanding the gauge-fixed
theory in terms of quantum geometry. However, at least for some matter
theories we may interpret the gauge-fixed theory as describing strings
propagating in some fixed target space. This interpretation lies at the
core of string theory, on which the literature is quite immense. We will
only briefly discuss this interpretation. Let us for simplicity consider
the case, where the matter sector consists of @xmath free Bose fields
@xmath , which transform as scalars under world sheet diffeomorphisms.
We may view the fields @xmath and the Liouville field @xmath as @xmath
coordinates embedding the world sheet into a @xmath dimensional target
space. ¹² ¹² 12 The Liouville direction always appears from the
integration over the conformal anomaly in the gauge-fixing procedure,
except in the critical case when the central charge @xmath equals @xmath
. As strings propagate, split and join in the target space they trace
out a 2 dimensional surface. Each configuration of the fields @xmath and
@xmath corresponds to a particular two-dimensional surface traced out by
a set of propagating strings in target space. Inserting a gauge
invariant operator in the bulk of the world-sheet corresponds to adding
an incoming or outgoing closed string in some particular state. Hence,
evaluating a given number of gauge invariant operators in the
gauge-fixed partition function @xmath corresponds to calculating a
particular string diagram of a given topology with a given number of
incoming and outgoing string states. The string diagrams are the string
theory counterparts of Feynman diagrams in field theory and the nature
of the process described by a particular string diagram is determined by
the particular topology of the world-sheet and the particular insertions
of gauge-fixed operators into the partition function. Now, string theory
is a rather vast subject and trying to summarize string theory in a
couple of sentences will not do justice to the theory. In this thesis I
will assume, that the reader is familiar with the basics of string
theory presented in for instance [ 2 ] . I will from time to time return
to this interpretation and try to understand the results presented in
this thesis in terms of string theory. In this section I will describe
the features of the fixed target space background generic to the
non-critical string theories, that arise when we gauge-fix 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity.

In string theory we may only calculate the scattering amplitudes of
small perturbations of a fixed background. The fixed background is given
by the target space geometry and the additional target space fields and
the fixed background determines the conformal non-linear sigma model
governing the embedding coordinates living on the world-sheet. Since the
appearance of Liouville theory is generic to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity, let us shortly describe the background associated with
Liouville theory. Firstly, let us consider a configuration of the matter
fields @xmath and @xmath describing a set of propagating closed strings
localized in a small region in the @xmath -direction of target space
centered around @xmath . In this case we may evaluate the linear term in
the Liouville action using the Gauss-Bonnet theorem ( 1.17 ) and ( 1.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the genus of the closed world-sheet. It follows from the
previous discussion that two times the number of handles of the closed
world-sheet equals the number of times a closed string either splits
into two intermediate strings or joins with another intermediate closed
string in the corresponding string diagram. Hence, we may view @xmath as
the local closed string coupling constant. Notice, the closed string
coupling constant increases with @xmath . At @xmath higher order string
diagrams are suppressed, while at @xmath the contributions from higher
order diagrams dominate the scattering amplitudes.

Secondly, the contributions to the partition function from
configurations localized in the large @xmath -region of target space are
suppressed by the interaction term in the Liouville action. The
interaction term introduces a wall in the Liouville direction at @xmath
preventing the strings from entering the strong coupling region of
target space.

Different target space backgrounds correspond to different conformal
field theories on the world-sheet with a total central charge equal to
zero, which is one of the defining features of a string theory
background. However, the particular conformal matter theories we will
consider in this thesis do not justify any obvious interpretation in
terms of strings propagating in some target space. The above target
space picture of Liouville theory is appropriate in the case of 2D
string theory, in which the matter consists of a single free Bose field
describing a Wick rotated time-direction in target space. Yet, the
mathematical structure of the conformal field theories we are going to
consider in this thesis is very much similar to the mathematical
structure of the conformal field theories, which we more obviously may
associate with some target space backgrounds. Some authors have actually
tried to interpret the results obtained in the models, we are going to
consider, in terms of the above target space picture of Liouville
theory. [ 12 ] Furthermore, a new target space interpretation of the
models we are going to consider has actually been proposed recently. [
11 , 12 , 13 ] We will return to this string theory interpretation later
on in the thesis.

## Chapter 2 Liouville Theory

In the previous chapter Liouville theory appeared in the procedure of
the gauge fixing euclidean 2D quantum gravity. Liouville theory concerns
the Liouville factor relating the physical metric to the fiducial
metric, @xmath , and defines a theory of 2D euclidean geometry within a
given equivalence class @xmath in moduli space. The role of the fiducial
metric in Liouville theory is to determine, which particular equivalence
class @xmath in moduli space we consider. In this chapter we first study
classical Liouville theory in order to obtain some intuition about
Liouville theory. We then turn our attention to a particular solution to
Liouville theory describing a non-compact geometry. Finally, we discuss
semi-classical Liouville theory and then quantum Liouville theory.

### 2.1 Classical Liouville Theory

Let us start out by studying classical Liouville theory. If we define
the classical Liouville field as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

from ( 1.30 ) we obtain the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the limit @xmath . Notice, in this limit @xmath essentially measures
the rigidity of the world sheet geometry toward quantum fluctuations and
in the strict limit @xmath only the Liouville configuration, that
minimizes the above Liouville action, contributes to the Liouville
partition function. We may define the limit @xmath as the classical
limit of Liouville theory. ¹ ¹ 1 This does not contradict our previous
statement made in footnote 3 regarding the non-existence of a classical
theory of pure gravity in two dimensions defined by the Einstein-Hilbert
action. On page 1.2 we argued, that the total central charge has to
vanish. In the case of pure 2D euclidean quantum gravity we get from
eqs. ( 1.32 ), ( 1.33 ) and ( 1.34 ), that @xmath . Hence, in the limit
@xmath we do not study pure classical gravity defined by the
Einstein-Hilbert action. In this limit we study some effective theory of
2D euclidean gravity obtained by integrating out some exotic matter
field theory with central charge @xmath . Using the formula [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

concerning the Ricci scalar @xmath and valid in two dimensions the
classical equation of motion of the Liouville field is easily obtained
from the classical Liouville action ( 2.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The classical Liouville equation transforms covariantly
under diffeomorphisms. Thus, classical Liouville theory defines a
consistent theory concerning the metric @xmath within a given
equivalence class @xmath in moduli space. The classical Liouville
equation ( 2.5 ) describes a surface of constant curvature.

Whether the classical Liouville equation has a solution within a given
equivalence class @xmath depends on, whether the sign of @xmath is
consistent with the topology of the Riemannian manifolds belonging to
@xmath . The sign of @xmath must be choosen in accordance with the
Gauss-Bonnet theorem ( 1.17 ), which relates the Euler number ( 1.1 ) to
the curvature. ² ² 2 In the case of the torus of genus @xmath we have to
choose @xmath . If this is the case, the uniformization theorem states,
that there exists a Riemannian manifold of constant curvature @xmath
within any given equivalence class @xmath in moduli space. [ 1 ]

We may view a conformal transformation of the physical metric @xmath as
a transformation of the classical Liouville field keeping the fiducial
metric @xmath fixed. In conformal gauge and applying complex coordinates
the classical Liouville field transforms according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

under the conformal transformation @xmath . Since the classical
Liouville equation ( 2.5 ) transforms covariantly under a
diffeomorphism, a conformal transformation of the Liouville field maps
one solution to the classical Liouville equation into another solution.
Hence, classical Liouville theory is a conformal field theory. ³ ³ 3
This may also be deduced from the classical Liouville action ( 2.3 ). In
conformal gauge the classical Liouville action changes by a boundary
term under an infinitesimal conformal transformation of the classical
Liouville field.

### 2.2 The Lobachevskiy plane

Let us consider the case @xmath and let us introduce the length scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the upper half plane ⁴ ⁴ 4 In this case the upper half plane does not
include the real axis. Liouville theory admits the solution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

expressed in complex coordinates. This solution describes a non-compact
geometry with constant negative curvature @xmath known as the
Lobachevskiy plane, which is an euclidean version of AdS @xmath . [ 10 ]
The isometry group of the Lobachevskiy plane is the group of Möbius
transformation @xmath mapping the upper half plane to the upper half
plane

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is the group of holomorphic bijective maps from the upper
half plane to the upper half plane, it follows from our discussion on
page 1.12 , that the group of isometries coincides with the group of
conformal transformations on the upper half plane. Thus, the
Lobachevskiy plane is maximally symmetric. Solving the geodesic equation
we may easily determine the geodesic distance @xmath between the two
point @xmath and @xmath in the Lobachevskiy plane parametrized in the
upper half plane

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the geodesic distance @xmath diverges as @xmath .

Using the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may map the Lobachevskiy plane to the interior of the unit disk

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expressed in these coordinates @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, as either @xmath or @xmath approach the boundary of the unit
disk, the geodesic distance @xmath diverges reflecting the non-compact
nature of the Lobachevskiy plane. The Lobachevskiy plane do not have a
boundary. However, the unit circle forms a one-dimensional infinity
known as the absolute. Let us consider any given point in the
Lobachevskiy plane parametrized in the interior of the unit disk. Using
an isometry we map the given point to the center of the unit disk. Let
us moreover consider the set of points @xmath within a given geodesic
distance @xmath of the marked point. From the rotational symmetry of the
metric ( 2.13 ) it is obvious, that the set of points @xmath is given by
a disk of radius @xmath within the unit disk and centered at the origin.
The geodesic distance @xmath from the marked point to the boundary of
@xmath is given in terms of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The area of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the length of the boundary @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the area of @xmath and the length of the boundary @xmath are
proportional to each other and they both grow exponentially with the
geodesic distance @xmath . This signature of the Lobachevskiy plane will
be important later on, when we turn our attention to the non-compact
geometries coming from dynamical triangulations.

### 2.3 The semi-classical spectrum of Liouville theory.

As mentioned previously our main focus in this thesis will be on
studying 2D euclidean quantum gravity, that is the random geometry of
the two-dimensional world-sheet. However, by a closed string state ⁵ ⁵ 5
Not all closed string states are physical gauge-invariant states. We
will return to this discussion in section 4.2 . in a given 2D conformal
field theory such as Liouville theory we conventionally mean a state of
the field quantized on the circle, which we parametrize by @xmath . In
order to obtain the spectrum of closed string states and the Hamiltonian
we consider the particular conformal field theory on the cylinder with
time @xmath propagating along the cylinder. We may map the infinite
cylinder to the sphere by the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the complex @xmath -plane time evolves radially outwards. Under this
transformation the circle at @xmath is mapped to the origin in the
complex @xmath -plane. Inserting an incoming state on the circle at
@xmath , that is weighing each field configuration in the cylinder
partition function by a wave functional depending on the field
configuration on the circle at @xmath , corresponds to inserting a
vertex operator at the origin in the complex @xmath -plane. Thus, an
incoming state at @xmath is mapped to a local vertex operator under the
transformation ( 2.18 ). This is the famous state-operator
correspondence in conventional conformal field theory. While the
spectrum of closed string states is conventionally introduced on the
cylinder, the spectrum of vertex operators is conventionally introduced
on the sphere. [ 2 ] As we will discuss later on in this chapter, the
conventional state-operator correspondence is not valid in Liouville
theory.

In order to obtain the Hilbert space of closed string states in
Liouville theory, we need some insight obtained from a semi-classical
analysis of the spectrum. The entropy of surfaces with fixed area @xmath
and fixed topology is typically given by a power relation @xmath , where
the exponent @xmath depends on @xmath and the topology of the surfaces [
5 , 14 ] . This implies that the Laplace transform of the partition
function with fixed area @xmath is convergent only for positive values
of the cosmological constant @xmath . Hence, we expect the Liouville
partition function to be convergent, if and only if the cosmological
constant @xmath is positive. This also follows from the fact, that the
Liouville action is unbounded from below if @xmath . Due to the fact
that @xmath in quantum Liouville theory semi-classical Liouville theory
obtained in the limit @xmath describes geometries of constant negative
curvature. There exists three families of solutions with constant
negative curvature to the classical Liouville equation ( 2.5 ) on the
cylinder, the elliptic, the parabolic and the hyperbolic solutions.
These three families of solutions are each characterized by their
monodromy properties. [ 16 , 5 ]

The elliptic solutions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The elliptic solutions have curvature singularities at @xmath . The
parabolic solution is obtained from the family of elliptic solutions in
the limit @xmath and also has a curvature singularity at @xmath . [ 16 ]
The hyperbolic solutions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From ( 1.30 ) we obtain the energy momentum tensor in the semi-classical
limit @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to obtain the above result we have to perform the functional
derivative of the Ricci scalar in the Liouville action ( 1.30 ) before
setting the fiducial metric equal to the flat metric @xmath . This
functional derivative is easily obtained from [ 15 ] . Applying the
equation of motion ( 2.5 ) together with eqs. ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.2 ) we
realize, that the energy momentum tensor is traceless, which is actually
a defining feature of a conformal field theory. Applying the complex
coordinates @xmath and @xmath introduced in ( 2.18 ) we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In section 2.5 we will discuss the energy momentum tensor in quantum
Liouville theory. It actually turns out, that a constant term appears in
the energy momentum tensor on the cylinder in quantum Liouville theory
due to the Schwarzian derivative appearing in the transformation law (
2.46 ) governing the energy momentum tensor under conformal
transformations. Since we eventually want to compare the energies of the
classical solutions to Liouville theory on the cylinder with the
energies of the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in quantum Liouville
theory we need to modify the above classical energy momentum tensor by
the same constant term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamilton operator on the cylinder is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the addition of the constant term to the energy momentum tensor
simply corresponds to changing the zero of the energy scale. Applying
the above expression for the Hamilton operator on the cylinder we may
calculate the energies at a given time @xmath of each of the solutions
to semi-classical Liouville theory on the cylinder. In the case of the
elliptic surfaces we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy of the parabolic solution at a given time @xmath is obtained
from the above energy in the limit @xmath . The energies of the
hyperbolic solutions at given time @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy of each solution is conserved. This is a consequence of the
fact, that the Lagrangian in Liouville theory do not depend on time
explicitly. We expect each of these solutions to correspond to some
particular state in the semi-classical limit of quantum Liouville
theory. In the following we will clarify this statement to some extent.

### 2.4 The mini-superspace approximation.

Before we turn our attention to quantum Liouville field theory it will
actually prove fruitful to study quantum Liouville theory in the
so-called mini-superspace approximation. In this approximation we only
consider configurations of the Liouville field independent of the
spatial direction @xmath on the cylinder, that is @xmath . We then
quantize the Liouville field applying this approximation. Our expection
is that all states of the Liouville field on the circle invariant under
rigid rotations will be captured by this approximation. In order to
obtain the Hamilton operator we first perform a Wick rotation to
Minkowski space. The Liouville action in Minkowski space @xmath and in
the mini-superspace approximation is obtained from ( 1.30 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lagrangian, @xmath and where we have performed the
integration over @xmath . The canonical momentum associated with the
Liouville field in the mini-superspace approximation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the above equations we obtain the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

So far in this section we have discussed classical Liouville theory in
the mini-superspace approximation. We now quantize Liouville theory in
this approximation. Applying the operator identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the Hamiltonian ( 2.29 ) and taking the shift of the zero of the
energy scale discussed in the previous section into account we obtain ⁶
⁶ 6 The reader may have noticed, that the shift in the zero of the
energy scale deviates from the shift derived in [ 5 , 16 ] , which
depends on @xmath . The deviation is a consequence of the fact, that the
authors in [ 5 , 16 ] demand, that the Fourier coefficients appearing in
the Fourier expansion of the energy momentum tensor on the cylinder
satisfy the Virasoro algebra, while we demand, that the Virasoro
generators defined in the @xmath -plane satisfy the Virasoro algebra.
These two condition are not the equivalent due to the Schwarzian
derivative appearing in the transformation law governing the energy
momentum tensor under conformal transformations. Moreover, the overall
conventions applied in [ 5 , 16 ] are somewhat different from the
conventions applied in this thesis.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The circumference @xmath of the one-dimensional “universe” at fixed time
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expressing the Hamiltonian ( 2.31 ) in terms of @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now impose the boundary condition, that the wave functions fall off
at large @xmath . In the target space picture introduced in section 1.3
this corresponds to imposing the physical condition, that the wave
functions fall off behind the Liouville wall. The eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian in the mini-superspace approximation satisfying this
boundary condition are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with energies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 2.34 ) we have absorbed the factor @xmath in the cosmological
constant appearing in the argument of the modified Bessel function
@xmath . The above eigenstates are normalizable, if and only if @xmath
is real. For @xmath imaginary the eigenstates diverge at @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath , that is the two wave functions correspond to the
same physical state.

### 2.5 Quantum Liouville theory

Let us apply the conformal gauge. In this gauge the action ( 1.30 ) in
quantum Liouville theory is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The central charge of Liouville theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The primary operators @xmath in Liouville theory are spinless and are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In eq. ( 2.38 ) the dots “ @xmath ” denote the operation of normal
ordering, in which all the divergences are removed, which come from
evaluating several factors of @xmath at the same point on the
world-sheet, when inserting the Taylor expansion of @xmath in terms of
@xmath into the partition function. [ 10 ] In the operator formalism
this normal ordering is implemented by placing all lowering operators to
the right of all raising operators. (With regard to lowering and raising
operators see the discussion below.) We demand, that the Virasoro
generators appearing in the Laurent expansion of the energy momentum
tensor in the complex @xmath -plane

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfy the Virasoro algebras

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the central charge. The energy momentum tensor obtained
from ( 1.30 ) by a calculation identical to ( 2.21 ) indeed satisfies
this condition [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under a conformal transformation @xmath the Liouville field transforms
according to [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Mapping the @xmath -plane to the infinite cylinder with the
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and applying the above transformation law ( 2.44 ) and the
transformation law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

governing the energy momentum tensor under a conformal transformation,
we obtain the energy momentum tensor on the cylinder

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, this energy momentum tensor indeed reduces to ( 2.23 ) in the
semi-classical limit. From eq. ( 2.24 ) and applying eqs. ( 2.46 ) and (
2.40 ) we obtain the Hamiltonian on the cylinder given in terms of the
Virasoro generators in the @xmath -plane.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before we proceed let us shortly consider Liouville theory with @xmath .
In this case the Liouville action in conformal gauge reduces to the
action of a free massless bose field discussed in [ 2 ] . Applying the
equation of motion of the Liouville field obtained from ( 2.36 ) with
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may expand the Liouville field in the complex @xmath -plane and
insert @xmath giving us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the canonical momentum operator introduced in the
mini-superspace approximation. Performing a Wick rotation to Minkowski
space and imposing the standard equal time commutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the canonical momentum field is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all other commutators vanishing. Using standard terminology from
the discussion of the harmonic oscillator in quantum mechanics, we will
refer to the ladder operators @xmath and @xmath as raising operators for
@xmath and lowering operators for @xmath . Turning on the cosmological
constant @xmath , the ladder operators are no longer constants of the
motion. On the contrary they depend on time in some complicated way.

If we cut out a disk in the @xmath -plane, insert a vertex operator at
the center of the disk and fix the configuration of the Liouville field
at the boundary of the disk, we may define the wave functional
associated with the inserted vertex operator and evaluated at the
particular configuration of the Liouville field imposed at the boundary
as the amplitude obtained by integrating over all configurations of the
Liouville field on the disk satisfying the particular boundary
condition. [ 2 ] This is the inverse map in the state-operator
correspondance discussed previously. Using this map on the entire set of
vertex operators in Liouville theory, we may define the so-called
Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals in Liouville theory [ 16 ] .
Applying the Hamiltonian ( 2.48 ) we may determine the energy of the
primary state @xmath associated with a given primary operator @xmath in
the Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals from eq. ( 2.39 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing the states in the Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals,
the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in the mini-superspace approximation
and the solutions to classical Liouville theory on the cylinder a
consistent picture arises, which sheds light on the Hilbert space and
the set of operators in Liouville theory. Let us start out by discussing
the set of eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian in the mini-superspace
approximation. The eigenstate @xmath is normalizable, if and only if
@xmath is real. Applying the target space picture introduced in section
1.3 we may give a physical interpretation of @xmath . The strings
propagate freely in the region @xmath of target space. Taking the
Liouville wall located at @xmath into account we expect a given closed
string eigenstate of the mini-superspace Hamiltonian to be the sum of an
incoming wave and an outgoing wave in this region of target space. The
outgoing wave is caused by the scattering of the incoming wave on the
Liouville wall. Moreover, we expect, that the momenta of the incoming
and outgoing wave measured by the operator @xmath defined in eq. ( 2.30
) coincide up to a sign. Indeed, from ( 2.32 ) we obtain, that the wave
function @xmath behaves as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.55)
  -- -- -- --------

in the region @xmath . Hence, we may regard @xmath as the momentum
carried by the waves in the region @xmath . From now on we will refer to
@xmath as the Liouville momentum and label the eigenstate with momentum
@xmath by @xmath . A given normalizable eigenstate of the Hamiltonian in
the mini-superspace approximation corresponds to a state in the Hilbert
space of quantum Liouville theory invariant under rigid rotations, that
is a state, where none of the degrees of freedom associated with ladder
operators @xmath and @xmath are excited.

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.56)
  -- -- -- --------

We refer to such a state as a highest weight state. We have attached the
subscript @xmath in order to remind ourselves, that this state belongs
to the Hilbert space of normalizable states. We expect, that states
exist in the Hilbert space, which are not invariant under rigid
rotations. Furthermore, the Hilbert space should define a representation
of the algebra satisfied by the ladder operators. This condition
ensures, that the Hilbert space defines a representation of the Virasoro
algebra, since the Virasoro generators may be expressed in terms of the
ladder operators. Acting on a highest weight state repeatedly with the
raising operators @xmath , @xmath , we generate a highest weight
representation of the algebra satisfied by the ladder operators @xmath
known as the Feigin-Fuchs module

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.57)
  -- -- -- --------

Similarly, we may generate a highest weight representation @xmath by
acting repeatedly with the raising operators @xmath , @xmath , on the
highest weight state with momentum @xmath . Due to the fact that all the
raising operators commute with the momentum operator @xmath we associate
the same Liouville momentum with all the states belonging to a given
Feigin-Fuchs module. We expect the Hilbert space in quantum Liouville
theory to be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is a direct integral. Notice, the fact, that the
state in the mini-superspace approximation with Liouville momentum
@xmath is identical to the state with Liouville momentum @xmath ,
implies, that we only integrate over the positive real axis.

As mentioned previously, in conventional conformal field theory there is
a one-to-one correspondence between states in the Hilbert space and
vertex operators generating local disturbances on the world-sheet. This
is not the case in Liouville theory. [ 16 ] Given a state in a conformal
field theory we may impose this state at a given time @xmath in the
complex @xmath -plane by removing the disk of radius @xmath and imposing
the wave functional corresponding to the state as a boundary condition
on the boundary of the hole. Alternatively, we may impose the state at
time @xmath by removing a disk of radius @xmath , imposing the wave
functional corresponding to the state as a boundary condition on the
boundary of the hole and compensating for the time evolution of the
state from @xmath to @xmath by acting on the wave functional with the
operator @xmath , where @xmath is the generator of scale transformations
in the complex @xmath -plane. In the limit @xmath the hole shrinks to a
point and imposing the wave function as a boundary condition now
corresponds to inserting a vertex operator. [ 2 ] In the case of
Liouville theory the physical circumference @xmath of the hole measured
in terms of the actual metric, @xmath , also vanishes in this limit as
long as we consider wave functionals, which decay sufficiently fast for
large values of @xmath . Assuming this is the case imposing the wave
functional in the limit @xmath corresponds to inserting a vertex
operator, which generates a local disturbance on the world-sheet with
metric @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 Such a vertex operator is known as a local
operator. However, in this case the state corresponding to wave
functional has to be peaked on small circumferences @xmath . Otherwise,
we are not able to associate a finite vertex operator with the state in
the limit, where the hole shrinks to a point. Hence, the state
corresponding to a local vertex operator has to be non-normalizable. The
normalizable states in the Hilbert space of Liouville theory do not
correspond to local operators. Now, the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian
in the mini-superspace approximation with imaginary momentum @xmath are
not normalizable due the fact, that they grow as @xmath for @xmath .
From eqs. ( 2.35 ) and ( 2.54 ) we realize, that the energies of these
non-normalizable states exactly match the energies of the states in the
Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals associated with the primary
operators @xmath , @xmath . Thus, we identify these states ⁸ ⁸ 8 Notice,
the states in the Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals corresponding
to primary operators are highest weight states with respect to the
Virasoro algebra. (See eq. ( 2.61 ).) Given the decomposition of the
Virasoro generators in terms of the ladder operators in [ 2 ] , we
realize, that these states in the Hartle-Hawking space of wave
functionals are also highest weight states with respect to the ladder
operators as defined in eq. ( 2.56 ). Hence, we expect these states to
be invariant under rigid rotations. and we expect, that the
corresponding primary operators @xmath , @xmath , are local operators. [
16 ] Similarly, we observe from eqs. ( 2.35 ) and ( 2.54 ), that the
energies of the normalizable states in the mini-superspace approximation
match with the energies of the states in the Hartle-Hawking space of
wave functionals associated with the primary operators @xmath , @xmath .
Due to this fact we identify these states. This implies, that the
operators @xmath , @xmath , do not correspond to local operators.
Instead, they create holes in the world-sheet with metric @xmath .
Moreover, the fact, that the state in the mini-superspace approximation
with Liouville momentum @xmath is identical to the state with Liouville
momentum @xmath , translates into the fact, that the operator @xmath
should be identified with the operator @xmath . We may therefore impose
the so-called Seiberg bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the set of local primary operators in Liouville theory and we may
impose the bound @xmath on the set of non-local primary operators. [ 5 ]
This implies in particular, that we may choose @xmath . From the above
we conclude, that the linear space of local operators in Liouville
theory is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is either the primary operator @xmath or one of its
conformal descendants.

The classical solutions to Liouville theory on the cylinder discussed in
section 2.3 fit nicely into the above picture. Matching the energies of
the classical solutions given by eqs. ( 2.25 ) and ( 2.26 ) with the
energies ( 2.35 ) of the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in the
mini-superspace approximation, it seems obvious, that we should identify
the elliptic and the parabolic solutions with the non-normalizable
states in the classical limit and the hyperbolic solutions with the
normalizable states in the classical limit. It is tempting to view the
singularity of a given elliptic or parabolic solution as the point of
insertion of the local operator creating the non-normalizable state. The
hyperbolic solutions on the opposite do not have unique points, which we
can associate with the insertion of local operators. This is consistent
with the fact, that we cannot associate a local operator with a
normalizable state in Liouville theory. [ 5 , 16 ]

The above picture raises a question. Since the states discussed in the
mini-superspace approximation are eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, they
do not evolve with time. The average circumference of the
one-dimensional universe obtained from one of these eigenstates is
independent of time. However, if we consider any of the classical
solutions given by ( 2.19 ) and ( 2.20 ), the circumference of the
one-dimensional universe do change with time. I propose the following
solution to this puzzle. The point is, that the operator @xmath and the
Hamiltonian @xmath do not commute in the mini-superspace approximation.
Hence, we cannot determine both the circumference @xmath and the energy
@xmath at the same time. Given that the one-dimensional universe is a
eigenstate of the Hamiltonian we cannot with certainty locate the
one-dimensional universe on either of the figures showing the classical
time evolution of the one-dimensional universe in the elliptic,
parabolic or hyperbolic case. In order to observe the classical geometry
emerge from one of the eigenstates in the mini-superspace approximation
we should define a classical probability distributions of the
circumference @xmath for each of the classical solutions and then
verify, that the probability distribution obtained from a given
eigenstate in the mini-superspace approximation reduces to the
probability distribution of the corresponding classical solution in the
classical limit.

In the above we have discussed the Feigin-Fuchs modules. Let us now
introduce the so-called Verma modules. Due to the fact, that the
operator @xmath is a primary operator, the corresponding state @xmath in
the linear space of Hartle-Hawking wave functionals is a highest weight
state with regard to the Virasoro algebra, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Acting on the highest weight state @xmath repeatedly with the Virasoro
generators @xmath , @xmath , we obtain a highest weight representation
of the Virasoro algebra known as a Verma module

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath introduces a grading in the Verma module. @xmath .
The corresponding degree is known as the level @xmath . It is easily
seen from the Virasoro algebra, that the level of the state @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Acting repeatedly with the raising operators @xmath , @xmath , on the
state @xmath we may generate a Feigin-Fuchs module as in ( 2.57 ). Since
we may express the Virasoro generators @xmath in terms of the raising
and lowering operators the Verma module @xmath is embedded in this
Feigin-Fuchs module. In the case when the Verma module defines an
irreducible representation of the Virasoro algebra, the Verma module and
the Feigin-Fuchs module are actually isomorphic. [ 20 ]

### 2.6 The dual state space

In this section we will introduce the dual space of the Hartle-Hawking
space of wave functionals. Our discussion is based upon [ 27 , 2 ] . In
order to proceed we first need to discuss the case @xmath , in which
Liouville theory reduces to the linear dilaton theory. Let us consider
the linear dilaton theory with a generic fiducial metric @xmath . In
this case the linear dilaton action is given by ( 1.30 ) with @xmath .
The normal ordering of a given primary operator in the linear dilaton
theory is given by [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the geodesic distance between @xmath and @xmath measured
in terms of the fiducial metric @xmath . Under the infinitesimal
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

the normal ordered primary operator transforms according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.67)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using the invariance of the linear dilaton measure under the
transformation ( 2.66 ) and applying the Gauss-Bonnet theorem ( 1.17 )
we obtain the following relation concerning the n-point function on the
sphere in the linear dilaton theory

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.68)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus, the n-point function on the sphere in the linear dilaton theory
vanishes, unless

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case when this condition is satisfied we may actually determine
the n-point function through a calculation almost identical to the
calculation performed in [ 2 ] in case of the free bosonic string. In
the calculation performed in [ 2 ] one determines the n-point function
by expanding the fields in a complete set of eigenfunctions of the
Laplace operator and thereafter performing the Gaussian integrals. In
order to determine the n-point function in the linear dilaton theory we
simply modify this calculation by including the linear term in the
linear dilaton action in the background field @xmath introduced in the
calculation performed in [ 2 ] . In conformal gauge we obtain the
following n-point function on the sphere in the linear dilaton theory

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us return to Liouville theory with @xmath in conformal gauge. As
discussed previously, we may generate the state associated with a given
wave functional in the Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals by
inserting the corresponding vertex operator at the origin in the complex
@xmath -plane. In the case of a primary state @xmath we may express this
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the so-called @xmath invariant state. The conformal
descendants of the primary state @xmath are obtained by acting on @xmath
with the Virasoro generators @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , as mentioned
previously in relation with the introduction of the Verma modules. Let
us consider the two-point function on the sphere in Liouville theory. In
[ 17 ] it is shown, that the two point function of two primary operators
inserted on the sphere vanishes in any given conformal field theory,
unless the conformal dimensions of the two operators coincide. In the
case where the two primary operators are @xmath and @xmath , the
conformal dimensions coincide and we may calculate the two-point
function by performing a perturbative expansion in the cosmological
constant @xmath . From eqs. ( 2.36 ), ( 2.69 ) and ( 2.70 ) we obtain
that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.72)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

In the light of the above result it seems natural to define the state
dual to the primary state @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

and to define the inner product as ⁹ ⁹ 9 Notice, this inner product is
not related to the inner product of states in the mini superspace
approximation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we restrict our discussion to states satisfying the Seiberg bound (
2.59 ) we obtain from eq. ( 2.72 ) and the above definition of the inner
product that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the state dual to a given descendant state as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are circles of radii @xmath and @xmath
respectively satisfying @xmath and @xmath . The contours @xmath and
@xmath encircle the origin in the complex @xmath -plane
counterclockwise. Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition of the inner product given in ( 2.74 ) generalizes in an
obvious way to include descendant states. Applying the transformation
law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

governing the spinless primary operator @xmath under the conformal
transformation @xmath and eqs. ( 2.73 ) and ( 2.71 ) it is easily seen,
that the conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

maps

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying eq. ( 2.46 ) we obtain, that the conformal transformation (
2.79 ) maps

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a circle of radius @xmath encircling the origin in the
complex @xmath -plane counterclockwise, while @xmath is a circle of
radius @xmath encircling the origin counterclockwise. It follows from
the two above equations, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.83)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

From the fact, that the two-point function of two descendant operators
is proportional to the two-point function of the two corresponding
primary operators, and from eq. ( 2.75 ), we conclude, that the inner
product of two given states vanishes, unless they belong to the same
representation of the two copies of the Virasoro algebra. Furthermore,
we conclude from the above equation and the corresponding equation
obtained from considering @xmath instead of @xmath , that the inner
product of two given states belonging to same representation of the two
copies of the Virasoro algebra vanishes, unless the two states belong to
the same levels @xmath and @xmath . The introduction of the dual space
of the Hartle-Hawking space of wave functionals allows us to introduce
the concept of an orthonormal basis for the Hartle-Hawking space of wave
functionals.

### 2.7 The structure of the Verma modules

A generic Verma module is irreducible. However, for particular values of
@xmath the corresponding Verma module actually defines a reducible
representation of the Virasoro algebra. The structure of these reducible
Verma modules in terms of irreducible representations of the Virasoro
algebra will play an important role, when we later on in this thesis
turn our attention to the non-compact geometries in 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. Let us therefore discuss the structure of these Verma modules
in more detail. A given highest weight representation @xmath is
reducible, if and only if it contains another highest weight
representation @xmath , @xmath . We denote this by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The highest weight state @xmath associated with the Verma module @xmath
embedded in @xmath is actually a null state, that is the state @xmath is
orthogonal to all states including itself. This is easily derived from
the Virasoro algebra using the fact, that @xmath is both a highest
weight state and a descendant state of the highest weight state @xmath .
[ 17 ] This property is inherited by all descendant states of @xmath ,
that is all states in @xmath are actually null states. We refer to a
state, which is both a highest weight state and a null state, as a
singular state. In order to determine, whether or not a given Verma
module is reducible, that is whether or not it contains null states, we
consider the so-called Kac determinant. The set of states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a basis for the linear subspace of @xmath at level @xmath . The
Kac determinant at level @xmath is the determinant of the Gram matrix of
inner product of all states belonging to the above basis. If the Verma
module @xmath contains a null state at level @xmath , then the Kac
determinant vanishes as level @xmath due to the definition of a null
state discussed in the above. Thus, we may determine whether or not a
given Verma module is reducible by studying the Kac determinant. We may
even determine the structure of a given reducible Verma module in terms
of irreducible representations of the Virasoro algebra from the Kac
determinant. Let us describe the results of the analysis of the Kac
determinant. A given Verma module @xmath is reducible if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are positive integers. [ 11 ] The structure of a
given reducible Verma module actually depends on whether @xmath is
rational or irrational. Let us start out by considering the generic case
@xmath irrational. In this case the Verma module @xmath with @xmath
given by eq. ( 2.86 ) only contains one singular state at level @xmath [
11 ] and we may define an irreducible representation of the Virasoro
algebra by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.88)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath .

Let us turn our attention to the case @xmath rational, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In this thesis we will not consider
the case @xmath . In this case we may express the condition ( 2.87 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Verma module @xmath is completely characterized by the conformal
dimension @xmath of the highest weight state from which it is
constructed. Thus, a given reducible Verma module is uniquely labelled
by the positive integer

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easily seen, that we may express this positive integer uniquely as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Different sets of labels @xmath may actually correspond to the same
value of @xmath in the case @xmath rational. The labelling of the
reducible Verma modules by @xmath is not convenient in this case.
Instead, we label a given reducible Verma module by the integers @xmath
and @xmath introduced in the above equation. [ 11 ]

A given Verma module with @xmath or @xmath may contain several singular
states. However, in both these cases the structure of the Verma module
is given by [ 11 , 17 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of embedded highest weight representations, where @xmath in the
case @xmath and @xmath in the case @xmath . We may define an irreducible
representation of the Virasoro algebra as in eq. ( 2.88 ).

The structures of the reducible Verma modules with @xmath and @xmath are
much more complicated and it is convenient to introduce an additional
way of labelling these reducible Verma modules. In the case @xmath and
@xmath we can express the positive integer @xmath given in ( 2.92 )
uniquely as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we may uniquely label a reducible Verma module with @xmath and
@xmath by the set of integers @xmath and @xmath . We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the Kac determinant one may derive the so-called reflection
property of reducible Verma modules [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

This property relates the structure of a given reducible Verma module in
Liouville theory with the structure of a corresponding reducible Verma
module in the so-called @xmath minimal model. The structure of the
reducible Verma modules appearing in the minimal models have been
studied in detail. [ 17 , 20 ] Using the reflection property we obtain
the following diagram illustrating the structure of the reducible Verma
modules labelled by @xmath and @xmath in Liouville theory [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Given a reducible Verma module @xmath labelled by @xmath and @xmath in
Liouville theory we simply locate the Verma module in the above diagram
and read of the structure of the given Verma module in terms of the
embedded highest weight representations. We may define an irreducible
representation @xmath of the Virasoro algebra as the given Verma module
@xmath modulo the sum of the representations nested in @xmath . From the
diagram ( 2.100 ) we may define the distance @xmath between two Verma
modules in the diagram as the number of arrows along the shortest path
from one Verma module to the other. For instance, @xmath .

The structure of a given reducible Verma module @xmath is encoded in the
so-called Virasoro character of the corresponding irreducible
representation @xmath constructed as described in the above. The
Virasoro character of a given representation @xmath of the Virasoro
algebra is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the central charge and @xmath . We may easily calculate
the Virasoro character of a given Verma module by determining the
dimension of the subspace at level @xmath from ( 2.85 ) and inserting
the result in the Virasoro character expressed as a sum over levels.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the number of decompositions of the positive integer
@xmath into sums of positive integers without regard to order. Moreover,
the Dedekind eta function is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the case of a Verma module associated with a normalizable primary
operator @xmath we may express the above result as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying this result we may obtain the Virasoro character of the
irreducible representation @xmath defined in eq. ( 2.88 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the case where the structure of the reducible Verma module is given
by a sub-diagram of ( 2.100 ) the Virasoro character is more
complicated. The key observation, which makes the calculation of the
Virasoro character possible in this case, is, that the intersection of
two Verma modules appearing in the same column in ( 2.100 ) is exactly
given by the sum of the two Verma modules appearing in the following
column on the left hand side. Due to this fact we may calculate the
Virasoro character of the irreducible representation @xmath obtained
from a given Verma module @xmath appearing in the diagram ( 2.100 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we sum over all Verma modules @xmath embedded in @xmath including
@xmath and where the oscillating sign @xmath enforces the successive
addition-subtraction of Virasoro characters as we move to the left
column upon column in the diagram ( 2.100 ). Applying the labelling
introduced in ( 2.92 ) we may express the Virasoro character @xmath of
the irreducible representation obtained from a given reducible Verma
module labelled by @xmath and @xmath as [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 2.92 ).

As observed in the above the structure of Liouville theory changes
drastically going from @xmath irrational to @xmath rational. This
behaviour is intrinsic to Liouville theory and affects many important
quantities in Liouville theory. Later on we will consider Liouville
theory coupled to the @xmath -minimal models in order to study 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity in the case, when the matter sector consists
of a @xmath -minimal model. In this case the condition ( 1.38 ) implies,
that @xmath is rational. The author of this thesis is not aware of any
conformal matter theory, which leads to @xmath being irrational. Many
results in pure Liouville theory such as the three point function and
the generic bulk-boundary structure constants are only known in the case
@xmath irrational. This is off course unfortunate, since the main
application of Liouville theory is 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity.

### 2.8 The operator product expansion

In a given conformal field theory we may expand the product of two
nearby operators in a series of single operators. This is known as the
operator product expansion (OPE). In the case of two spinless primary
operators the operator product expansion is given by [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we sum over all finite sets of positive integers @xmath and @xmath
ordered such that @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, we define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we apply the definitions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a given vertex operator and where @xmath is a closed
contour enclosing @xmath counterclockwise in the complex @xmath -plane.
Finally, the constants @xmath and @xmath are determined completely by
the conformal symmetry of the theory. [ 17 ] In the case of Liouville
theory the sum over conformal families appearing in the OPE is actually
an integral. If we consider the OPE of two local operators in Liouville
theory we only integrate over the conformal families of local operators.

In the next chapter we will apply the OPE ( 2.108 ) in the case @xmath .
Let us therefore discuss the OPE in this case. In order to proceed we
start out by considering the Verma module generated from the highest
weight state @xmath belonging to the Hartle-Hawking space of
wave-functionals. From ( 2.86 ) and the following discussion we obtain,
that this Verma module is reducible and that there exists a singular
state @xmath belonging to this Verma module at level 2, that is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying the fact, that @xmath is a highest weight state, and the
Virasoro algebra ( 2.41 ), we obtain that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is not a null state, it follows from eq. ( 2.113 ) and the
above equation that ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Acting on @xmath with any other Virasoro
generator @xmath , @xmath , does not lead to any additional constraints.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As discussed in section 2.6 the highest weight state @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath -invariant state in Liouville theory. From
the above discussion we obtain the following condition on the vertex
operator @xmath corresponding to the highest weight state @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the action of the Virasoro generators on the primary state @xmath
is defined in eq. ( 2.111 ). Let us consider the n-point function on the
sphere. The above condition implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From eq. ( 2.111 ) and the standard OPE of the energy momentum tensor
and a given vertex operator given in [ 2 ] , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.120)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is a small closed contour encircling the @xmath in the
complex @xmath -plane counterclockwise. From eq. ( 2.111 ), Cauchy’s
theorem and the OPE of the energy momentum tensor and a given primary
vertex operator given in [ 2 ] , we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (2.121)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Hence, we obtain the equation

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.122)
  -- -- -- ---------

Let us insert the OPE ( 2.108 ) of the two primary operators @xmath and
@xmath into the above equation. Evaluating the contribution from each
conformal family to lowest order in @xmath we obtain the condition, that
@xmath , only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We solve the above equation in terms of @xmath by first solving the
equation in terms of @xmath . From this calculation we obtain the
condition, that the only conformal families, which appear in the OPE of
@xmath and @xmath , are the conformal families corresponding to the
primary operators @xmath and @xmath . In the following we omit the
subscript in @xmath for convenience. Applying the OPE ( 2.108 ), eqs. (
2.73 ) and ( 2.75 ) and the condition discussed in the paragraph
following eq. ( 2.83 ), we realize, that we may express the structure
constants appearing in the OPE of the primary operators @xmath and
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Performing a perturbative expansion in @xmath and applying the condition
( 2.69 ) and eq. ( 2.70 ) we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In the above calculation we assume, that @xmath is in a small
neighborhood of @xmath . We apply this assumption in the third line,
where we pick out the only term in the perturbative expansion in @xmath
, which is different from zero. Hence, the final expression is only
valid for @xmath belonging to a small neighborhood of @xmath . Setting
@xmath in eq. ( 2.124 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.126)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and where the integral appearing in the second last expression is
evaluated in appendix B in [ 18 ] . The above calculation is only valid
for @xmath belonging to a small neighborhood of @xmath . As in the
previous calculation we have applied this assumption in the third line,
where we pick out the only term different from zero in the perturbative
expansion in @xmath . Notice however, in the two above calculation we
have determined the structure constant @xmath precisely in the two cases
@xmath and @xmath , where it is different from zero.

## Chapter 3 Boundary conditions in Liouville theory

### 3.1 The boundary state formalism

So far we have discussed conformal field theory defined on a closed
world-sheet. Let us now discuss conformal field theory in conformal
gauge defined on a world-sheet with the topology of the disk. The
following discussion is not specific to Liouville theory. The discussion
concerns a generic 2D conformal field theory. According to the Riemann
mapping theorem we may map any given simply connected proper subset of
the complex plane to the upper half plane by a conformal transformation.
Hence, it is sufficient to consider a generic conformal field theory
defined in the upper half plane. In this case we may impose a boundary
condition on the real axis. In the following we want to deduce a
necessary condition ensuring that the boundary condition does not break
conformal invariance. Now, any given infinitesimal conformal
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which maps the upper half plane to the upper half plane, satisfies the
condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

ensuring, that the real axis is mapped to the real axis. A quantum
conformal field theory is defined by the condition, that the product of
the weight @xmath , where @xmath is the action, and the measure @xmath
is invariant under a given conformal transformation, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us assume, that the field @xmath transforms according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

under a given infinitesimal conformal transformation. Moreover, let us
consider a slight modification of the above transformation of the field
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath inside the region @xmath and @xmath outside @xmath , and
let us consider the case, where the region @xmath lies entirely in the
bulk of upper half plane. Since the field @xmath close to the boundary
is invariant under this transformation, the arguments given in section
2.3 in [ 2 ] in the case of a closed world-sheet are also valid in our
case. From these arguments we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the divergence theorem and the fact, that the
conserved current associated with the conformal transformation ( 3.1 )
is given by [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the case of a closed world-sheet. Let us gradually approach the
limit, in which the region @xmath becomes the entire upper half plane.
In this limit the transformation ( 3.5 ) reduces to the transformation
law ( 3.4 ) governing @xmath under the given conformal transformation.
From ( 3.3 ) and ( LABEL:almostdefcontheo ) we obtain the following
necessary condition in the limit, where @xmath becomes the entire upper
half plane,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

ensuring that, the the imposed boundary condition does not break
conformal invariance defined by eq. ( 3.3 ). This condition is
satisfied, if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating over the configuration space of the field @xmath the above
equation turns into a condition concerning the energy momentum tensor
viewed as an operator. Notice, this condition implies, that we may
extend the definition of the holomorphic energy momentum tensor @xmath
to the entire complex plane.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing a Laurent expansion of the holomorphic energy momentum tensor
@xmath we obtain one set of Virasoro generators satisfying the Virasoro
algebra. The anti-holomorphic energy momentum tensor @xmath does not
give rise to an additional independent set of Virasoro generators due to
the relation ( 3.10 ).

Applying the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may map the upper half plane to the infinite strip parametrized by
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . As in the case of the infinite
cylinder discussed in section 2.3 , we may view time evolving along the
infinite strip and introduce the concept of an open string state
quantising the field on the finite line element @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 A given
open string state is not necessarily a physical gauge-invariant state.
This is the so-called open string picture. Since we only have one set of
independent Virasoro generators, the spectrum of open string states only
transforms under one copy of the Virasoro algebra as opposed to the
spectrum of closed string states, which transforms under two independent
copies of the Virasoro algebra. In general we do not have to impose the
same boundary condition on each of the two sides of the infinite strip.
The spectrum of open string states depends crucially on the boundary
conditions imposed on the opposite sides of the infinite strip. Applying
the transformation law ( 2.46 ) the condition ( 3.9 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the infinite strip. From this condition we realize, that conformal
invariance of a given boundary condition is equivalent to momentum
conservation, that is no momentum flows across the boundaries of the
infinite strip.

Due to the fact, that the signature of the world-sheet is euclidean, we
may view @xmath as the time direction and @xmath as the spatial
direction instead of considering time evolving along the infinite strip.
Moreover, let us impose the periodicity condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

transforming the infinite strip into a finite cylinder of circumference
@xmath . In this so-called closed string picture the boundary conditions
become boundary states @xmath , which we may expand in terms of states
belonging to the Hilbert space of closed string states. Applying the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may map the cylinder to the annulus in the complex @xmath -plane with
time evolving radially outwards. Applying the transformation law ( 2.46
) we may translate the condition ( 3.9 ) into a condition satisfied by
the energy momentum tensor on both boundaries of the annulus in the
complex @xmath -plane

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the energy momentum tensor in terms of the Virasoro generators
we obtain the following condition satisfied by the boundary state @xmath
on the inner most boundary of the annulus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may express the Hilbert space of closed string states as a direct sum
over tensor products @xmath of irreducible representations of the
Virasoro algebra. (See for instance eq. ( 2.58 )). Moreover, we may
express the boundary state @xmath as a sum over contributions from each
of these tensor products of irreducible representation of the Virasoro
algebra. The above linear equation ( 3.16 ) imposes an independent
condition on the contribution from each of these tensor products. Given
the tensor product @xmath we may construct a solution to the above
equation ( 3.16 ) belonging to this tensor product, if and only if
@xmath , that is if and only if the left and the right representations
of the Virasoro algebra are isomorphic. If this is the case the solution
is unique and is given by [ 21 , 22 , 23 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an orthonormal basis of the irreducible representation @xmath . ² ² 2
In the case of a non-unitary representation we cannot choose an
orthonormal basis due to the existence of negative norm states. In this
case we normalize the vectors in the above basis such, that the norm of
any given vector belonging to the basis is either @xmath or @xmath . In
the following we also refer to such a basis as an orthonormal basis. In
the case of Liouville theory the concept of orthonormality is defined
with respect to the chiral part of inner product introduced in section
2.6 . In the case of a generic conformal field theory we may introduce a
similar inner product. Furthermore, we may choose an orthonormal basis
of eigenstates of @xmath and @xmath . The state defined in the above
equation is known as an Ishibashi state. We conclude, that we may
express a given boundary state as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is known as the wave function of the boundary state.

As shown in appendix A in the case of Liouville theory the one-point
function in the upper half plane of a given spinless primary operator
@xmath of conformal dimension @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the transformation ( 2.12 ) mapping the upper half plane to the
unit disk and the transformation law ( 2.78 ) we obtain the one-point
function on the disk

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating the given primary operator at the center of the unit disk we
obtain from eqs. ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.19 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the wave function conjugate to @xmath and where @xmath
is the highest weight state corresponding to the given primary operator
@xmath . ³ ³ 3 Notice, we assume, that the primary operators are
normalized such that @xmath . This in indeed the case with regard to the
@xmath minimal model, which we will consider later on in this thesis. In
Liouville theory the sum appearing in ( 3.19 ) is actually an integral
and the primary states are delta-function normalized. (See eq. ( 2.75
)). With this in mind the above discussion also applies to boundary
states in Liouville theory. Hence, the wave function of a given boundary
state is determined by the one-point function. In the case of Liouville
theory we use the notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us return to the infinite strip. However, let us consider the
generic case, in which the width of the strip is @xmath . In the open
string picture the Hamilton operator is given by [ 24 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In deriving the last identity we have applied the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

mapping the infinite strip to the upper half plane and eqs. ( 2.46 ), (
3.10 ) and ( 2.40 ). Let us once again impose the periodicity condition
( 3.13 ) transforming the infinite strip into a cylinder of
circumference @xmath and length @xmath . Due to the periodic boundary
condition the cylinder amplitude @xmath evaluated in the open string
picture is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we take the trace over the entire spectrum of open string states,
that couple to the two boundary conditions imposed on the opposite sides
of the cylinder and where we partition the spectrum of open string
states into irreducible representation of the Virasoro algebra and apply
definition ( 2.101 ). @xmath denotes the number of times the irreducible
representation @xmath appears in the spectrum of open string states,
that flow in between the two boundaries in the open string channel. The
set of possible boundary states is constrained by the condition, that
@xmath has to be a non-negative integer for all @xmath for any given
wave-function. ⁴ ⁴ 4 More precisely, this is true with regard to the
discrete part of the spectrum of open states flowing in the open string
channel. This condition is known as the Cardy condition.

The above discussion concerns 2D conformal field theory in general. Let
us now return to Liouville theory. The primary boundary operators in
Liouville theory are given by [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with conformal dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 5 ] it is argued, that we should identify @xmath . Hence, we may
also impose the Seiberg bound ( 2.59 ) with regard to boundary
operators. The conformal descendants of a given primary boundary
operator are obtained by acting on the primary operator with the
Virasoro generators @xmath , @xmath . As in the case of bulk operators
there exists a state-operator correspondence between open string states
and boundary vertex operators. As mentioned previously we do not
necessarily have to impose the same boundary condition along an entire
connected boundary. However, at any given point, where the boundary
condition changes, we have to insert a boundary operator, which couple
between the two boundary conditions. Given the state-operator
correspondence the spectrum of boundary operators, which couple between
two given boundary conditions, is determined by the spectrum of open
string states, that flow in between the two boundary condition in the
open string channel. If we choose the two boundary condition to be the
same on both sides of the strip, we may determine the spectrum of
boundary operators associated with a given boundary condition.

### 3.2 The FZZT boundary state

In chapter 1 we gauge-fixed 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity coupled to a
given conformal field theory in the case, where we only include closed
geometries with a given fixed topology in the statistical ensemble of
surfaces. Let us now consider 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity coupled to a
given conformal field theory in the case, where we fix the topology of
the world-sheet @xmath to be the topology of the disk. In this case the
gravitational action ( 1.16 ) is modified by a boundary term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal line-element. Notice, the boundary
term in the above gravitational action is proportional to the length
@xmath of the boundary and the constant of proportionality @xmath is
known as the bare boundary cosmological constant. In [ 25 ] the
gauge-fixing procedure of 2D euclidean quantum gravity is performed in
this case. The result of this procedure is similar to the result
obtained in section 1.2 . However, in the Liouville action a boundary
term appears in addition to the bulk action ( 1.30 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal line element and @xmath is the
geodesic curvature both defined in terms of the fiducial metric @xmath .
The coefficient of the boundary term linear in @xmath is determined by
considering the case @xmath and demanding, that the gauge-fixed theory
is independent of our choice of fiducial metric @xmath . The constant
appearing in the exponent of the vertex operator in the nonlinear
boundary interaction term is determined by the condition, that the
conformal symmetry is maintained even for non-zero values of the
boundary cosmological constant, that is turning on the boundary
cosmological constant @xmath has to correspond to a marginal deformation
of Liouville theory. Notice, given the fact, that the physical metric is
given by @xmath , the value @xmath obtained by imposing this condition
of marginality is consistent with the interpretation, that the nonlinear
boundary term measures the length of the boundary. From [ 7 ] we expect,
that in the process of gauge-fixing this particular boundary interaction
term appears in the action with a coefficient divergent in the cut-off
introduced in the gauge-fixing procedure. In the above Liouville action
we have absorbed this divergent coefficient into the bare boundary
cosmological constant @xmath giving us a finite renormalized boundary
cosmological constant @xmath , which is a free parameter of the theory.

The boundary condition imposed on the Liouville field by the above
boundary action is easily determined by evaluating the functional
derivative of the Liouville action ( 3.30 ) with respect to the
Liouville field and setting it to zero.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this equation the normal derivative @xmath appears from the
functional derivative of the kinetic term in the bulk Liouville action.
In the semi-classical limit @xmath this boundary condition corresponds
to a generalized Neumann boundary condition.

Let us parametrize Liouville theory in the upper half plane and let us
consider Liouville theory in the conformal gauge. Due to the origin of
the boundary action given in ( 3.30 ) it is clear, that this boundary
condition does not break conformal invariance. However, given our
discussion in section 3.1 we should verify, that the energy momentum
tensor satisfies the condition ( 3.9 ), when we impose the boundary
condition given in eq. ( 3.30 ). The authors in [ 25 ] merely verify,
that the condition ( 3.9 ) is satisfied in the case @xmath . In the
generic case @xmath we may argue as follows. Firstly, the boundary
Liouville field transforms according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

under a given conformal transformation @xmath mapping the upper half
plane to the upper half plane. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Notice, this transformation law
indeed reduces to the classical transformation law in the semi-classical
limit, where @xmath . Secondly, applying this transformation law, the
transformation law governing a primary boundary operator under a given
conformal transformation and the fact, that the conformal dimension of
the primary boundary operator @xmath is 1, we obtain ⁶ ⁶ 6 Notice, in
the following calculation the manipulations are performed on the
operators inserted in the partition function.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have applied an infinitesimal conformal transformation @xmath
mapping @xmath to @xmath on the real axis. Inserting the boundary
condition ( 3.31 ) into the energy momentum tensor ( 2.43 ) evaluated on
the real axis we finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us determine the boundary state corresponding to the boundary
condition given in ( 3.30 ) using the so-called bootstrap techniques.
These techniques are based upon and utilize the conformal symmetry of
the field theory to full extent and from a theoretical point of view
these techniques are interesting, since they provide a powerful tool to
obtain exact results in conformal field theory. The beauty of these
techniques becomes evident, when one compares the complexity of and the
limited information obtained from a standard perturbative calculation in
terms of Feynman diagrams with the abundance of information obtained
from a exact calculation based upon these bootstrap techniques. We have
actually already applied some of these bootstrap techniques in our
discussion of the OPE in section 2.8 . In addition to these bootstrap
techniques we will need to know some particular structure constants in
Liouville theory, which are not fixed by the conformal symmetry, in
order to set up an exact equation determining the wave function of the
boundary state. We have already determined two of these structure
constants appearing in the OPE in section 2.8 . The additional structure
constant needed in the calculation of the boundary state will be
determined by a method similar to the “perturbative” method applied in
section 2.8 . The boundary state corresponding to the boundary condition
given in eq. ( 3.30 ) was first determined Fateev, Zamolodchikov and
Zamolodchikov in [ 9 ] by the above method, which relies on some tricks
developed by Teschner [ 26 , 27 ] . We therefore refer to this boundary
state as the FZZT boundary state.

The basic idea for determining the boundary state is to consider the
two-point function of the operator @xmath and a generic primary operator
@xmath in the upper half plane. It follows from eq. ( 2.118 ), that this
two-point function satisfies the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

By a calculation identical to ( 2.120 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eq. ( 2.111 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have used Cauchy’s theorem and the fact, that there is no pole
at infinity. Applying the condition ( 3.9 ) and Cauchy’s theorem we may
transform the integral along the real axis into a path integral in the
complex @xmath -plane.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

These three integrals may be determined in the same way as we determined
the integrals in eq. ( 2.121 ). Inserting the result of this calculation
and eq. ( 3.36 ) into eq. ( 3.35 ) we obtain the partial differential
equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In appendix A we show, that the two point function in the upper half
plane is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.40)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, @xmath is given by eq. ( 2.11 ). Inserting this expression
for the two-point function into the partial differential equation ( 3.39
) we obtain a second order differential equation governing @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two linearly independent solutions to this equation known as
conformal blocks is given by [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the hypergeometric function. @xmath is given by a linear
combination of these two solutions and let us determine the coefficients
in this linear combination by inserting the OPE discussed in section 2.8
into eq. ( 3.41 ) and evaluating the contributions from each of the two
conformal families appearing in the OPE to lowest order in @xmath . From
eqs. ( 2.108 ), ( 2.125 ), ( 2.126 ), ( 3.42 ), ( 2.109 ) and ( A.12 )
we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are some undetermined constants. Comparing this
result with the expansions of @xmath and @xmath to lowest order in
@xmath we obtain the coefficients appearing in @xmath expressed as a
linear combination of @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying eqs. (15.3.6) and (15.3.3) in [ 28 ] we may express

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

So far the imposed boundary condition has not entered into the
calculation explicitly. The above expression ( 3.48 ) is valid
independent of the conformal invariant boundary condition imposed on the
real axis. In order to determine the FZZT boundary state we have to
consider some quantity, which depends explicitly on the boundary
condition. Let us therefore consider the bulk-boundary operator
expansion. In [ 29 ] it is argued, that given a boundary condition,
which does not break conformal invariance, we may expand a given bulk
operator in terms of boundary operators in the limit, where the bulk
operator approaches the boundary. This bulk-boundary expansion is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we integrate over all conformal families of boundary operators and
where we sum over all finite sets of positive integers ordered such that
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath is known as the bulk-boundary structure
constant, @xmath and the remaining constants @xmath are fixed completely
by the conformal symmetry. The bulk-boundary structure constant is
normalized such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the empty set. Finally,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider the expansion of the primary operator @xmath in terms of
boundary operators. This expansion has to be consistent with eq. ( 2.118
). Inserting the bulk-boundary operator expansion into eq. ( 3.39 ),
which is equivalent to eq. ( 2.118 ), and evaluating the contribution
from each conformal family to lowest order in @xmath , we obtain the
condition, that the bulk-boundary structure constant @xmath , only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to solve this equation in terms of @xmath we first determine
@xmath and then determine @xmath . From this calculation and the Seiberg
bound we obtain, that the bulk-boundary structure constant @xmath , only
if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, only two conformal families of boundary operators appear in the
bulk-boundary expansion of @xmath . One of these families is the family
descending from the identity operator and we conclude, that we may
express the bulk-boundary structure constant as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us determine the structure constant @xmath in the case, where the
boundary condition is given by ( 3.30 ). As in the case of the structure
constants determined in section 2.8 we first need to consider Liouville
theory with @xmath , that is the limit, in which Liouville theory
reduces to the linear dilaton theory. The correlation function of @xmath
bulk operators and @xmath boundary operators in the linear dilaton
theory is given by [ 9 ] ⁷ ⁷ 7 By an argument similar to ( 2.68 ) we may
show, that this correlation function vanishes, unless

@xmath (3.57)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us return to Liouville theory with @xmath and @xmath . In the upper
half plane the two-point function of two primary boundary operators
vanishes, unless the conformal dimensions of the two operators coincide.
This is a consequence of the conformal symmetry. Performing a
perturbative expansion in @xmath and @xmath we obtain from the above
equation the following two-point function valid for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.60)
  -- -- -- --------

In the above calculation we have assumed, that @xmath belongs to a small
interval around @xmath . We apply this assumption, when we identify the
term in the perturbative expansion different from zero. However, it is
sufficient to determine two-point function for @xmath belonging to a
small interval around @xmath , since the two-point function vanishes for
all @xmath assuming @xmath . From the bulk-boundary expansion of @xmath
given in eq. ( 3.51 ) and the above equation we obtain, that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.61)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

valid for @xmath . In the above calculation the @xmath refers to the
contribution from descendant operators. The two point function involving
a descendant operator is proportional to the corresponding two point
function involving the corresponding primary operator. This follows from
the integral representation of the Virasoro generators given in eq. (
2.111 ) and from the OPE of the energy momentum tensor and a given
primary boundary operator. However, the two-point function involving a
descendant operator decays faster in the limit @xmath than the
corresponding two-point function involving the corresponding primary
operator. Hence, in the limit @xmath we project out the contribution
from descendant operators in the above calculation. In order to
determine the bulk-boundary structure constant @xmath we consider the
above equation for @xmath belonging to a small interval around zero and
perform a perturbative expansion in @xmath and @xmath . From eq. ( 3.58
) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we consider the integral as a formal representation of the beta
function @xmath . See eq. (6.2.1) in [ 28 ] . Moreover, we have used
eqs. (6.2.2), (6.1.18), (6.1.15) and (6.1.8) in [ 28 ] . Let us insert
the expansion of @xmath in terms of boundary operators given by eq. (
3.51 ) into eq. ( 3.41 ). Applying eqs. ( 3.42 ), ( 3.56 ) and ( A.12 )
and performing an expansion in @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing this equation with eq. ( 3.48 ) we identify the first term in
eq. ( 3.48 ) as coming from the fusion of @xmath to the boundary
operator @xmath , while the second term comes from the fusion of @xmath
to the identity operator on the boundary. Moreover, from this comparison
we obtain the equation

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.64)
           @xmath            
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where the constant @xmath is defined in eq. ( 3.50 ). We have obtained
the above exact equation by exploiting the reducible structure of the
Verma module associated with the primary operator @xmath . However,
instead of considering the two-point function involving @xmath we might
as well consider the two-point function involving the primary operator
@xmath . The Verma module associated with the primary operator @xmath
also has a singular state at level 2. In this case we would obtain an
exact equation concerning the one-point function on the disk related to
the above equation by the duality transformation [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution to eq. ( 3.64 ) and the dual equation is given by [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameter @xmath is related to the boundary cosmological
constant by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying eq. ( 3.22 ) we obtain the FZZT boundary wave function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced an overall factor @xmath . We will comment on
this particular normalization of the FZZT wave function at the end of
the next section.

### 3.3 The ZZ boundary states

For each given solution to classical Liouville theory with negative
curvature we expect, that there exists at least one corresponding
solution to quantum Liouville theory, which reduces to the given
classical solution in the classical limit @xmath . In section 2.2 we
discussed a particular non-compact solution to classical Liouville
theory with constant negative curvature, the Lobachevskiy plane. In [ 10
] Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov quantize the Lobachevskiy plane. Let
us now discuss their derivation. By the quantum Lobachevskiy plane we
mean a random geometry, whose properties on average are similar to the
properties of the classical Lobachevskiy plane. Specifically,
Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov assume, that the geodesic distance
between two operators inserted on the quantum Lobachevskiy plane
diverges in the limit @xmath as in the case of the classical
Lobachevskiy plane. (See eqs. ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.11 ).) Moreover, they
assume, that the two-point function factorizes into a product of
one-point functions in the limit, where the geodesic distance between
the two operators approaches infinity. This assumption seems reasonable
at least in a unitary theory, where the correlation functions decay at
large distance. By a derivation identical to the derivation given in
appendix A in the case of the two-point function we may show, that the
product of two one-point functions in the upper half plane is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 3.42 ). In the case where @xmath and in
the limit @xmath , where the geodesic distance between the two operators
diverges and @xmath approaches the absolute, we obtain the following
leading order behavior of the product of the two one-point functions
from eqs. ( A.12 ) and ( 3.42 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above leading order behaviour is identical to the leading order
behaviour of the term in the two-point function ( 3.40 ) coming from the
second conformal block in eq. ( 3.48 ), which describes the fusion of
the operator @xmath to the boundary identity operator in the limit,
where @xmath approaches the absolute. Moreover, we obtain from eqs. (
3.40 ) and ( 3.48 ), that the fusion of the operator @xmath to the
boundary operator @xmath in the limit, where @xmath approaches the
absolute, is responsible for a large distance correlation between the
two operators. This large distance correlation between the two operators
is only present, if the bulk-boundary structure constant @xmath .
Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov now assume, that the second conformal
block in eq. ( 3.48 ) indeed captures the decay of the two point
function into a product of one-point functions. Equating the leading
order term of the second conformal block with the corresponding leading
order term in the above product of two one-point functions Zamolodchikov
and Zamolodchikov obtain the equation

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath            
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 3.50 ). If we consider the primary
operator @xmath instead of the primary operator @xmath , we obtain a
dual equation through a similar argument. This dual equation is related
to the above equation by the duality transformation given by eqs. ( 3.65
) and ( 3.66 ). Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov argue, that at least for
incommensurable values of @xmath and @xmath the complete set of
solutions to these two equations is given by a family of solutions
parametrized by two positive integers @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the basic (1,1) one-point function is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the derivation of this family of one-point functions we ought to
verify, whether each of these solutions really describe a quantum
Lobachevskiy plane. In [ 10 ] Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov show the
following. Let us define the quantum Liouville field as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the three above equations we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

independent of which solution labelled by @xmath we consider. This is
precisely the classical Liouville equation ( 2.5 ) in conformal gauge
satisfied by the classical Lobachevskiy plane. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Applying ( 2.4 ) we
may express the classical Liouville equation ( 2.5 ) in conformal gauge
as

@xmath (3.77)

Let us discuss the classical limit @xmath of the above two parameter
family of one-point functions. For @xmath the one-point function @xmath
does not approach a well-defined function in the limit @xmath . Thus, it
seems hard to associate a classical geometry with the one-point function
@xmath in the classical limit for @xmath . However, the one-point
function @xmath is well-behaved in the classical limit @xmath . We may
view the insertion of a single vertex operator @xmath into the partition
function as the introduction of an external current into the Liouville
action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the language of standard quantum field theory we may interpret

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as the generating function of all connected Feynman diagrams. ⁹ ⁹ 9
Notice, in the above we have parametrized Liouville theory on the disk
for convenience. Applying the definition of the generating function of
all connected Feynman diagrams we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the sum over all connected Feynman diagrams with @xmath
external legs and where we have inserted the explicit expression for the
external current. Comparing the two above equations we realize, that we
may interpret @xmath as the sum over all connected Feynman diagrams with
@xmath external legs all ending at @xmath . Given the one-point function
@xmath we may determine the asymptotic expansion of @xmath in @xmath
order by order. In the case of @xmath the first term depending on @xmath
appears at third order. In the case of @xmath the first term depending
on @xmath appears at second order. Finally, the lowest order term in
@xmath do not depend on @xmath . Expanding the Liouville action ( 1.30 )
around the solution ( 2.13 ) describing the classical Lobachevskiy plane
we may perform a standard perturbative calculation of @xmath in terms of
Feynman diagrams. This is done in [ 10 ] by Zamolodchikov and
Zamolodchikov with regard to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Firstly, they
show, that the perturbative calculation in terms of Feynman diagrams of
@xmath to second order, of @xmath to first order and of @xmath to lowest
order agrees with the asymptotic expansion of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
independent of @xmath . Secondly, they calculate @xmath to second order
and show, that the perturbative calculation in terms of Feynman diagrams
match the asymptotic expansion obtained from the one-point function
@xmath , only if @xmath . From this they conclude, that the basic @xmath
solution corresponds to the ”natural” quantization of the Lobachevskiy
plane. This raises the question, how we should interpret the remaining
members of the two-parameter family of solutions. One of the three main
results obtained by the author of this thesis in collaboration with his
academic adviser and presented in this thesis is a possible
interpretation of the remaining members of the two parameter family of
solutions. This interpretation is based upon and is in agreement with
calculation performed both on the disk and the cylinder. We will return
to this interpretation later on in this thesis.

Even though the Lobachevskiy plane is a non-compact geometry we may, as
we have done in eq. ( 2.13 ), parametrize the Lobachevskiy plane in the
interior of a compact region of the complex plane, for instance the unit
disk. In order to solve the Liouville equations in the interior of the
unit disk we have to impose a boundary condition satisfied by the
Liouville field as we approach the boundary. With time evolving radially
outwards on the disk a given boundary condition in quantum Liouville
theory corresponds to a boundary state imposed at the boundary of the
unit disk as discussed previously in section 3.1 . In the case of the
Lobachevskiy plane this out-vacuum state is imposed at the absolute of
the Lobachevskiy plane at infinite. Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov
assume, that the boundary conditions corresponding to the two parameter
family of one-point functions @xmath do not break conformal invariance,
that is the corresponding boundary states may be expressed as linear
combinations of Ishibashi states. Applying eq. ( 3.22 ) we may define
the corresponding two parameter family of boundary wave functions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Strictly speaking, we have omitted an overall constant factor
independent of @xmath in the above definition compared with the
expression for the wave function given in eq. ( 3.22 ). We will motivate
this particular normalization in a short while. The boundary states
corresponding to the above boundary wave functions are known as
ZZ-boundary states named after Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov. Notice
the somewhat peculiar fact, that we may express a given ZZ-boundary
state as the difference between two FZZT-boundary states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fact was first noticed by Martinec in [ 33 ] . We will discuss this
fact later on in this thesis.

Let us determine the spectrum of open string states flowing in the open
string channel between two given ZZ boundary conditions labelled by
@xmath and @xmath respectively. In order to determine this spectrum we
consider the cylinder amplitude with circumference @xmath and length
@xmath and impose a ZZ boundary state on each boundary. Applying the
definition of an Ishibashi state given in eq. ( 3.17 ) and applying eqs.
( 2.48 ) and ( 2.101 ) we obtain ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In Liouville theory we denote
the Ishibashi state associated with the irreducible representation
@xmath of the left and right copies of the Virasoro algebra by @xmath .
This notation differs from the notation applied in section 3.1 .

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.86)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying eq. ( 2.104 ), performing a standard Gaussian integration and
applying the formula [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Dedekind eta function, we obtain the following
identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced a prime in the summation symbol in order to
denote, that the summation runs in steps of two, and applying eqs. (
3.82 ), ( 3.83 ), ( 3.86 ) and ( 3.89 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.92)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of @xmath irrational it follows from the discussion
regarding reducible Verma modules in section 2.5 that we may express the
above Liouville cylinder amplitude in the open string channel as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 2.86 ). The normalizations of the ZZ
wave functions are chosen such that the overall factor in front the sum
over Virasoro characters is one. Comparing the above equation with eq. (
3.26 ) we realize, that for @xmath irrational the spectrum @xmath of
open string states flowing in the open string channel in between the two
ZZ boundary conditions is given by the direct sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the primes refer to the fact, that the summations run in steps of
two. For @xmath irrational the fusion ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The fusion rules usually
pertain to only the left or the right part of the theory. Given two
chiral operators belonging to the left part of the theory the fusion
rules state, which conformal families of chiral operators appear in the
OPE or fusion of the two operators. However, in the case of a conformal
field theory, in which only spinless operators exist, we might as well
apply the term fusion in relation with operators belonging to the tensor
product of both the left and right part of the theory. of the two
primary operators @xmath and @xmath is given by [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath refers to the conformal family of operators descending from
the primary operator @xmath . Comparing the two above equation we
realize, that for @xmath irrational there is the following one-to-one
correspondence between the ZZ boundary states and the degenerate primary
operators @xmath : The spectrum of open string states flowing in the
open string channel between two ZZ-boundary states labelled by @xmath
and @xmath is given by the fusion rule associated with the corresponding
operators @xmath and @xmath . In [ 10 ] Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov
show, that we may associate the primary operator @xmath with the FZZT
boundary state given by the wave function @xmath in a similar way. In
particular by a calculation similar to calculation performed in the
above we may show, that the Liouville cylinder amplitude with a FZZT
boundary condition imposed on the one boundary and the @xmath ZZ
boundary condition imposed on the other boundary is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.96)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the open string channel. The normalization of the FZZT wave function
given in eq. ( 3.69 ) is exactly chosen such, that the overall
coefficient in front of the sum over the Virasoro characters in the
above equation is equal to one.

## Chapter 4 The (p,q) minimal model coupled to Quantum Gravity

### 4.1 The (p,q) minimal model

The set of minimal models consists of a family of two-dimensional
conformal field theories labelled by two relatively prime positive
integers @xmath satisfying @xmath . The central charge of the @xmath
minimal model is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The term minimal refers to the fact, that a given minimal model only
consists of a finite number of irreducible representations of the two
copies of the Virasoro algebra. Due to the simplicity of the minimal
models, the @xmath minimal model coupled to Liouville theory defines a
laboratory well suited for the study of matter coupled to Quantum
Gravity in two dimensions. The literature on the minimal models is quite
extensive. This short introduction to the minimal models is mainly based
upon [ 17 ] . In the so-called diagonal @xmath minimal model, which we
will consider in this thesis, the primary operators are spinless and are
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with conformal dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath minimal model is unitary, if and only if @xmath . By unitary
we mean a conformal field theory, which do not contain any negative norm
states. Applying the state-operator correspondence defined in eq. ( 2.71
) we may associate a highest weight state with each of the primary
operators. Acting on a given highest weight state repeatedly with the
Virasoro generators @xmath , @xmath , we generate a Verma module as
defined in ( 2.62 ) in the case of Liouville theory. The structure of a
given Verma module in terms of irreducible representations of the
Virasoro algebra may be determined from the Kac determinant discussed in
section 2.7 . The structure of the Verma module @xmath is given by [ 20
]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in eqs. ( 2.97 ) and ( 2.98 ).
Notice, this diagram is related to the corresponding diagram ( 2.100 )
in Liouville theory with @xmath and @xmath by the previously discussed
reflection property. We define the irreducible representation @xmath
associated with the reducible Verma module @xmath as in Liouville theory

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.7)
  -- -- -- -------

As in the case of Liouville theory we determine the Virasoro character
of the irreducible representation @xmath from the above diagram. (See
eq. ( 2.106 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we sum over all Verma modules @xmath embedded in @xmath including
@xmath . The Hilbert space of the diagonal @xmath minimal model is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we sum over the set of labels @xmath given in eq. ( 4.2 ).

The structure of the Verma modules is essential to the @xmath minimal
model. Due to the fact, that there exists two unrelated singular states
in the Verma module @xmath at level @xmath and level @xmath
respectively, the corresponding primary operator @xmath satisfies two
independent constraints similar to the constraint ( 2.118 ). This
follows from an argument similar to the argument given in section 2.8
with regard to the primary operator @xmath in Liouville theory. These
constraints, the corresponding anti-holomorphic constraints and the
constraint, that only spinless primary operators appear in the OPE of
two spinless primary operators, imply, that the set of conformal
families descending from the primary operators given in ( 4.2 ) is
closed under the OPE, which is off course a requirement in order for the
model to be well-defined. The fusion of two primary operators in the
diagonal @xmath minimal model is given by [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term diagonal applied in the above discussion refers to the fact,
that the Hilbert space is the direct sum over direct products of copies
of the same representation, which is equivalent to the statement, that
all primary operators are spinless. However, minimal models exist, which
are not diagonal. The three-state Potts model at the critical point is
an example of a non-diagonal model. [ 17 ] The operator content of a
given conformal field theory is constrained by the fact, that the genus
@xmath torus amplitude must be invariant under the modular group @xmath
. This condition follows from the fact, that any given torus may be
defined as the upper half plane modulo some lattice spanned by two
linearly independent vectors. These two linearly independent vectors
enter the torus amplitude through the modular parameter @xmath .
However, there exists a whole family of pairs of linearly independent
vectors each spanning the same lattice and the torus amplitude should
not depend on, which pair of vectors we choose to define the lattice by.
Going from one pair of vectors spanning the lattice to another pair of
vectors, the modular parameter @xmath transforms under the action of the
modular group @xmath . Hence, the torus amplitude must be invariant
under the group of modular transformations. Any given torus amplitude
may be obtained by imposing some periodic boundary condition on the
cylinder of finite length. The torus amplitude may therefore be
expressed as the trace over the Hilbert space of closed string states.
The condition, that the torus amplitude has to be invariant under the
group of modular transformations, imposes a constraint on the Hilbert
space and the corresponding operator content of the conformal field
theory. Both the diagonal minimal models and the three-state Potts model
at the critical point satisfy the above modular constraint.

Let us consider the so-called Cardy boundary states in the @xmath
minimal model introduced in [ 30 , 22 ] . These boundary states are
defined by two conditions. Firstly, the boundary states should not be
break conformal invariance. This condition implies, that the boundary
states may be expanded in terms of the Ishibashi states defined in eq. (
3.17 ). Secondly, the family of Cardy states should satisfy the Cardy
condition discussed in section 3.1 . For each primary operator @xmath we
obtain a Cardy state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we sum over all conformal families in the diagonal @xmath minimal
model and where @xmath is the so-called modular S-matrix [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The correspondence between the Cardy state labelled by @xmath and the
primary operator @xmath is similar to the correspondence between the
ZZ-boundary state labelled by @xmath and the primary operator @xmath in
Liouville theory in the case @xmath irrational. The spectrum of open
string states flowing in the open string channel between the @xmath
Cardy state and the @xmath Cardy state is determined by the fusion rule
associated with the primary operators @xmath and @xmath . Hence, in the
open string channel the cylinder amplitude of length @xmath with the
@xmath Cardy boundary condition imposed on one boundary and the @xmath
Cardy boundary condition imposed on the other boundary is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Virasoro character @xmath .

Finally, let us shortly touch on the physics described by the minimal
models. Let us for simplicity consider the unitary @xmath minimal model.
The @xmath minimal model describes the Ising model in the thermodynamic
limit at the critical temperature @xmath , which separates the ordered
ferromagnetic phase from the unordered symmetric phase. More generally,
the @xmath minimal model describes the universality class of models, to
which the Ising model at the critical point belongs. Due to the fact,
that the correlation length @xmath diverges at the critical point @xmath
of the Ising model, the theory no longer contains any length scale nor
mass scale @xmath at the critical point and the theory becomes
scale-invariant, conformal. Moreover, we are able to define a continuum
model describing the Ising model at the critical point. Comparing
critical exponents we may identify this continuum model as the @xmath
minimal model. The three primary operators existing in the @xmath
minimal model, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , correspond to the identity
operator, the energy-density operator and the spin-density operator
respectively in the Ising model. [ 32 ] The two Cardy boundary states
@xmath and @xmath correspond to the two boundary conditions fixing the
spins on the boundary to be either up or down respectively. The third
Cardy state @xmath corresponds to the free boundary condition, where the
spins on the boundary are free to fluctuate. [ 30 ] The remaining @xmath
minimal models also describe some lattice models at criticality. [ 17 ]
However, in this thesis we will not put to much emphasis on the
particular realizations of the minimal models in terms of lattice
models. Our main focus will be on studying the effect of matter on
geometry in 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. We consider the minimal models
coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity as toy models, since the
simplicity of the minimal models enables us to perform actual
calculations.

### 4.2 The (p,q) minimal model coupled to Quantum Gravity

Let us couple the @xmath minimal model to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity
and let us discuss the space of physical closed string states.
Performing the gauge-fixing procedure discussed in section 1.2 we obtain
the tensor product of the @xmath minimal model, Liouville theory and the
ghost theory, where the central charge of Liouville theory is fixed by
the condition ( 1.38 ), that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath in Liouville theory is fixed by eqs. ( 1.33 ), (
1.34 ) and the Seiberg bound ( 2.59 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Any given physical amplitude should not depend on our choice of gauge.
Considering a small variation of the fiducial metric @xmath , we may
show, that this condition of gauge-independence is equivalent to the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all physical states @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the total
energy momentum tensor. [ 2 ] Expanding the energy momentum tensor in
terms of the Virasoro generators we obtain the condition, that any
matrix element obtained by inserting a Virasoro generator in between two
physical states must vanish. We may express this condition as a
constraint on the space of physical closed string states in the
so-called BRST formalism. Actually, the two independent copies of the
Virasoro algebra give rise to two independent constraints on the space
of physical closed string states. Let us for simplicity only consider
the constraint imposed by the left copy of the Virasoro algebra. ¹ ¹ 1
We may perform a similar discussion with regard to the constraint
imposed by the right copy of the Virasoro algebra. We may express this
constraint in terms of the BRST charge ² ² 2 Actually, we only consider
the term in the BRST charge, which acts on the left part of theory. The
complete BRST charge consists of the above term and a corresponding term
acting on the right part of the theory. [ 20 , 2 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operators @xmath and @xmath are the conventional ghost
operators defined in [ 2 ] and where the dots ‘‘:’’ refer to the
operation of creation-annihilation normal ordering, in which we place
all lowering operators to the right of all raising operators. ³ ³ 3
Notice, we add a minus sign each time we change the order of two
neighboring ghost operators. Furthermore, the Virasoro generators @xmath
appearing in the above expression for the BRST charge are given by the
sums of the corresponding Virasoro generators in the matter sector and
in the Liouville sector. As discussed in various textbooks on 2D Quantum
Gravity or string theory such as [ 2 , 5 ] the condition of gauge
independence may be expressed partially ⁴ ⁴ 4 We obtain a similar
constraint with regard to the right part of the complete BRST charge,
which acts on the right part of the theory. as the constraint, that any
given physical state @xmath must belong to the kernel of @xmath , that
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

A state annihilated by @xmath is known as a closed state. Due to the
fact, that the BRST charge is nilpotent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

the image of @xmath is actually a subspace of the kernel of @xmath . A
state belonging to the image of @xmath is known as an exact state.
Because @xmath is self-adjoint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

any given exact state is actually orthogonal to all closed states
including itself. Thus, two given closed states, which differ by an
exact state, have the same inner product with all closed states and are
therefore physically equivalent. We identify two given physical states,
if they differ by an exact states. In addition to the condition ( 4.18 )
any given physical state @xmath must satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The origin of this condition is essentially kinematic. [ 2 ]

Applying the anti-commutator relations concerning the ghost operators
given in [ 2 ] we may easily show, that the commutator of the BRST
charge and the so-called ghost number operator @xmath defined in [ 2 ]
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the BRST charge raises the ghost number by one. Let us define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the fact, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows from the anti-commutator relations concerning the ghost
operators given in [ 2 ] , it follows from eqs. ( 4.18 ) and ( 4.21 ),
that any given physical state is annihilated by @xmath . Hence, in our
search for physical states we may restrict our attention to the subspace
annihilated by both @xmath and @xmath . Let us consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the left part of the Hilbert space of the ghost theory.
It follows from eq. ( 4.24 ), that the linear space annihilated by
@xmath and @xmath is closed under @xmath . Due to this fact we obtain
the cochain complex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us define the cohomology groups

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the above discussion, it seems natural to identify @xmath as the
left part of the linear space of physically distinct closed string
states belonging to the tensor product of the irreducible matter
representation @xmath and the irreducible Liouville representation
@xmath . The entire linear space is given by the tensor product @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the corresponding right part.

The above BRST cohomology groups were determined by Lian and Zuckerman
in [ 20 ] . The proof presented in [ 20 ] is quite complicated and
employs the rather advanced technology of spectral sequences. Moreover,
the formula given in [ 20 ] for the non-trivial BRST invariant states is
quite complex and involves the so-called Felder resolution, which was
originally introduced in the construction of the minimal models in the
Coulomb-Gas formalism. [ 31 ] In order not to go to far astray we will
only discuss the above BRST cohomology groups to the extent necessary
for our further discussion in this thesis. Lian and Zuckerman show, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, @xmath is non-trivial, if and only if the Verma module @xmath
belongs the diagram ( 2.100 ) with @xmath and @xmath related to the
diagram ( 4.4 ) by the reflection principle ( 2.99 ), that is if and
only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the Liouville momenta @xmath , at which non-trivial cohomologies
exist, all lie on the imaginary axis and are located symmetric around
the origin. Assuming that the above condition is satisfied, Lian and
Zuckerman prove, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the distance @xmath is defined in the paragraph following the
diagram given in ( 2.100 ). Thus, in the case when the condition ( 4.30
) is satisfied, the BRST cohomology @xmath is one-dimensional and we may
determine the ghost number of the non-trivial physical state spanning
the BRST cohomology from the above theorem. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Notice, Lian and
Zuckerman consider @xmath as a linear space over the field @xmath .

We may construct a single physical closed string state for each
non-trivial cohomology group @xmath determined by Lian and Zuckerman.
This follows from the fact, that both the @xmath minimal model and
Liouville theory are diagonal, and from the fact, that the BRST
cohomology @xmath is one-dimensional. This physical closed string state
is given by the tensor product of the non-trivial state spanning the
BRST cohomology @xmath and the corresponding non-trivial state spanning
the BRST cohomology @xmath . Since the ghost numbers @xmath and @xmath
associated with this physical closed string state obviously coincide,
for simplicity we will refer to the two ghost numbers as one in the
following. In section 2.5 we argued, that the conformal family of states
descending from the primary state corresponding to the primary operator
@xmath should be identified with the conformal family of states
descending from the primary state corresponding to the primary operator
@xmath . In the @xmath minimal model coupled to euclidean Quantum
Gravity this observation turns into the statement, that we should
identify any given physical closed string state with Liouville momentum
@xmath , @xmath , with the corresponding physical closed string state
with Liouville momentum @xmath . Hence, we may impose the bound, that we
only consider physical closed string states with Liouville momentum on
the upper imaginary axis. Given the state-operator correspondence
discussed previously we may define a physical observable corresponding
to each physical closed string state. We may view the result obtained by
Lian and Zuckerman as a classification of the physical observables in
the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. Due to
the non-tensor transformation laws given in [ 2 ] and governing the
ghost number currents under a given conformal transformation the ghost
number associated with the physical observable corresponding to a given
physical state with ghost number @xmath is actually given by @xmath . [
2 ] Imposing the condition, that we only consider physical closed string
states with Liouville momentum @xmath belonging to the upper imaginary
axis, is equivalent to imposing the Seiberg bound on the set of physical
observables. The ghost number of a given physical observable satisfying
the Seiberg bound is either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath . Now,
the explicit construction of a generic physical observable is quite
complicated. (See [ 20 ] with regard to the so-called zig-zag method.)
However, in this thesis we will only need the fact, that we may express
the physical observable @xmath spanning the one-dimensional linear space
@xmath as [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath refers to a certain combination of Virasoro raising
operators and ghost operators depending on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, we may actually construct the observables @xmath with ghost
number @xmath explicitly. In this case the zig-zag method becomes
trivial.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to these observables as tachyon operators. The above equation
for @xmath determining the gravitational dressing of a given matter
operator was first determined independently by Knizhnik, Polyakov and
Zamolodchikov in the light cone gauge in [ 34 ] and by David in
conformal gauge in [ 35 ] . This equation has been instrumental to the
development of euclidean 2D Quantum Gravity. The tachyon operator @xmath
should actually be identified with the physical observable

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integration in the above expression for the tachyon operator @xmath
is replaced by the factor @xmath , if we fix the position of the vertex
operator appearing in the integrand applying and fixing some of the
remaining conformal symmetry. [ 2 ] It follows from the above
expression, that the tachyon operator @xmath measures the area of the
world-sheet.

To each of the physical observables in the BRST formalism we may
associate a gravitational scaling dimension @xmath defined by [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the normalized expectation value of the observable
@xmath evaluated on closed Riemann surface on genus @xmath with fixed
area @xmath . Under the rigid translation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

the different factors in the above integrand transform according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have applied eq. ( 2.67 ) in deriving the two first equations.
Using the fact, that the Liouville measure is invariant under the rigid
translation ( 4.38 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain the gravitational scaling dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the scaling dimension of the observable @xmath is determined by
the Liouville momentum @xmath . From eq. ( 4.30 ) we see, that the set
of gravitational scaling dimensions associated with the set of physical
observables with ghost number @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the matrix model approach to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity we may
construct a set of scaling operators. The gravitational scaling
dimensions associated with these operators are given by [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the condition @xmath has been lifted. The nature of the
additional physical operators appearing in the matrix model formalism
compared with the BRST formalism is still an open question.

### 4.3 The FZZT and ZZ-branes

Seiberg and Shih define a FZZT brane ⁶ ⁶ 6 In this thesis we refer to a
conformal invariant boundary condition in a conformal field theory with
vanishing central charge as a brane. as the tensor product of a Cardy
state and a FZZT boundary state [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the modular S-matrix is defined in ( 4.12 ) and the FZZT wave
function @xmath is given by ( 3.69 ). Due to the fact that we may
express any given Virasoro raising operator appearing in a correlator as
a linear differential operator acting on the position dependent part of
the correlator as in eqs. ( 2.120 ) and ( 2.121 ), we may determine the
one-point function evaluated on the disk from eqs. ( 4.33 ), ( 3.22 ), (
4.12 ) and ( 3.69 ) up to a constant independent of the boundary
condition ⁷ ⁷ 7 The boundary state @xmath conjugate to the Cardy state
@xmath is defined in [ 22 ] as

@xmath (4.47)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are constants independent of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath labelling the FZZT brane and where we used the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows from eq. ( 4.30 ). Notice, the one-point function is
invariant under each of the transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that a given boundary state is completely characterized by the
set of physical gauge invariant one-point functions evaluated on the
disk, Seiberg and Shih view this invariance as evidence, that FZZT
branes related by the above transformations are identical modulo BRST
exact states. In order to identify the physically distinct FZZT branes
they introduce a new label @xmath instead of @xmath invariant under the
above symmetries

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before we define a ZZ-brane in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity let us shortly discuss the definition of a ZZ
boundary condition in Liouville theory in the case @xmath rational. In
the following discussion we will apply the notation concerning the
reducible Verma modules introduced in eqs. ( 2.92 ) and ( 2.93 ). In
section 3.3 we showed, that in the case @xmath irrational there is a
one-to-one correspondence between the degenerate primary operators in
Liouville theory associated with the reducible Verma modules and the ZZ
boundary conditions. However, as we discussed in section 2.7 the
structure of a generic reducible Verma module changes, when we go from
@xmath irrational to @xmath rational. Eq. ( 3.93 ) is not valid in the
case @xmath rational, since the Virasoro character of the irreducible
representation obtained from a given generic reducible Verma module is
more complicated in the case @xmath rational than in the case @xmath
irrational. (Compare eqs. ( 2.105 ) and ( 2.107 ).) Furthermore, the
fusion rules concerning the degenerate primary operators in the case
@xmath rational differ from the corresponding fusion rules valid in the
case @xmath irrational. Thus, the one-to-one correspondence between the
degenerate primary operators and the ZZ boundary states defined in eqs.
( 3.82 ) and ( 3.83 ) is not valid in the case @xmath rational. Seiberg
and Shih suggest, that we alter the definition of the ZZ boundary states
in the case @xmath rational in order to restore this one-to-one
correspondence. [ 11 ] Let us shortly discuss their definition of the ZZ
boundary states in Liouville theory. Since we label a given reducible
Verma module by @xmath defined in eq. ( 2.92 ) in the case @xmath
rational, they argue, that we should label the ZZ boundary states in
Liouville theory likewise. Now, it follows from eq. ( 3.96 ), which is
valid for @xmath rational, that we may associate the identity operator
with the basic @xmath or rather @xmath ZZ boundary state even in the
case @xmath rational. Moreover, Seiberg and Shih argue, that we should
define the ZZ boundary state labelled by @xmath as the following sum
over FZZT-boundary states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 2.92 ). This definition ensures, that
the spectrum of open string states flowing in the open string channel
between the @xmath ZZ-brane and @xmath ZZ-brane is indeed given by the
fusion of the identity operator with the degenerate primary operator
associated with reducible Verma module labelled by @xmath . This follows
from eqs. ( 3.96 ), ( 2.104 ) and ( 2.107 ). However, given the
definition by Seiberg and Shih of the ZZ boundary states in Liouville
theory in the case @xmath rational it would be nice to verify
explicitly, that the spectrum of states flowing in the open string
channel between two generic ZZ boundary conditions is indeed given by
the direct sum of the conformal families appearing in the fusion of the
two corresponding degenerate primary operators.

Seiberg and Shih define a ZZ brane as the tensor product of a Cardy
matter state and a ZZ boundary state. Due to the fact, that we identify
FZZT branes labelled by the same @xmath and with the same Cardy indices
we may express a given ZZ brane as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (4.53)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Furthermore, it follows from the above calculation that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

These three equations should be considered true modulo BRST exact
states. We will refer to the ZZ boundary states in Liouville theory
labelled by @xmath , where @xmath , as principal ZZ boundary states.
With regard to these principal ZZ boundary states we leave out the
redundant label @xmath . Moreover, we will refer to a given principal ZZ
boundary state tensored with any given Cardy matter state as a principal
ZZ brane. This terminology differs somewhat from the terminology of
Seiberg and Shih. We will motivate this terminology shortly. Thus, we
realize from the three above equations, that the linear space of ZZ
branes is smaller than one might naively think. Any given ZZ brane may
be expressed as a linear combination of the principal ZZ branes. In the
case of a principal ZZ boundary state the definition ( 4.52 ) reduces to
eq. ( 3.84 ). ⁸ ⁸ 8 Going from @xmath irrational to @xmath rational the
structure of a reducible Verma module associated with a given principal
ZZ boundary state does actually not change. Even in the case @xmath
rational the reducible Verma module only contains one singular state.
These Verma modules are located in the second column counted from the
left hand side in the diagram ( 2.100 ). Hence, the definition of a ZZ
boundary state given in eqs. ( 3.82 ) and ( 3.83 ) is valid with regard
to the principal ZZ boundary states. It follows from eq. ( 3.68 ), that
the cosmological constants associated with the FZZT boundary states
appearing on the left hand side of eq. ( 3.84 ) actually coincide.
Hence, even though the Lobachevskiy plane is non-compact, we may
actually associate a cosmological constant with each of the principal ZZ
boundary state. The cosmological constant associated with the principal
ZZ boundary state labelled by @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have absorbed the factor @xmath into @xmath and the factor
@xmath into @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 In the remaining part of this thesis we apply
this normalization of @xmath and @xmath . We will comment on this
surprising fact later on in this thesis.

Differentiating the disk amplitude @xmath once with respect to the bulk
cosmological constant corresponds to inserting the area operator @xmath
into the disk partition function. From the first identity in (
LABEL:onepointFZZT ) and eqs. ( 4.12 ), ( 3.69 ) and ( 4.35 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the omitted dimensionless constant of proportionality is
independent @xmath , @xmath and the Cardy indices @xmath and @xmath .
Integrating this amplitude with respect to the bulk cosmological
constant and thereafter differentiating the amplitude with respect to
the boundary cosmological constant we obtain the disk amplitude @xmath
with one marked point on the boundary

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have absorbed a constant factor independent of @xmath and
@xmath into @xmath . Introducing the dimensionless variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and applying the expression for the boundary cosmological constant in
terms of @xmath we may express eq. ( 4.58 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Chebyshev polynomial of the first kind. This
polynomial equation defines a Riemann surface

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we may interpret as the moduli space of FZZT-branes with Cardy
indices @xmath . Each point on this Riemann surface corresponds to a
particular FZZT-brane with Cardy indices @xmath . Notice, our discussion
of the moduli space of FZZT-branes differs somewhat from the discussion
by Seiberg and Shih in the sense, that we introduce a Riemann surface
for each set of Cardy indices @xmath . We will comment on this shortly.
Due to fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may consider @xmath introduced in eq. ( 4.51 ) as an uniformizing
parameter of @xmath covering the Riemann surface once. Since @xmath the
topology of the Riemann surface @xmath appears to be the topology of the
sphere. However, this is not correct. There exists a finite number of
pairs @xmath of distinct values of @xmath , where both values @xmath and
@xmath belonging to a given pair correspond to the same point @xmath on
the Riemann surface @xmath . These pairs are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding points on the Riemann surface @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may think of each of these singularities on the Riemann surface
@xmath as a pinched A-cycle of a higher genus surface. [ 11 ]

The above discussion is based on the truly exciting work [ 11 ] of
Seiberg and Shih. However, we have to some degree modified the
discussion appearing in [ 11 ] . Let us shortly discuss the points of
deviation. It follows from eq. ( LABEL:onepointFZZT ), that the
one-point function on the disk satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

regardless of which physical gauge invariant operator @xmath we insert.
Seiberg and Shih regard this equation as evidence, that the following
identity regarding the FZZT-branes is valid modulo BRST exact states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this equation they argue, that we only need to consider FZZT-branes
and ZZ-branes with Cardy matter indices @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Recall, that
Seiberg and Shih define the ZZ boundary states in terms of the FZZT
boundary states. Thus, they define a principal ZZ brane as the tensor
product of a principal ZZ boundary state and the @xmath Cardy matter
state. In the above discussion we view the Riemann surface @xmath as the
moduli space of FZZT branes with fixed Cardy matter indices @xmath . In
light of the above equation Seiberg and Shih consider the Riemann
surface @xmath as the moduli space of all FZZT branes regardless of the
values of the Cardy indices. Moreover, they actually view the Riemann
surface @xmath as the target space in @xmath minimal string theory. [ 13
] However, in the following chapter we will show, that the above
equation ( 4.67 ) is not consistent with the generic cylinder amplitude
in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. It
remains to be seen, if the above target space interpretation can be
reconciled with this fact.

## Chapter 5 The generic FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude

In this chapter we calculate the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitudes in the
@xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity for all
pairs of Cardy matter states imposed on the two boundaries. This
calculation is based upon the work of the author of this thesis done in
collaboration with his academic adviser and is published in [ 36 , 37 ]
in the case of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. The calculation of the cylinder amplitude for a generic pair of
Cardy matter states imposed on the two boundaries in the @xmath minimal
model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, @xmath , will be
submitted for publication in the near future. That said, the specific
FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude in the unitary @xmath minimal model coupled
to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity with the Cardy matter states @xmath and
@xmath imposed on the two boundaries of the cylinder has previously been
determined in [ 12 , 33 ] . The cylinder amplitude obtained here
generalizes the results obtained in [ 12 , 33 ] . As we will see in the
following discussion the structure of the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude
becomes clear once we consider the cylinder amplitude in a generic
@xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity.

In the closed string channel the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the single real moduli of the cylinder.

The matter cylinder amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the cylinder Hamiltonian in the closed string channel is given by
eq. ( 2.48 ) and where we have applied the definition ( 4.11 ) for the
Cardy matter states and the definition ( 3.17 ) for the Ishibashi
states. The Virasoro character @xmath is determined in eq. ( 4.8 ). The
Liouville cylinder amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have expanded both the FZZT boundary states in Ishibashi states
according to eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.23 ) and inserted the definition (
3.17 ) for the Ishibashi states. The Virasoro character @xmath is
defined in eq. ( 2.104 ). Finally, in the closed string channel the
ghost cylinder amplitude is given by ¹ ¹ 1 The single real moduli @xmath
of the cylinder gives rise to the insertion of the ghost operator @xmath
into the ghost cylinder amplitude. The single conformal Killing vector
of the cylinder generating rigid rotations parallel to the boundaries
gives rise to the insertion of the ghost operator @xmath into the ghost
cylinder amplitude. [ 2 ] [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the ghost boundary state is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the ghost vacuum defined in [ 2 ] . Applying the
anti-commutator relations concerning the ghost operators given in [ 2 ]
we obtain that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the expressions for the Virasoro generators @xmath and @xmath in
terms of ghost operators given in [ 2 ] , the anti-commutator relations
concerning the ghost operators and the above relation we may easily show
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Dedekind eta function. Inserting eqs. ( 5.2 ), ( 5.3
) and ( 5.7 ) into eq. ( 5.1 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We will determine the cylinder amplitude by transforming the integration
over the Liouville momentum @xmath into a sum over residues in the
complex @xmath -plane. The analytical structure of the integrand viewed
as a function of @xmath is therefore crucial to our derivation of the
cylinder amplitude. Let us start out by performing the integral our the
moduli @xmath . This integral is obtained in eq. ( B.9 ) in appendix B .

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (5.9)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

This result is quite remarkable. The poles in the above expression are
located at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are exactly the points in the complex @xmath -plane at which the
cohomology group @xmath is non-vanishing, that is the above expression
has a pole at each value of the complex Liouville momentum @xmath
associated with a physical closed string state with matter content
belonging to the irreducibel matter representation @xmath . If we take
the summation in eq. ( LABEL:truecyl ) over all the different
irreducible matter representations @xmath into account we realize, that
the integrand in eq. ( LABEL:truecyl ) has a simple pole at each point
in the complex Liouville momentum plane associated with a physical
closed string state. Let us define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have applied the definition of the modular S-matrix given in
eq. ( 4.12 ). It follows from eqs. ( B.11 ) and ( B.20 ) derived in
appendix B , that we may express the set of points in the complex @xmath
-plane, at which @xmath has a pole, as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the symbol @xmath means ”does not divide”.

Quite surprisingly, the integrand in expression ( LABEL:truecyl ) for
the cylinder amplitude contains more poles than the poles associated
with physical closed string states. From eq. ( 3.69 ) and from eq.
(6.1.31) in [ 28 ] we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has poles at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the poles in the integrand in eq. ( LABEL:truecyl ) are simple poles
except the pole at zero, which is a second order pole. In order to
regularize this second order pole at zero and make the integral in eq. (
LABEL:truecyl ) convergent, we introduce the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

into the integrand, which splits the second order pole at zero into pole
at @xmath and a pole at @xmath . In the following calculation we will
assume that @xmath . The cylinder amplitude for generic values of @xmath
and @xmath is obtained by analytical continuation of the result obtained
under the assumption @xmath . Let us split the FZZT wave function @xmath
given by eq. ( 3.69 ) into two terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Corresponding to eq. ( 5.13 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the fact, that the integrand in ( LABEL:truecyl ) is an even
function in @xmath we may express the cylinder amplitude as an integral
along the entire real axis in the complex @xmath -plane. Splitting
@xmath into the two above terms and applying the assumption @xmath we
may divide the expression ( LABEL:truecyl ) for the cylinder amplitude
into two terms, one integral, which we close in the upper half plane,
and one integral, which we close in the lower half plane.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the closed contour @xmath encircle all the poles in the upper half
plane counterclockwise and where the closed contour @xmath encircle all
the poles in the lower half plane clockwise. Applying Cauchy’s theorem
we may express the cylinder amplitude as a sum over residues. Taking the
opposite directions of the two contours @xmath and @xmath into account
it follows from eqs. ( 5.9 ) and ( 5.18 ) that the contribution to the
cylinder amplitude from a given pole at @xmath equals the contribution
to the cylinder amplitude from the corresponding pole at @xmath . Hence,
we may express the cylinder amplitude entirely as a sum over residues in
the upper half plane of the complex @xmath -plane. Let us parametrize
the set of points in the upper half plane at which @xmath has a pole as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The residue at a given pole in the function @xmath is easily determined
from eq. ( 5.9 ) and from Cauchy’s theorem we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.22)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where the even function @xmath is defined in eq. ( LABEL:ffunc ). The
last line in the above expression contains the divergent part and the
finite part in the cut off @xmath of the residue at @xmath . In the
second last line we sum over the residues at @xmath , @xmath . In the
third line from the bottom we sum over the residues at @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and in the fourth line from the bottom we sum over the residues
at @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . All the residues in the second line to the
fourth line counted from the bottom are associated with poles appearing
in the product of the two FZZT wave functions given by eq. ( 5.18 ).
Finally, in the first two lines we sum over all the residues, which we
may associate with physical closed string states as discussed
previously. This sum is particularly interesting and let us denote it by
@xmath . Inside the curly bracket we sum over all the residues
associated with the closed string states with a matter content belonging
to the irreducible matter representation @xmath . Outside the curly
bracket we sum over all the irreducible representations in the @xmath
minimal model. From the expression ( LABEL:onepointFZZT ) for the
one-point function evaluated on the disk we realize, that the residue
associated with a given physical closed string state @xmath is
essentially given by the product of the two disk amplitudes @xmath and
@xmath . This is true up to a constant independent of the boundary
conditions. Thus, we may interpret a given residue in the sum @xmath as
the amplitude of the corresponding closed string state propagating
between the two branes. The observant reader may object, that the
boundary wave function @xmath is not really the FZZT wave function
@xmath . However, we may decompose the boundary wave function @xmath
into an even part in @xmath equal to the FZZT wave function @xmath and
an odd part and we may formally divide the sum @xmath into a sum
involving the even part of @xmath and a sum involving the odd part of
@xmath . We know from eqs. ( LABEL:truecyl ) and ( 3.69 ), that the
cylinder amplitude is an even function in @xmath . As we will see in a
moment the even nature of the cylinder amplitude is restored by the
finite part of the residue at @xmath . Thus, all the odd terms
effectively cancel and the significant part of the boundary wave
function @xmath is the even part, which is identical to the FZZT
boundary wave function @xmath . This argument is clearly of a formal
nature. If we change @xmath in the sum @xmath we obtain a divergent sum.
The sum obtained by inserting a complete set of physical closed string
states into the cylinder amplitude is strictly speaking ill-defined.
Hence, we may view the sum @xmath as a convergent realization of the
formal sum obtained by inserting a complete set of physical closed
string states into the cylinder amplitude. In light of the above
discussion we understand why the contribution to the cylinder amplitude
from a given pole located at @xmath is equal to the contribution to the
cylinder amplitude from the corresponding pole located at @xmath . With
regard to the poles associated with physical closed string states this
is a manifestation of the fact, that we have to identify the physical
closed string state with Liouville momentum @xmath with the physical
closed string state with Liouville momentum @xmath .

The structure of cylinder amplitude is similar to the structure of the
classical Greens function encountered in the discussion of the Wick
rotated harmonic oscillator. Let us consider the restriction of the
operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

to the linear space of functions satisfying the boundary condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

(More precisely, we consider @xmath on @xmath ). With respect to the
usual inner product the operator @xmath is Hermitian due to the above
boundary condition. In this linear space of functions there does not
exist any solution to the homogeneous equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath is therefore invertible and we may try to determine
the inverse operator given in terms of the Greens function @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a complete set of eigenfunction @xmath with eigenvalues @xmath of
the Hermitian operator @xmath we may express the Greens function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of the Hermitian operator @xmath the properly normalized
eigenfunctions are given by @xmath with eigenvalues @xmath . These
eigenfunction do strictly speaking not belong to @xmath . However, they
remain bounded as @xmath and we may consider them as generalized
eigenfunctions. From the above expression we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we recognize as the ordinary Fourier transform. In the case @xmath
we perform the above integration by closing the integration contour in
the upper half plane. In this case the Greens function is given by
@xmath times the residue of the single pole in the upper half plane
located at @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the final expression is valid even for @xmath . Thus, the Greens
function is essentially given by the product of the two non-normalizable
solutions @xmath and @xmath to the homogeneous equation ( 5.25 ).

With regard to the cylinder amplitude we start out in eq. ( 5.1 ) by
consider the restriction of the Hermitian operator @xmath to the Hilbert
space of normalizable states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is true in the sense, that we may expand the boundary states in
terms of normalizable states belonging to this Hilbert space. This is
obtained by expanding the matter and the Liouville boundary states in
Ishibashi states, which we furthermore expand as in eq. ( 3.17 ), and by
expanding the exponential operator appearing in the definition ( 5.5 )
of the ghost boundary state. ² ² 2 Notice, in addition to the operator
@xmath the ghost operator @xmath appears in the cylinder amplitude. The
importance of this insertion becomes apparent, when we consider the
inner product of the ghost states. The two ghost boundary states imposed
on the opposite sides of the cylinder each contribute with a factor
@xmath in the cylinder amplitude and we may express

@xmath (5.31)

Due to the fact, that

@xmath (5.32)

while

@xmath (5.33)

the operator @xmath appearing in the cylinder amplitude ensures, that
the ghost cylinder amplitude is non-vanishing. Notice, this is an
expansion in terms of eigenstates of the cylinder Hamiltonian @xmath .
The eigenvalues of the cylinder Hamiltonian @xmath restricted to the
above Hilbert space are all strictly positive. ³ ³ 3 It follows from
Bèzout’s theorem, that there exists @xmath and @xmath satisfying

@xmath (5.34)

Moreover, it follows from the Virasoro algebra ( 2.41 ), that the
conformal dimension of a given descendant state is larger than the
conformal dimension of the corresponding primary state. From Bèzout’s
theorem, eqs. ( 4.3 ) and ( 2.39 ) and from the anti-commutator
relations concerning the ghost operators given in [ 2 ] we obtain the
following lower bound on the set of eigenvalues @xmath of the cylinder
Hamiltonian restricted to the Hilbert space @xmath

@xmath (5.35)

This implies that the integration over @xmath is convergent and
performing this integration we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the boundary states in normalizable eigenstates of the
cylinder Hamiltonian we obtain an expression similar to eq. ( 5.27 ).
Due to the analytic structure of the cylinder amplitude we may close the
integration contour in the complex @xmath -plane and by Cauchy’s theorem
we may express the cylinder amplitude as a sum over residues. At least
with respect to the residues associated with physical closed string
states and up to a constant independent of the boundary conditions we
may express a given residue as the product of two disk amplitudes @xmath
and @xmath , where the non-normalizable physical closed string state
@xmath satisfies the homogeneous Wheeler-DeWitt equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we obtain an expression for the cylinder amplitude quite similar
to eq. ( 5.29 ).

Let us discuss the relation ( 4.67 ) proposed by Seiberg and Shih in [
11 ] and let us start out by considering the sum @xmath over residues
associated with physical closed string states. We will consider the
consistency of the relation ( 4.67 ) with the full cylinder amplitude
later on in this chapter. Instead of struggling with the expression for
the sum @xmath given in eq. ( 5.22 ) we return to the expression for
cylinder amplitude given in eq. ( LABEL:cylint ). Inserting the
expression obtained in ( 5.18 ) we may express the cylinder amplitude as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath is defined in eq. ( LABEL:ffunc ). Applying
the parametrization of the set of poles associated with physical closed
string states given in eq. ( 5.12 ) we may express the sum @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where we have inserted the expression for the residue of @xmath obtained
in ( B.26 ). ⁴ ⁴ 4 Notice, in eq. ( B.26 ) we determine

(5.40)

Applying the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime in the summation symbol denotes, that the summation runs
in steps of two, and the fact that the values, which we sum over in this
identity, are located symmetric around zero, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the above calculation we realize, that the sum over the residues
associated with physical closed string states is consistent with the
relation ( 4.67 ) proposed by Seiberg and Shih for all values of the
Cardy matter indices. This is not surprising, since we may decompose
each residue associated with a physical closed string state into the
product of two disk amplitudes and since the relation proposed by
Seiberg and Shih is valid on the disk.

After having discussed the sum @xmath over residues associated with
physical closed string states, let us now briefly comment on the poles
in the cylinder amplitude, which we cannot associate with any physical
closed string states in the BRST formalism. From eq. ( 4.43 ) we may
associate a gravitational scaling dimension to each of the poles in the
integrand in ( 5.38 ). Quite remarkable, the scaling dimensions
associated to the poles located at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

precisely match the gravitational scaling dimensions associated with the
physical operators present in the matrix model approach to the @xmath
minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity but not present in
BRST formalism discussed in section 4.2 . In this sense we may associate
these poles with the additional physical operators appearing in the
matrix model approach. These poles appear in the product of the two FZZT
wavefunctions given by eq. ( 5.13 ). The sum over the residues
corresponding to these poles is given by the fourth line from the bottom
in eq. ( 5.22 ).

Let us determine the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude for all pairs of Cardy
matter states. It follows from eq. ( 5.22 ) that the cylinder amplitude
depends explicitly on the function @xmath defined in eq. ( LABEL:ffunc )
and not only on the residues of @xmath . For generic values of the Cardy
indices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we are not able to express
@xmath in any simple way. However, in the special case @xmath and @xmath
and in the special case @xmath and @xmath we are actually able to
determine a simpler expression for the function @xmath than the
expression given in eq. ( LABEL:ffunc ). ⁵ ⁵ 5 Strictly speaking, the
cylinder amplitude is only defined for @xmath , since all Cardy matter
states @xmath satisfy this condition. However, we choose to define the
matter cylinder amplitude by eq. ( 5.2 ) in the case @xmath . Applying
this definition we may define the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude by eq. (
5.1 ) even in the case @xmath . This will prove convenient in our
further discussion. In appendix B we show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath and @xmath . Let us begin by considering the case
@xmath and @xmath . Using the above expression for @xmath and applying
the identity ( 5.41 ) we may easily determine the residue at @xmath of
the integrand @xmath in eq. ( 5.38 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the trigonometric and hyperbolic functions appearing in the
above residue in terms of exponential functions we may express the
cylinder amplitude as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.48)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where we have introduced the uniformization parameter ( 4.51 ) in the
final expression. Let us now consider the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude
in the special case @xmath and @xmath . By a calculation almost
identical to the calculation performed in the above we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.49)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Thus, we have determined the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude in the @xmath
minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity in the special
case, when one of the Cardy matter states is the @xmath Cardy matter
state. Let us now determine the cylinder amplitude for generic values of
the Cardy matter indices. Given the cylinder amplitudes ( 5.48 ) and (
5.49 ) this is actually easily done due to the fact, that we may express
any given matter cylinder amplitude @xmath in terms of matter cylinder
amplitudes with the @xmath Cardy matter state imposed on one of the
boundaries. Applying the fact, that the spectrum of open string states,
which flow between two given Cardy matter boundary conditions, is
determined from the fusion algebra ( 4.10 ) of the corresponding primary
operators, we may express a given matter cylinder amplitude in the open
string channel as ⁶ ⁶ 6 Strictly speaking, we ought to prove the
identity

@xmath (5.50)

in the case @xmath , in which the matter cylinder amplitude is defined
by eq. ( 5.2 ). This is easily done. From eq. ( 4.12 ) and eq. (10.133)
in [ 17 ] we obtain

@xmath @xmath @xmath (5.51) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

where we have applied the symmetry of the Kac table.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Inserting this result into the initial expression ( 5.1 ) for the
FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given eqs. ( 5.48 ) and ( 5.49 ) we have actually determined the
FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude for all values of the Cardy indices.

Let us future reference explicitly write down the FZZT-FZZT cylinder
amplitudes in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. In this case the first Cardy matter label is always equal to
@xmath .
For @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.54)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

For @xmath , @xmath even:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , @xmath odd:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us return to the discussion concerning the relation ( 4.67 )
proposed by Seiberg and Shih and let us for simplicity consider the
FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity. In this case the uniformization parameter
@xmath defined in eq. ( 4.51 ) is related to the boundary cosmological
constant given in eq. ( 3.68 ) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us for simplicity consider the cylinder amplitude in the case, where
the values of the two boundary cosmological constants coincide, that is
@xmath . In this case we may easily show, that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.58)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

With regard to the summation index @xmath appearing in the expressions (
5.54 ), ( 5.55 ) and ( 5.56 ) the following estimate is valid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this estimate, the above identity and the cylinder amplitudes given
by eqs. ( 5.54 ), ( 5.55 ) and ( 5.56 ) we see, that the generic
cylinder amplitude is finite in the semi-classical region @xmath and
@xmath in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. Now, let us apply the relation ( 4.67 ) in the generic cylinder
amplitude in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity and let us again consider the case @xmath .

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.60)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

For @xmath and in the semi-classical region @xmath this amplitude
actually diverges at a positive value of the boundary cosmological
constant @xmath . This contradicts our previous observation and we
conclude, that the relation ( 4.67 ) is not consistent with the cylinder
amplitude. The difference between the correct cylinder amplitude and the
amplitude obtained from the relation ( 4.67 ) is not an analytical
function due to the fact, that the correct cylinder amplitude is finite
for @xmath and @xmath , while the amplitude obtained from the relation (
4.67 ) diverges at a positive value of @xmath , if @xmath . Therefore,
we cannot attribute the difference between the two amplitudes to
geometries with vanishing area. We conclude from our previous
discussion, that the relation ( 4.67 ) is not valid with regard to the
cylinder amplitude due to the contribution from the poles, which we
cannot associate with physical closed string states in the BRST
formalism.

## Chapter 6 The nature of ZZ-branes

As discussed in section 4.3 Seiberg and Shih argue in [ 11 ] , that any
ZZ boundary state tensored with a given Cardy matter state @xmath in the
@xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity may be
expressed in terms of principal ZZ-boundary states tensored with the
given Cardy matter state @xmath modulo BRST exact states. (See eqs. (
4.53 ), ( 4.54 ) and ( 4.55 )). The argument presented in [ 11 ] for
this identity relies on the fact, that any given ZZ-boundary state in
Liouville theory may be written as a linear combination of FZZT-boundary
states, and on the observation, that the parameter @xmath labeling the
different FZZT-boundary states only enters the bulk one-point function
evaluated on the disk through the uniformization parameter @xmath
defined in eq. ( 4.51 ). A similar observation is valid with regard to
the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitudes in the @xmath minimal model coupled to
2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. The generic cylinder amplitude derived in
the previous chapter may be expressed entirely in terms of the
uniformization parameters @xmath and @xmath associated with the FZZT
boundary conditions imposed on the two boundaries of the cylinder and
the different Cardy matter indices labelling the Cardy matter states
imposed on the two boundaries of the cylinder. Thus, the FZZT-FZZT
cylinder amplitudes obtained in the previous chapter provide further
evidence for the identity proposed by Seiberg and Shih concerning
ZZ-branes. In section 3.3 we saw, that the random geometry associated
with the basic @xmath ZZ boundary state corresponds to the “natural”
quantization of the Lobachevskiy plane obtained from standard loop
perturbation theory. However, we did not address the main question
raised by Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov in [ 10 ] concerning the
nature of the remaining @xmath ZZ boundary states in Liouville theory.
Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov wrote: “The most intriguing point is the
nature of the “excited” vacua…A meaning of these quantum excitations of
the (physically infinite faraway) absolute remains to be comprehended.”
In this chapter we will present a physical interpretation of the
principal ZZ boundary states consistent with and motivated by the
one-point function evaluated on the quantum Lobachevskiy plane, the
FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitudes and ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitudes. Due to the
identities ( 4.53 ), ( 4.54 ) and ( 4.55 ) a physical interpretation of
the principal ZZ boundary states is sufficient. This interpretation of
the principal ZZ boundary states is developed by the author of this
thesis in collaboration with his academic adviser and is published in [
39 ] . Our interpretation concerns the principal ZZ boundary states in
the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity.
However, we expect a similar interpretation to be valid in more general
conformal field theories coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity.

In order to motivate our interpretation we will start out by providing
evidence for the following identity concerning the principal ZZ-branes ¹
¹ 1 The possibility of such an identity was first noticed in [ 12 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This identity should be understood in the following way: The expectation
value of any given physical gauge-invariant observable is the same,
whether we consider the left hand side or the right hand side of the
above equation. Notice, the above relation is only possible due to the
fact, that the set of indices labelling the different Cardy matter
states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the same as the set of indices labelling the different principal
ZZ-boundary states. Moreover, we will provide evidence for the following
generalization of the above identity concerning the principal ZZ-branes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the primes in the summation symbols denote, that the summations
run in steps of two. Notice, this summation is exactly the same, which
appears in the fusion of the primary matter operators @xmath and @xmath
in the @xmath minimal model given by eq. ( 4.10 ). In the final section
of this chapter we will introduce and justify our interpretation
concerning the principal ZZ boundary states. This interpretation will
explain the physics captured by eqs. ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ).

### 6.1 The one-point function on the pseudo-sphere

Let us begin by showing, that the relations ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ) are
valid with respect to the bulk one-point function evaluated on the
quantum Lobachevskiy plane. How can this be true? Let us for simplicity
focus on the relation ( 6.1 ). Recall the definition of the Cardy matter
states given in eqs. ( 4.11 ) and ( 4.12 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and recall the definition of the principal ZZ-boundary states given in
eqs. ( 3.82 ) and ( 3.83 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Up to a factor independent of the boundary condition imposed at the
absolute of the Lobachevskiy plane the one-point function of the
physical observable @xmath is given by the product of the imposed Cardy
matter wave function evaluated at @xmath and the imposed principal ZZ
wave function evaluated at @xmath . This follows from an argument
similar to the argument presented in connection with eq. (
LABEL:onepointFZZT ). The validity of the identity ( 6.1 ) with regard
to physical observables evaluated on the quantum Lobachevskiy plane
relies on the fact, that the Liouville momentum @xmath of a given
physical observable depends crucially on the matter content of the given
observable. If the matter content of a given observable belongs to the
conformal family of operators descending from the primary matter
operator @xmath , then the Liouville momentum of the observable is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows from this fact that going from the right hand side to the
left side of eq. ( 6.1 ) the factor @xmath appearing in the one point
function obtained from the right hand side becomes the factor @xmath
appearing in the one-point function obtained from the left hand side and
we see, that the two expressions match.

Let us show in more detail, how this simple mechanism explains the more
general relation ( 6.3 ) with respect to bulk observables evaluated on
the quantum Lobachevskiy plane. From the above discussion we obtain

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where we have applied the identity ( 3.91 ) in deriving the last
expression and where @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the specific
boundary condition imposed at the absolute of the Lobachevskiy plane.
Applying the identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath we may express the above one-point function as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last identity is obtained by comparing the second last
expression with the intermediate result obtained in the second last line
in ( LABEL:inter ). From the above calculation we conclude, that the
relations ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ) are valid with respect to physical bulk
observables evaluated on the quantum Lobachevskiy plane.

### 6.2 The FZZT-ZZ and ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitudes

Let us start out by considering the non-compact FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude with a principal ZZ-brane imposed on one of the boundaries.
Due to the fact, that we may express any given principal ZZ-boundary
state in Liouville theory as the difference between two FZZT boundary
states as in eq. ( 3.84 ) we may easily obtain the FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude from the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude derived in chapter 5 .
It follows from eqs. ( 3.84 ) and ( 3.85 ) that imposing the principal
@xmath ZZ-boundary state instead of a FZZT boundary state on one of the
boundaries of cylinder amounts to changing ² ² 2 Since the final
expression for FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude is symmetric in @xmath and
@xmath , we are free to choose on which boundary we impose a ZZ-boundary
state instead of the FZZT boundary state. For convenience we choose the
boundary labelled by 2.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the integrand in the expression ( 5.38 ) for the cylinder amplitude,
that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.14)
  -- -- -- --------

where the function @xmath is defined in eq. ( LABEL:ffunc ). Notice, the
factor @xmath exactly cancels all the poles, which we cannot associate
with physical closed string states in the BRST formalism, that is the
poles coming from @xmath in the denominator. Only the poles, which we
can associate with physical closed string states in the BRST formalism,
contribute to the non-compact FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude. Thus, the
nature of the poles, which we cannot associate with physical closed
string states in the BRST formalism, must be closely related to the
compact nature of the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude. In the above
expression for the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude we have not included the
regularization introduced in eq. ( 5.15 ), since there is no need for
this regularization in the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude. Notice, in place
of @xmath in the above expression for the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude we
may insert any function, which is equal to @xmath up to an entire
function of @xmath . The set of poles in the integrand and the values of
the corresponding residues are invariant under this operation. This
follows from the fact, that the function multiplying @xmath in the
integrand is an entire function of @xmath , and from the fact, that
@xmath is a closed contour. Inserting @xmath defined in eq. ( B.31 ) in
place of @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have subtracted an entire function of @xmath from the integrand
in obtaining the last expression. Applying the identity ( 3.91 ) we may
express the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the following identities derived from eq. ( 3.91 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath , we may express the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term subtracted from the integrand going from eq. ( 6.18 ) to eq. (
6.19 ) is an entire function of @xmath . Comparing this expression for
the cylinder amplitude with the expression ( 6.15 ) we realize, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude in the @xmath minimal model
coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity is consistent with the relations
( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ). Not only is this true with respect to the final
expression for the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude. We may express both the
left hand side and the right hand side of the above identity as a sum
over residues and each residue on the left hand side is actually equal
to the corresponding residue on the right hand side. This follows from
the fact, that going from eq. ( 6.15 ) to eq. ( 6.19 ) we have simply
subtracted an entire function of @xmath from the integrand. ³ ³ 3 It is
tempting to think, that this entire function corresponds to the
contribution to the integrand from an exact state with respect to the
BRST charge @xmath . This is important due to the fact, that we may
interpret a given residue contributing to the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude
as the amplitude of the corresponding physical closed string state
propagating between the FZZT brane and the ZZ brane as explained in
chapter 5 . Recall, all the residue contributing to the FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude may be associated with physical closed string states. ⁴ ⁴ 4
The above identity comes as no surprise due to the fact, that the
relation ( 6.3 ) is valid with respect to physical observables evaluated
on the Lobachevskiy plane, and due to the fact, that the decomposition
illustrated in figure 5.2 is valid with regard to the FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude since we may associate a closed string state with any given
residue contributing to the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude.

For completeness let us determine the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude from
eq. ( 6.15 ). From Cauchy’s theorem and eq. ( 3.91 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where we have expanded the trigonometric functions in terms of
exponential functions in order to perform the summation over residues.
Furthermore, in the final expression we have introduced the
uniformization parameter ( 4.51 ).

Finally, let us consider the ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitude. Applying eqs. (
3.84 ) and ( 6.20 ) we may easily show, that the ZZ-ZZ cylinder
amplitude is consistent with eqs. ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 6.3 The nature of ZZ-branes

The nature of the different principal ZZ boundary states becomes
apparent, when we consider the expression ( 6.15 ) for the FZZT-ZZ
cylinder amplitude. In this expression we have integrated out all the
matter and the ghost degrees of freedom. Notice, if we impose the basic
@xmath Cardy matter state on both boundaries the contribution from the
matter cylinder amplitude to the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude is trivial.
The only state, which flows in the open string channel, is the state
corresponding to the identity operator and the matter cylinder amplitude
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and where the Hamiltonian in the open string picture is
derived in eq. ( 3.24 ). The factor @xmath simply cancels the
corresponding factors coming from the Liouville cylinder amplitude and
the ghost cylinder amplitude due to the fact, that @xmath . Imposing the
@xmath and the @xmath Cardy matter states on the two boundaries instead
of the basic @xmath Cardy matter state the integrand in expression (
6.15 ) is modified by the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we may view

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

as a dressing factor resulting from the integration over the matter
degress of freedom on the ZZ-brane. This is exactly the factor, which
distinguish the @xmath ZZ boundary state defined in eq. ( 3.82 ) from
the basic @xmath ZZ boundary state. If we start out by imposing the
basic @xmath ZZ boundary state and @xmath Cardy matter state on one of
the boundaries of the cylinder and then integrate out the matter degrees
of freedom the basic @xmath ZZ boundary state turns into the @xmath ZZ
boundary state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we realize, that we may view the @xmath ZZ boundary condition,
@xmath , as an effective boundary condition in Liouville theory obtained
by integrating out the matter degrees of freedom. Moreover, we realize,
that we may either impose the @xmath Cardy matter condition at the
absolute by imposing the @xmath Cardy matter state tensored with the
basic @xmath ZZ boundary state or by imposing basic @xmath Cardy matter
state tensored with the @xmath ZZ boundary state. This is the physics
captured by the relation ( 6.1 ). The above interpretation of the
principal ZZ boundary states is also valid with regard to the one-point
function evaluated on the Lobachevskiy plane. In this case we do not
have to integrate over any moduli @xmath and up to a factor independent
of the boundary condition the one-point function factorizes into a
matter part and a Liouville part. Imposing the @xmath Cardy matter state
at the absolute, inserting the physical observable @xmath and
integrating over the matter degrees of freedom we obtain the matter part
of the one-point function, which differs from the corresponding matter
part of the one-point function obtained by imposing the basic @xmath
Cardy matter state at the absolute by the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the modular S-matrix defined in eq. ( 4.12 ). Similarly,
imposing the @xmath ZZ boundary state at the absolute and integrating
over the configuration space of the Liouville field we obtain the matter
part of the one-point function, which differs from the corresponding
matter part of the one-point function obtained by imposing the basic
@xmath ZZ boundary state at the absolute by the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the special form of the modular S-matrix @xmath given in eq. (
4.12 ) and due to the particular Liouville momentum associated with the
given physical observable @xmath the two factors coincide. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In
light of the above interpretation of the principal ZZ boundary
conditions in Liouville theory as effective boundary conditions it is
tempting to view the matter part @xmath of the one-point function @xmath
as a dressing factor of an effective operator in Liouville theory
corresponding to @xmath .

Even though we interpret the @xmath ZZ boundary condition, @xmath , as
an effective ZZ boundary condition obtained by integrating out the
matter degrees of freedom, nothing from a conformal field theory point
of view prevents us from imposing both the @xmath Cardy matter state,
@xmath , and the @xmath ZZ boundary state at the absolute. This somewhat
unnatural boundary condition is allowed due to the fact, that the
effective @xmath ZZ boundary condition is conformally invariant. The
above interpretation is incomplete without some explanation of the
physical meaning of this boundary condition. The nature of this boundary
condition is captured by the relation ( 6.3 ). Recall that there is a
one-to-one correspondance between the Cardy matter conditions and the
conformal families of operators in the @xmath minimal model. Imposing
the above somewhat unnatural boundary condition is equivalent to
imposing the basic @xmath ZZ boundary condition at the absolute and
imposing the matter boundary condition associated with the sum over
conformal families appearing in the fusion of the two primary matter
operators associated with the @xmath and the @xmath Cardy matter states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, due to the fact that the fusion coefficients are positive
integers, the corresponding matter boundary condition satisfies the
Cardy condition discussed in section 3.1 . The introduction of the
somewhat unnatural boundary condition discussed in the above is actually
redundant, since we may express any ZZ-brane in terms of the basic
ZZ-branes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This set of ZZ-branes compromises the set of independent boundary
conditions, which we may impose at the absolute at infinity on the
quantum Lobachevskiy plane. In this sense there only exists one ZZ
boundary condition in pure Liouville theory, the basic @xmath ZZ
boundary condition. All the other principal ZZ-boundary conditions are
effective boundary conditions obtained by integrating out the matter
degrees of freedom.

How come the effective ZZ boundary conditions appear in the analysis of
Zamolodchikov and Zamolodchikov and not only the basic @xmath ZZ
boundary condition? The main point is that Zamolodchikov and
Zamolodchikov consider Liouville theory parametrized on the disk, in
which case there are no moduli @xmath . This implies that the theory
factorizes into a matter part, a Liouville part and a ghost part.
Integrating out the matter and the ghost parts we end up with Liouville
theory with the central charge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

as an effective theory of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity. In this effective theory both the basic and
the matter dressed ZZ boundary conditions appear.

## Chapter 7 ZZ branes from a worldsheet perspective

So far we have discussed 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity defined in terms
of Liouville theory. In this chapter we will discuss a rather different
approach to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, dynamical triangulations. For
a thorough introduction to dynamical triangulations see [ 14 ] , a
classic on Quantum Geometry. In chapter 6 we studied the non-compact
geometries in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity defined in terms of the ZZ branes. Due to the simplicity and
beauty of dynamical triangulations we are able to calculate the cylinder
amplitude with the exit loop in a fixed distance from the entrance loop,
an amplitude, which is not obtainable from the continuum approach to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity in terms of Liouville theory. This amplitude
will provide us with a whole new approach to obtaining non-compact
geometries in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity and will allow us to study the transition from compact to
non-compact geometry. The cylinder amplitude with the exit loop in a
fixed distance from the entrance loop was first derived in the seminal
paper [ 40 ] by Kawai, Kawamoto, Mogami and Watabiki in the case of pure
2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. In [ 41 ] their calculation was
generalized to the so-called conformal background of the @xmath minimal
model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity by Gubser and Klebanov.

### 7.1 Dynamical triangulations

Instead of considering different parametrizations of 2D euclidean
geometries and worrying about gauge fixing etc., in dynamical
triangulations we construct the 2D euclidean geometries explicitly by
gluing equilateral polygons together. We may view the link length @xmath
as a diffeomorphism invariant cutoff of distances. The statistical
ensemble of triangulations obtained in this way defines a grid in the
space of diffeomorphism classes of metrics. It is assumed that this grid
becomes dense in the limit @xmath and that we may determine the
partition function, in which we sum over all diffeomorphism classes of
2D euclidean geometries, by studying this limit. For simplicity we
consider geometries of a fixed topology. In the following we will
consider the class of so-called unrestricted triangulations. An
unrestricted triangulation is defined as a complex obtained by gluing a
collection of equilateral polygons and double links together. We may
connect the polygons and the double links either at the vertices or
along the links. A given complex remains the same if we attach a double
link to a link. As a case study in dynamical triangulations let us take
a closer look at the disk amplitude with one marked link on the boundary
obtained from gluing triangles and double links together. Let us define
the generating function of unrestricted triangulations of the disk as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and where @xmath is the number of unrestricted triangulations of the
disk consisting of @xmath triangles and with @xmath links on the
boundary of which one is marked. In the class of unrestricted
triangulations we include the complex consisting of a single point. This
implies that @xmath . Since the area @xmath and the length @xmath of the
boundary of a given triangulation consisting of @xmath triangles and
with @xmath links on the boundary are roughly given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we may view

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the bare bulk cosmological constant and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the bare boundary cosmological constant. Hence, in eq. ( 7.1 ) each
triangulation is weighed in accordance with the gravitational action (
3.29 ) and we may view the generating function @xmath as the regularized
analogue to the continuum disk partition function. In this way Quantum
Gravity or rather Quantum Geometry is turned into a combinatorial
problem of counting the number of non-isomorphic triangulations
consisting of a given number of triangles and with a given number of
links on the boundary. The generating function @xmath was first
determined by Tutte in 1962 in [ 42 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath analytical in a
neighbourhood of zero. From the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

we obtain the three equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we may determine @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in terms of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In deriving these expressions we have imposed the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

obtained from the generating function of rooted branched polymers. [ 14
] It follows from the above expressions, that the generating function
@xmath defined by the expansion in eq. ( 7.1 ) has a finite radius of
convergence with respect to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is convergent only if @xmath in the case @xmath . Off course we may
define @xmath by analytic continuation outside the region of
convergence. However, the interpretation of @xmath in terms of
unrestricted triangulations is only valid inside the region of
convergence.

The asymptotic behaviour of @xmath for large @xmath and bounded @xmath
is given by [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a critical exponent. In order to obtain the continuum
disk partition function with fixed area and fixed length of the boundary
we must approach the continuum limit @xmath keeping both the area of the
discretized worldsheet @xmath and the length of the discretized boundary
@xmath fixed. Hence, we are interested in @xmath in the limit of large
@xmath and @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In light of eq. ( 7.17 ) we expect @xmath to behave as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

in this limit, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the continuum disk partition function @xmath with fixed area
@xmath and fixed length @xmath of the boundary as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to approach the continuum limit in a way such that the
generating function @xmath is dominated by triangulations consisting of
a large number of triangles @xmath and with a large number of links
@xmath on the boundary satisfying that @xmath . Otherwise, we do not
obtain any continuum disk partition function @xmath in this limit, which
we may interpret as a weighed sum over geometries of finite area and
with finite boundaries. This is obtained by tuning

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

in a specific pace as we tune @xmath . Assuming this is the case we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have identified

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In light of eqs. ( 7.4 ) and ( 7.5 ) we observe, that both the bulk and
the boundary cosmological constants undergo additive renormalization in
the continuum limit. Moreover, the above calculation suggests, that the
pace, at which @xmath should approach @xmath and @xmath should approach
@xmath in the continuum limit, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting these expressions into eqs. ( 7.11 ), ( 7.12 ), ( 7.13 ) and (
7.14 ) we may easily show, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath , where @xmath is a constant factor. Finally,
inserting the above expressions into the expression ( 7.6 ) for the
generating function we obtain ¹ ¹ 1 In the above continuum disk
amplitude we have rescaled the boundary cosmological constant @xmath by
a strictly positive factor.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the continuum disk amplitude with one marked point on the boundary
and @xmath is a constant factor. Notice, we disregard the leading term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

due to the fact, that this term is analytic in both @xmath and @xmath ,
which implies, that we may not associate this term with any geometries
of finite area or with finite boundaries. ² ² 2 If we perform an inverse
Laplace transform of @xmath with respect to either @xmath or @xmath we
obtain a function related to the Dirac delta function centered at zero
by differentiation. Moreover, the leading term is non-universal. It is
related to the specific class of triangulations, which we consider in
this discussion. From eqs. ( 4.58 ) and ( 3.68 ) we realize, that the
continuum disk amplitude ( 7.33 ) with one marked point on the boundary
obtained in the above scaling limit matches the corresponding disk
amplitude obtained from the Liouville approach to pure 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity. As discussed previously in the case of pure 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity the parameter @xmath in Liouville theory is
given by @xmath .

In the above example we have considered the class of unrestricted
triangulations of the disk consisting of triangles and double links. In
the continuum limit we obtained the disk amplitude with one marked point
on the boundary in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. Let us proceed and
consider the class of unrestricted triangulations consisting of polygons
of order @xmath and double links. To each polygon of order @xmath we
associate the weight @xmath , which we allow to assume both positive and
negative values. The generating function for unrestricted triangulations
of the disk is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of unrestricted triangulations of the disk
with @xmath @xmath -sided polygons and with one marked link on the
boundary consisting of @xmath links. As in the case discussed previously
the generating function is only convergent for @xmath belonging to a
certain region in weight space and for @xmath . The boundary of this
region of convergence in weight space is a hyper-surface @xmath of
codimension @xmath . Embedded in @xmath we have a hierarchy of
hyper-surfaces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a hyper-surface in weight space of codimension @xmath .
The @xmath multi-critical hyper-surface is given by @xmath , @xmath . ³
³ 3 We define @xmath as the empty set. The continuum disk amplitude
obtained in the scaling limit, in which @xmath approaches a given point
@xmath on the boundary of the region of convergence and @xmath
approaches @xmath , depends on, which multi-critical hyper-surface
@xmath belongs to. However, the continuum disk amplitude does not depend
on the particular point @xmath which we approach on the given
multi-critical hyper-surface. The above multi-critical hyper-surfaces
are not specific to the generating function of unrestricted
triangulations of the disk. If we consider the generating function of
unrestricted triangulations of a given topology the same multi-critical
hyper-surfaces appear in weight space. Each of these multi-critical
hyper-surfaces may be associated with a particular matter theory coupled
to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. The continuum theory associated with a
given multi-critical hyper-surface may be identified from the critical
exponents associated with the given multi-critical hyper-surface. One of
the critical exponents characterizing the different multi-critical
hyper-surfaces is the so-called string susceptibility @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the continuum partition function, in which we sum over
all closed geometries of genus @xmath and with fixed area @xmath , and
@xmath is the Euler number defined in eq. ( 1.1 ). We may determine the
string susceptibility associated with a given multi-critical
hyper-surface from the scaling behaviour of the generating function of
closed triangulation of genus @xmath . [ 14 ] For a given conformal
field theory coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity the string
susceptibility was first determined by Knizhnik, Polyakov and
Zamolodchikov in [ 34 ] in the genus zero case. For higher genus the
string susceptibility was first determined by David in [ 35 ] .
Comparing the string susceptibilities and other critical exponents
obtained in the different approaches to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity we
identify the scaling limit, in which we approach the @xmath
multi-critical hyper-surface, as the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity. In the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity we have @xmath tachyon operators defined by
eq. ( 4.36 ), which may contribute to the action. The background values
of the coupling constants of these tachyon operators are determined by
the path along which we approach a given point on the @xmath
multi-critical hyper-surface. Approaching the @xmath multi-critical
hyper-surface along a path such that all coupling constants are set
equal to zero except the cosmological constants we obtain the so-called
conformal background. This is the particular scaling limit, which we
identify as the tensor product of the @xmath minimal model, Liouville
theory and the conformal ghost theory. Approaching the given point on
the @xmath multi-critical hyper-surface along a different path we obtain
a marginal deformation of the conformal background in which case the
continuum theory does not factorize into a matter part and a Liouville
part. [ 43 ] In this thesis we will only consider the conformal
background of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity.

The cylinder amplitude in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity was first obtained from dynamical
triangulations in [ 44 , 43 ] . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Actually, in [ 44 , 43 ] the
cylinder amplitude is obtained from the one-matrix model, both the
complex and the Hermitian. We may view the @xmath expansion of the
one-matrix model as an ingenious tool to obtain the generating function
of unrestricted triangulations of a given topology. An introduction to
the one matrix model is beyond the scope of this thesis. Quite
remarkable, the cylinder amplitude obtained from dynamical
triangulations is the same in all @xmath minimal models coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity independently of background. The cylinder
amplitude obtained from dynamical triangulations with no marked point on
either boundary is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the boundary cosmological constants
associated with the two boundaries. However, as we have seen in chapter
5 there exists a whole family of cylinder amplitudes in the @xmath
minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, one for each pair
of Cardy matter states. The scaling limit of dynamical triangulations in
which we approach the @xmath multi-critical hyper-surface corresponds to
one concrete realization of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity and to one concrete realization of boundary
conditions. In order to determine which particular Cardy matter
condition is realized in this scaling limit we compare the cylinder
amplitude obtained from dynamical triangulations with the cylinder
amplitudes obtained in eqs. ( 5.54 ), ( 5.55 ) and ( 5.56 ). From this
we conclude, that the @xmath Cardy matter condition is realized in the
scaling limit of dynamical triangulations, in which we approach the
@xmath multi-critical hyper-surface. As we discussed in case of the
Ising model in section 4.1 the @xmath Cardy matter state corresponds to
a fixed boundary condition in the concrete realizations of the @xmath
minimal models. Furthermore, the only open string state, which couples
between two @xmath Cardy boundary conditions, is the state associated
with the identity operator.

### 7.2 The cylinder amplitude with fixed distance

Formally, we define the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we integrate over all geometries homeomorphic to the cylinder,
with one marked point on the entrance loop c and no marked points on the
exit loop @xmath . @xmath denotes the boundary cosmological constant
associated with entrance loop, while @xmath denotes the boundary
cosmological constant associated with the exit loop. The distance @xmath
between a given point @xmath on the exit loop and the entrance loop
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the distance between the two points @xmath and @xmath .
The delta functions appearing in the above definition impose the
constraint, that only geometries, that satisfy, that each point @xmath
on the exit loop @xmath is in a fixed distance @xmath of the entrance
loop @xmath , contribute to the partition function. Notice, this
definition is not symmetric in @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the points
on the exit loop of a given geometry satisfying the delta function
constraints are not necessarily the only points in a distance @xmath of
the entrance loop.

In general, the set of points in a given distance @xmath of the entrance
loop @xmath consists of several disconnected loops.

The above definition is clearly a formal definition. To state a precise
and concrete definition, from which one may determine the cylinder
amplitude with the exit loop in a fixed distance from the entrance loop,
is an entirely different matter. The concept of distance is highly
non-trivial in Quantum Gravity. In Liouville theory the geodesic
distance is a derived non-local concept, which is difficult to work
with. The concept of geodesic distance in Liouville theory is discussed
by David in [ 45 ] . The fact, that we may introduce a measure of
distance in Quantum Gravity from dynamical triangulations, illustrates
the strength of the combinatorial approach to Quantum Gravity offered by
dynamical triangulations. For a given triangulation we define the dual
lattice as the “fat” graph obtained by replacing each @xmath -sided
polygon by a vertex with @xmath emerging double lines each crossing a
separate link of the @xmath -sided polygon. We connect the two double
lines crossing a link shared by two neighbouring polygons. The
introduction of double lines instead of single lines on the dual lattice
allows us to define a notion of orientation on the dual lattice. We
define the distance between two given links on a given triangulation as
the minimum number of double lines connecting the two links on the dual
lattice. Applying this definition Kawai, Kawamoto, Mogami and Watabiki
consider the generating function of unrestricted triangulations of the
cylinder satisfying that the minimum distance from any given link on the
exit loop to the entrance loop is a fixed positive integer @xmath . They
only consider triangulations consisting of triangles and double links.
In the so-called transfer matrix formalism they show that the cylinder
amplitude with fixed distance @xmath and one marked point on the
entrance loop obtained in the scaling limit corresponding to pure 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity satisfies the PDE [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the initial condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The disk amplitude @xmath is given by ( 7.33 ). Performing an inverse
Laplace transform with respect to both @xmath and @xmath the initial
condition reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the length of the entrance loop and @xmath is the length
of the exit loop. Gubser and Klebanov generalize the calculation done by
Kawai, Kawamoto, Mogami and Watabiki and show, that the above equations
are also valid in the conformal background of the @xmath minimal model
coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity obtained in the scaling limit,
in which we approach the @xmath multi-critical hyper-surface. [ 41 ] In
this case @xmath denotes the disk amplitude with one marked point on the
boundary in the conformal background of the @xmath minimal model coupled
to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. In the scaling limit in which we
approach the @xmath multi-critical hyper-surface the continuum distance
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the critical exponent @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scaling of @xmath in terms of @xmath is fixed by the condition, that
the two sides of the equation, from which we derive the partial
differential equation ( 7.41 ), scale in the same way.

We may obtain a lot of interesting physics from the above cylinder
amplitude. In the remaining part of this section let us discuss the
anomalous dimension of the distance @xmath . Let us first consider a
given geometry homeomorphic to the sphere. The area within a distance
@xmath of a given point @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

With respect to the given geometry we define the average area of a disk
of radius @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding ensemble average for fixed total area @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we integrate over all geometries homeomorphic to the sphere and
with area @xmath . The Hausdorff dimension @xmath of the ensemble of
manifolds is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient @xmath appearing in this definition must be
dimensionless. The ensemble average @xmath is given in terms of two
parameters with a non-trivial dimension, the distance @xmath and the
area @xmath . However, in the limit @xmath the ensemble average @xmath
cannot depend on the area @xmath .

What is the physics encoded in the Hausdorff dimension @xmath ? In the
following we assume that @xmath measures the geodesic distance. Let us
consider a given point @xmath on a generic smooth ⁵ ⁵ 5 Based on the
insights obtained from studying the paths contributing to the propagator
of a free scalar field [ 46 , 47 ] we do not expect the partition
function to be dominated by smooth geometries. geometry and let us
gradually zoom in on a neighbourhood of @xmath . On a sufficiently small
scale @xmath we expect the geometry to appear flat in a neighbourhood of
@xmath . For @xmath the area of the disk of radius @xmath and centered
at @xmath is given by the well-known formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the ensemble average is dominated by geometries, which all appear
flat on a sufficiently small finite scale @xmath , the Hausdorff
dimension is equal to @xmath . However, if the Hausdorff dimension is
different from @xmath , then no matter how small a scale @xmath we
consider, geometries, which are not flat on this scale @xmath ,
contribute significantly to the ensemble average.

Let us determine the Hausdorff dimension associated with the distance
@xmath introduced in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity from dynamical triangulations. From eqs. ( 7.49 ) and (
7.44 ) we may determine the dimension of the ensemble average ⁶ ⁶ 6
Notice, if we differentiate the ensemble average @xmath defined by eqs.
( 7.46 ), ( 7.47 ) and ( 7.48 ) with respect to @xmath we obtain the
reparametrization invariant two-point function with fixed area up to a
constant factor independent of @xmath . Moreover, if we shrink both the
entrance loop and the exit loop to a point in the cylinder amplitude
given by eqs. ( 7.41 ) and ( 7.42 ) we obtain the reparametrization
invariant two-point function, where we sum over all geometries
homeomorphic to the sphere independent of their area. This two-point
function is related to the two-point function with fixed area by a
Laplace transformation. Hence, we may obtain the ensemble average @xmath
from the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the definition ( 7.48 ) of the ensemble average we obtain that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude that the Hausdorff dimension associated with the distance
@xmath in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the semi-classical limit @xmath corresponding to @xmath we expect,
that the partition function with fixed area is dominated by a single
smooth geometry, in which case the Hausdorff dimension associated with
the geodesic distance is equal to @xmath . The Hausdorff dimension given
by the above equation do not approach @xmath in the semi-classical limit
@xmath . In [ 48 ] Kawamoto, Saeki and Watabiki determined the Hausdorff
dimension from studying the diffusion equation in Liouville theory. They
reached the conclusion, that the Hausdorff dimension associated with the
geodesic distance is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the central charge of the conformal matter theory
coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. Notice, this expression for the
Hausdorff dimension indeed approaches @xmath in the semi-classical limit
@xmath corresponding to @xmath . In the case of pure 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity corresponding to @xmath the two expressions for the
Hausdorff dimension ( 7.53 ) and ( 7.54 ) match. We conclude, that
@xmath is the geodesic distance in the case of pure 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. In the case of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity, @xmath , the two expressions for the Hausdorff
dimension do not match. In this case @xmath is not the geodesic
distance. Rather, @xmath is a distance measured in terms of matter
excitations. This is explicit in some constructions of 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity with matter such as the Ising model studied by Ambjørn,
Anagnostopoulos, Jurkiewics and Kristjansen in [ 49 ] and the @xmath
model formulated as an @xmath model studied by Ambjørn, Kristjansen and
Watabiki in [ 50 ] . The fact, that the fractal dimension of pure 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity is equal to @xmath and not @xmath is related
to the fact, that the partition function in pure 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity is dominated by wildly branching geometries. [ 40 ] From
so-called Causal Dynamical Triangulations one may obtain the cylinder
amplitude with fixed geodesic distance @xmath between the two boundaries
in pure 2D Lorentzian Quantum Gravity. This amplitude describes the
propagation of a closed loop with “time” @xmath . In Causal Dynamical
Triangulations we only include geometries in the statistical ensemble,
which satisfy, that the topology of any given “time”-slice is @xmath ,
that is we exclude branching geometries from the statistical ensemble.
This constraint prevents the propagating loop from splitting up into
several loops with “time” @xmath . The Hausdorff dimension obtained from
Causal Dynamical Triangulations is @xmath . [ 51 ]

### 7.3 ZZ-branes from a worldsheet perspective

In chapter 6 we studied non-compact geometries in the @xmath minimal
model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity defined in terms of the
ZZ-branes. In this section we will introduce a different approach to
obtaining non-compact geometries in the @xmath minimal model coupled to
2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. This section is based upon work done by
the author of this thesis in collaboration with his academic adviser
Prof. Jan Ambjørn and partly with S. Kawamoto and S. Arianos. This work
is published in [ 38 ] and [ 36 ] . The author of this thesis took part
in the work published in [ 38 ] as a part of his master thesis. This
work concerns the geometry of the disk amplitude with fixed geodesic
distance in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. The results published in
[ 36 ] have been obtained by the author of this thesis during his time
as a Ph.D student in collaboration with his academic adviser. This work
concerns the cylinder amplitudes with fixed distances in the @xmath
minimal models coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity including pure 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity and concerns the interpretation of the
obtained results especially in terms of branes.

Given the initial condition ( 7.42 ) we may easily solve the partial
differential equation ( 7.41 ) by the method of characteristic curves.
We first determine the characteristic curve in the @xmath -plane passing
through @xmath along which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

is constant. We parametrize the characteristic curve by @xmath .
Applying the partial differential equation ( 7.41 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

from which we derive the characteristic equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution to the characteristic equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the point in the @xmath -plane at which the
characteristic curve crosses the @xmath -axis. The above equation
determines @xmath as a function of @xmath and @xmath . From the initial
condition ( 7.42 ) we obtain the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Let us begin by considering the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance
in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, in which case @xmath measures the
geodesic distance. In pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity the disk
amplitude with one marked point on the boundary is given by eq. ( 7.33 )
and we may express the cylinder amplitude with fixed geodesic distance
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Viewing eq. ( 7.41 ) as a renormalization group equation and @xmath as
the scale we see that eq. ( 7.41 ) induces a flow in @xmath . With
regard to this flow the real @xmath -axis is divided into to two
disjoint intervals separated by the zero @xmath of @xmath . For @xmath
the flow of @xmath is constrained to the interval @xmath , while for
@xmath the flow of @xmath is constrained to the interval @xmath . This
follows from eq. ( 7.61 ) and the initial condition @xmath for @xmath .
In the following we will consider @xmath and @xmath in which case we
have a clear interpretation of @xmath in terms of geometry. For @xmath
(which is always the case, if @xmath and @xmath ,) we may express the
cylinder amplitude with fixed geodesic distance as the Laplace transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is clear, that we may view @xmath as an induced boundary
cosmological constant on the exit loop. The induced boundary
cosmological constant @xmath (or more precisely the factor @xmath ) is
related to the entropy of geometries homeomorphic to the cylinder and
with an exit loop of fixed length @xmath in a fixed geodesic distance
@xmath from a marked entrance loop. Later on when we consider the @xmath
minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity this is no longer
true due to the presence of matter.

In order to generate a non-compact random geometry we will consider the
limit in which the geodesic distance @xmath from the exit loop to the
entrance loop diverges. In the non-compact limit @xmath the induced
boundary cosmological constant @xmath approaches the fixed point @xmath
independent of the value of @xmath . The induced boundary cosmological
constant @xmath is generic to the non-compact limit and precisely match
the value of the boundary cosmological constant associated with the
single principal ZZ brane in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity through
eq. ( 4.56 ). In this sense we may view the cosmological constant
associated with the ZZ-brane and the non-compact quantum Lobachevskiy
plane in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity as an induced boundary
cosmological constant. In order to study the random geometry obtained in
the limit @xmath let us start out by shrinking the entrance loop to a
point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this limit the induced boundary cosmological constant is obtained eq.
( 7.61 ) with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The disk amplitude @xmath with fixed geodesic distance is similar to the
ordinary disk amplitude @xmath except that all points on the boundary
are in a fixed geodesic distance @xmath from a point (puncture) in the
bulk of the disk. Viewing @xmath as a partition function we may
determine the average area and the average boundary length of the
corresponding random geometry in the limit @xmath . For generic values
of @xmath we obtain from the two above equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

from which we see, that the random geometry obtained in the non-compact
limit @xmath for generic values of @xmath essentially is a semi-infinite
cylinder of vanishing radius except close to the exit loop, where the
radius becomes finite. However, precisely for @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath and in the non-compact limit of large @xmath the average area
and the average boundary length are proportional and they both grow
exponentially with the geodesic distance @xmath . This is exactly the
signature of the Lobachevskiy plane discussed in section 2.2 . Let us
try to understand this result. There only exists one non-compact
solution to classical Liouville theory, the Lobachevskiy plane. The
negative curvature of the Lobachevskiy plane is determined by the
positive value of @xmath . Due to this fact we expect, that (for a fixed
value of @xmath ) there essentially only exists one non-compact random
geometry in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, a quantum Lobachevskiy
plane. This is indeed consistent with above the result. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The
infinitely narrow cylinder obtained in the non-compact limit @xmath for
generic values of @xmath is essentially a one-dimensional geometry. In
order to generate the Lobachevskiy plane in the non-compact limit @xmath
we need the boundary of the disk to diverge in this limit. This is
obtained by tuning the boundary cosmological constant @xmath to the
smallest possible value. From the expressions in ( 7.65 ) and ( 7.66 )
valid for all @xmath we may show, that the both the average area and the
average boundary length are positive for all @xmath as long as @xmath
and @xmath . In this case we may view @xmath as a partition function in
2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. For @xmath this interpretation is not
valid. At a finite geodesic distance @xmath the average boundary length
becomes negative and any interpretation of @xmath in terms of geometry
is obviously not correct. The smallest possible value of @xmath viewed
as a genuine boundary cosmological constant in 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity is @xmath .

Let us consider the cylinder amplitude ( 7.60 ) with fixed geodesic
distance in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. Retaining a finite
entrance loop we may probe the boundary condition imposed on the exit
loop in the non-compact limit @xmath . For generic values of @xmath the
cylinder amplitude vanishes in the non-compact limit @xmath . However,
precisely for @xmath the cylinder amplitude remains finite in the limit
@xmath and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have introduced the uniformization parameter @xmath defined in
eq. ( 4.51 ) with regard to the boundary cosmological constant on the
entrance loop. Up to an overall dimensionless normalization this is
exactly the unique FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude in pure 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity obtained in eq. ( LABEL:FZZTZZcyl ). The differentiation
with respect to @xmath occurs in the above identity due to the fact,
that we have marked one point on the entrance loop in the cylinder
amplitude with fixed geodesic distance @xmath . Imposing a FZZT boundary
condition is equivalent to introducing a boundary cosmological constant.
For finite values of the geodesic distance @xmath we have imposed a FZZT
boundary condition on both the entrance loop and the exit loop. In the
transition from compact to non-compact geometry enforced by setting
@xmath and taking the limit @xmath the FZZT-brane imposed on the exit
loop transforms into the single principal ZZ-brane in pure 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity. The above construction of non-compact geometries in
pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity resolves a puzzle related to the
ZZ-branes: The world-sheet geometry associated with a ZZ-brane is
non-compact. However, if we calculate the average area of the random
world-sheet associated with for instance the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude
given by eq. ( LABEL:FZZTZZcyl ) we obtain a finite value! In our
construction the resolution to this problem comes from the fact, that we
cannot determine the correct value of the average area after we set
@xmath . Recall, the average area is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we first set @xmath as in eq. ( LABEL:cylinfty ) and then apply the
above formula for the average area we do not determine the average area.
Instead we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is finite even in the non-compact limit @xmath . It remains to be
seen, if a similar conclusion may be reached in the Liouville approach
to ZZ-branes.

Let us consider the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance @xmath in the
conformal background of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity. In the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity the ordinary disk amplitude obtained from dynamical
triangulations is given by [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and where the polynomial @xmath in the conformal background
is determined from eq. ( 4.60 ) (up to a convenient normalization)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the first kind of Chebyshev polynomial of order @xmath .
Explicitly, we may express

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the zeros of the polynomial @xmath viewed as a function of @xmath
lie on the real @xmath -axis in between @xmath and @xmath and divide the
real @xmath -axis into @xmath disjoint intervals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

As in the case of pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity the PDE ( 7.41 )
induces a flow in @xmath with the distance @xmath . The nature of the
flow may easily be determined from eq. ( 7.58 ) and the initial
condition @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath belongs to the interval @xmath
the flow of @xmath is constrained to the same interval. The fixed points
of @xmath corresponding to @xmath are the zeros in the polynomial @xmath
(viewed as a function of @xmath ), which precisely match the values of
the boundary cosmological constant associated with the principal
ZZ-branes in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity. Let us start out by presenting our results concerning the
cylinder amplitude @xmath with fixed distance in the conformal
background of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity, @xmath . Then we will discuss the interpretation of these
results. For generic values of the boundary cosmological constant @xmath
on the exit loop the cylinder amplitude @xmath vanishes in the limit
@xmath independent of which fixed point @xmath approaches. However, as
in the case of pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity we have a unique
situation, if we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fixed point approached by @xmath in the limit @xmath
. In this case the cylinder amplitude obtained in the limit @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and where we have omitted a dimensionless constant of
proportionality. It is natural to assume, that the boundary condition
imposed on the finite entrance loop is the boundary condition generic to
the scaling limit of dynamical triangulations, i.e. the @xmath Cardy
matter condition with respect to the matter section. As shown in chapter
6 the fundamental ZZ boundary condition in Liouville theory is the basic
@xmath ZZ boundary condition. The set of FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitudes in
the conformal background of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity with a @xmath Cardy matter condition imposed
on the FZZT boundary and the basic @xmath ZZ boundary condition imposed
on the ZZ boundary is determined in eq. ( LABEL:FZZTZZcyl ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have expressed the uniformization parameter @xmath defined in
eq. ( 4.51 ) in terms of @xmath . Applying the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the modular S-matrix in the @xmath minimal model defined
in eq. ( 4.12 ), we may express the cylinder amplitude obtained in eq. (
7.77 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the omitted constant of proportionality is dimensionless and where
we have applied the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

derived from eq. ( 4.11 ) and the fact, that the @xmath . Quite
remarkable, independent of the fixed point @xmath approached by @xmath
we obtain the FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude with the basic @xmath Ishibashi
state imposed on the ZZ boundary in the limit @xmath , if we set @xmath
. In this limit we have a transition from a FZZT brane to a ZZ brane on
the exit loop. The FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude with the @xmath Ishibashi
state imposed on the ZZ boundary is characterized by the fact, that the
only physical closed string states, which propagate in this cylinder
amplitude, are the closed string states with a trivial matter part
corresponding to the identity operator. ⁸ ⁸ 8 These are the physical
closed string states constructed from the BRST cohomology groups

@xmath (7.82)

where

@xmath (7.83)

and where

@xmath (7.84)

Recall, the irreducible matter representation @xmath only contains the
state corresponding to identity operator. This conclusion follows from
the following argument: As discussed previously we may express any given
FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude involving a principal ZZ brane as the
difference between two FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitudes. The FZZT-FZZT
cylinder amplitude with the @xmath Ishibashi state imposed on one of the
boundaries is given by eq. ( LABEL:truecyl ) (up to an overall
normalization), if we simply leave out the sum over the different matter
Virasoro characters and only include the contribution from the matter
Virasoro character @xmath . It follows from eq. ( 5.9 ) and the
following discussion that the only poles, which contribute to this
particular FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude, are the poles associated with
the physical closed string states with a trivial matter part
corresponding to the identity operator and the poles, which we cannot
associate with any physical closed string states in the BRST formalism.
The contribution from the latter poles cancels in the difference between
the two FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitudes giving us the FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude.

The limit @xmath plays an instrumental role in the above transition from
a FZZT brane to a ZZ brane on the exit loop and we would like to address
two important aspects with regard to this limit. Firstly, as discussed
in section 4.3 Seiberg and Shih advocates, that target space in @xmath
minimal string theory is given by the Riemann surface @xmath defined in
eq. ( 4.61 ). In the case of @xmath minimal string theory this Riemann
surface is a double sheeted cover of the complex @xmath -plane except at
the singularities, which are the zeros in the polynomial @xmath
appearing in the ordinary disk amplitude. ⁹ ⁹ 9 @xmath is defined as the
set of points @xmath . Due to the square root appearing in the ordinary
disk amplitude given by eq. ( 7.72 ) @xmath is a double sheeted cover of
the complex @xmath -plane. However, we cannot distinguish between the
two sheets for values of @xmath for which the ordinary disk amplitude
vanishes. The singularities of @xmath are therefore given by the zeros
in the polynomial @xmath . The zeros in the polynomial @xmath precisely
match the values of the boundary cosmological constant associated with
the principal ZZ branes and Seiberg and Shih advocates, that we should
associate each singularity with a particular principal ZZ-brane. One is
also led to this extended target space in the above construction. As
mentioned previously the fixed points of the induced boundary
cosmological constant @xmath are precisely the zeros in the polynomial
@xmath . We want @xmath to be able to approach any of the fixed points
in the limit @xmath i.e. we want all the fixed points to be attractive.
This is only possible, if we consider the running boundary cosmological
constant @xmath as a function and @xmath as a variable taking values on
the Riemann surface @xmath . The reason is that every other fixed point
on a given sheet is repulsive. The attractive fixed points on one sheet
are repulsive on the other sheet and vice versa. The flow of @xmath in
the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity, @xmath
odd, also hints at this extended target space. In the case @xmath odd
the largest fixed point @xmath is repulsive on the first sheet. If we
consider @xmath the induced boundary cosmological constant gradually
approaches infinity along the real axis as we increase @xmath and
reaches infinity for a finite value of @xmath . If we keep on increasing
@xmath the induced boundary cosmological constant @xmath flows down the
real axis on the second sheet and gradually approaches the attractive
fixed point @xmath on the second sheet.

Secondly, our construction also adds to the understanding of the
relation ( 3.84 ) discovered by Martinec. As shown in section 3.3 in
Liouville theory for generic values of @xmath there is a one-to-one
correspondance between the ZZ boundary states labeled by @xmath and the
degenerate primary operators @xmath . This correspondance completely
determines the Liouville cylinder amplitude with two ZZ boundary
conditions: The spectrum of states flowing in the open string channel
between two ZZ boundary states is obtained from the fusion algebra of
the corresponding degenerate operators. Similarly, there is a one-to-one
correspondance between the FZZT boundary states labeled by @xmath and
the non-local primary operators @xmath . The conformal dimension of the
spin-less degenerate primary operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the conformal dimension of the spin-less non-local primary
operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath for @xmath , one is naively led to the wrong conclusion,
that a FZZT boundary state turns into a ZZ boundary state, if one tunes
@xmath . However, the operator @xmath is degenerate and in addition to
setting @xmath we therefore have to truncate the spectrum of open string
states, that couple to the FZZT boundary state, in order to obtain a ZZ
boundary state. This is precisely captured in the relation 3.84 with
regard to the principal ZZ boundary states in Liouville theory for
@xmath rational. The world-sheet geometry characterizing the FZZT brane
is compact, while the world-sheet geometry of the ZZ-brane is
non-compact. Hence, truncating the spectrum of open string states
induces a transition from compact to non-compact geometry. In our
concrete realization of this transition this truncation is obtained by
first setting the boundary cosmological constant @xmath on the exit loop
and then taking @xmath . In this limit the induced boundary cosmological
constant approaches the fixed point @xmath associated with one of the
principal ZZ boundary conditions.

## Chapter 8 Conclusion and discussion

Let us shortly summarize the main results obtained in this thesis and
discuss the main questions arising from this work. In chapter 5 we
determined the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude for all pairs of Cardy
matter states in the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean
Quantum Gravity. We showed, that to any given physical closed string
state appearing in the BRST formalism we may associate a pole in the
integrand in the expression ( 5.38 ) for the FZZT-FZZT cylinder
amplitude. We interpret the corresponding residue as the amplitude of
the given physical closed string state propagating between the two FZZT
branes. In addition to these poles, which are in a one-to-one
correspondance with physical closed string states appearing in the BRST
formalism, a different set of poles appeared in the integrand in the
expression ( 5.38 ) for the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude. The nature of
these poles is clearly different from the nature of the poles associated
with physical closed string states. These additional poles appear in the
product of the two FZZT boundary wave functions, while the poles
associated with physical closed string states appear in the trace of the
operator @xmath . One of the main questions arising from our calculation
of the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude in the @xmath minimal model coupled
to 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity is the nature of these additional poles,
which we cannot associate with any physical closed string states in the
BRST formalism. The nature of these poles is clearly related to the
compact nature of the FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitude. This follows from
the fact, that these additional poles do not appear in the integrand in
expression ( 6.14 ) for the non-compact FZZT-ZZ cylinder amplitude.
Quite remarkable, we may associate some of these additional poles with
scaling operators, which appear in the matrix model approach to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity but not in the BRST formalism discussed in
section 4.2 .

Comparing the complete set of FZZT-FZZT cylinder amplitudes obtained in
chapter 5 with the cylinder amplitude obtained from dynamical
triangulation/the one-matrix model we concluded in section 7.1 , that
the particular matter boundary condition realized in the scaling limit
of dynamical triangulations, in which we approach the @xmath
multi-critical hyper-surface, is the @xmath Cardy matter condition.

In chapter 6 we argued and provided some evidence, that there
essentially only exists one ZZ boundary state in pure Liouville theory,
the basic @xmath ZZ boundary state. All the other principal ZZ boundary
states correspond to effective boundary conditions in Liouville theory
obtained by integrating out the matter degrees of freedom. With regard
to the one point function evaluated on the quantum Lobachevskiy plane
and the FZZT-ZZ and ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitudes we showed explicitly, that
the dressing factor, which distinguishes the @xmath ZZ boundary state
from the basic @xmath ZZ boundary state, appears when we impose the
@xmath Cardy matter condition on the ZZ boundary and integrate out the
matter degress of freedom. A truly existing future line of research
would concern the ZZ branes from a boundary perspective. The
interpretation of the principal ZZ boundary states proposed in this
thesis suggests, that there exists an isomorphism between the set of
physical open string states, that couple to the ZZ brane on the left
hand side of eq. ( 6.3 ) and the set of physical open string states,
that couple to the ZZ brane on the right hand side of eq. ( 6.3 ). As a
starting point for studying the ZZ branes from a boundary perspective
one may consider the FZZT-ZZ and the ZZ-ZZ cylinder amplitudes in the
open string channel. Given our experience with the cylinder amplitudes
in the closed string channel we may expect, that a given cylinder
amplitude involving a ZZ brane and evaluated in the open string channel
is given by a sum over residues each associated with a particular
physical open string state. This analysis may shed some light on the
spectrum of physical open string states, that couple to a given ZZ brane
or flow between a ZZ brane and another given brane. This research
project may be interesting from an AdS/CFT point of view.

In section 7.3 we studied the cylinder amplitude with fixed distance in
the conformal background of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity and the disk amplitude with fixed geodesic
distance in pure 2D euclidean Quantum Gravity. In the case of pure 2D
euclidean Quantum Gravity we showed, that if we set @xmath then in the
non-compact limit @xmath we have a transition from compact to
non-compact worldsheet geometry, that is the Lobachevskiy plane, and we
have a transition from a FZZT brane to a ZZ brane on the exit loop. In
the case of the @xmath minimal model coupled to 2D euclidean Quantum
Gravity, @xmath , we gave some evidence, that we have a similar
transition from a FZZT brane to a ZZ brane on the exit loop in the limit
@xmath , if we set @xmath , where @xmath is the fixed point approached
by the induced boundary cosmological constant @xmath in the limit @xmath
. The particular matter boundary condition realized in this limit on the
ZZ boundary is the @xmath Ishibashi state and the FZZT-ZZ cylinder
amplitude obtained in this limit is characterized by the fact, that the
only physical closed string states, which propagate in the closed string
channel, are the physical states with a matter part corresponding to the
identity operator. A better understanding of this fact may shed some
light on the nature of the distance @xmath .

## Appendix A The one and two point functions in the upper half plane

Let us consider the two point function of two primary operators @xmath
and @xmath inserted in the upper plane. Moreover, let us use conformal
gauge. The group of conformal transformation mapping the upper half
plane to the upper half plane is given by @xmath , which is a three
parameter group. Hence, we may fix the position of three real
coordinates by a conformal transformation. In the following we will
construct a conformal transformation mapping @xmath and @xmath . The
conformal transformation is obtained in the following way. We first map
the upper half plane to the unit disk with the conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We then perform a rotation of the disk

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . (The indices @xmath and @xmath refer to the position of
the operators @xmath and @xmath throughout this argument.) Notice, this
conformal transformation maps @xmath to the imaginary axis. The disk is
now mapped to the upper half plane by the conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice, @xmath is mapped to the imaginary axis. Applying the conformal
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we map @xmath . We now map the upper half plane to the unit disk by the
conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under this transformation @xmath is mapped to the center of the unit
disk. We then perform a rotation of the disk

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and finally, we map the unit disk to the upper half plane by the
conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice, @xmath is mapped to @xmath and @xmath is mapped to @xmath ,
@xmath , under the composition of these conformal transformations. The
value of @xmath may be determined from the fact that the parameter

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

is invariant under conformal transformations. Hence, we may express
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which we may determine @xmath in terms of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the transformation law ( 2.78 ) governing the primary operators
under a given conformal transformation successively we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form of the one-point function is obtained from the above two-point
function by setting @xmath equal to the identity operator.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Identities used in the derivation of the cylinder
amplitude

In this appendix we derive some of the identities used in the derivation
of the cylinder amplitude in chapter 5 . Let us begin by performing the
integral given in eq. ( 5.9 ). From eq. ( 2.104 ), ( 4.8 ) and ( 3.87 )
we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (B.1)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

In order to proceed we first need to prove the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

valid for @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the Psi function defined
in eq. (6.3.1) in [ 28 ] and where @xmath and @xmath are the two roots
in the second order polynomial

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to prove this identity we first notice, that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

From eq. (6.3.6) in [ 28 ] we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From eq. (6.3.18) in [ 28 ] we realize, that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which completes the proof of the identity ( B.2 ). Applying the identity
( B.2 ) we obtain from eq. ( B.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, applying the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

derived from eqs. (6.3.5) and (6.3.7) in [ 28 ] we get, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us now turn our attention to the function @xmath defined in eq. (
LABEL:ffunc )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and let us try to derive a simpler expression for @xmath than the above
expression. In order to proceed we first need to determine the set of
poles of @xmath . Given the fact, that @xmath , we may easily show, that
if one of the terms in the above sum has a pole at @xmath , then none of
the other terms have a pole at @xmath . From this fact and the above
definition of @xmath we realize, that the set of points, at which @xmath
has a pole, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, all the poles of @xmath are simple poles.
Let @xmath be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may express @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this we realize, that @xmath . Moreover, let @xmath be given. Then
we obviously express @xmath as in eq. ( B.12 ). We conclude, that we may
parametrize the set @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider the following ideal in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the fact, that @xmath is a principal ideal domain, we know, that
the ideal @xmath is generated by a single integer, that is @xmath such,
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to determine @xmath we have to determine the smallest positive
integer belonging to @xmath . According to Bèzout’s theorem this integer
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the light of this result we realize, that we may express @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider the function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice, the set of point, at which @xmath has a pole, is equal to the
set of points @xmath , at which @xmath has a pole. Moreover, all the
poles of @xmath are simple poles as the poles of @xmath . The residue of
@xmath at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us determine the residue of @xmath at @xmath . From our previous
discussion we realize, that we may express @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, let us consider the case @xmath , @xmath even. In this case
the residue of @xmath at @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

By a similar calculation we may determine the residue of @xmath at
@xmath in the three remaining cases @xmath , @xmath odd, @xmath , @xmath
even and @xmath , @xmath odd. In all the remaining cases we get the same
result as in the above equation. Thus, if we multiply @xmath with the
two entire functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain two functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which have the same pole structure as @xmath , and which have the same
residue at a given pole as @xmath , that is both @xmath and @xmath are
entire functions.

Let us consider @xmath . In order to prove, that @xmath is equal to
@xmath we need to show, that the difference between the two functions is
bounded in the entire complex plane. If this is the case Liouville’s
theorem tells us, that the two functions differ by a constant. For
generic values of the Cardy indices @xmath is not bounded in the complex
plane. This follows from the fact, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. Let us consider the case @xmath and @xmath ,
in which the difference between @xmath and @xmath vanishes in the limit
@xmath , and let us prove, that @xmath is indeed bounded in the entire
complex plane in this special case. It follows from eq. ( B.10 ) and (
B.31 ), that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we only need to show, that @xmath is bounded on the set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the fact, that the set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

is closed and bounded and @xmath is continuous, there exists an @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now consider any given @xmath , @xmath . For @xmath we obtain the
following estimate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we used the fact, that @xmath in the last estimate. Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the two last estimates we have used some of the intermediate
result in ( B.39 ) and the fact, that @xmath . From the estimate ( B.41
) and eqs. ( B.10 ) with @xmath we obtain for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Moreover, for @xmath we obtain from ( B.31 ) and the two estimates (
B.39 ) and ( B.40 ), that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for @xmath we obtain the estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we conclude, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Liouville’s theorem we obtain, that @xmath and @xmath only differ
by a constant @xmath in the case @xmath and @xmath . We may determine
this constant from eq. ( B.33 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

By a similar argument we may show, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.48)
  -- -------- -- --------