This thesis studies the construction of state sums from representation
theory, and shows how to use geometric asymptotics to understand the
leading order behaviour of the state sum weights in geometric terms.

In Chapter 1, I review the axiomatic definition of topological quantum
field theories due to Atiyah. I review the definition of topological
quantum field theories through state sums on triangulated manifolds. I
describe the construction of state sum invariants of 3-manifolds from a
graphical calculus and show how to evaluate the invariants as boundary
amplitudes. As a particular example I define the Ponzano-Regge state sum
through the graphical calculus of SU(2) representation theory.

I review various asymptotic geometricity results in Chapter 2. I define
coherent boundary manifolds for state sums based on @xmath
representations. The geometry of the representations of @xmath and
@xmath is given in terms of bivectors and spinors. I give a list of
conditions necessary and sufficient for a set of bivectors to be the
bivectors of a 4-simplex in @xmath and @xmath .

In Chapter 3, I then derive the asymptotic geometry of the @xmath based
Ponzano-Regge invariant in three dimensions for arbitrary triangulations
of a 3-ball using the formulation of the amplitude in terms of boundary
amplitudes of Chapter 1 and the coherent boundary manifolds of Chapter
2.

I derive the asymptotic geometry of the 4-simplex weight of the
4-dimensional @xmath Ooguri state sum is derived in Chapter 4, using the
coherent boundary manifolds of Chapter 2. As a corollary I give the
asymptotic behaviour of various spin foam models for Euclidean
4-dimensional lattice gravity recently proposed.

In Chapter 5 I derive the asymptotic geometry of the recently proposed
spin foam model for Lorentzian 4-dimensional lattice gravity. The
techniques differ substantially from those in Chapter 3 and 4 in that I
make heavy use of spinor representations of @xmath .
