##### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 Preliminaries
    -    1.1 Secondary representation theory
    -    1.2 Local cohomology modules
    -    1.3 Cousin complexes
-    2 Finite Cousin complexes
    -    2.1 Cohomology modules of Cousin complexes
    -    2.2 Uniform annihilators of local cohomology
    -    2.3 Applications
        -    2.3.1 Partial characterizations
        -    2.3.2 Height of an ideal
-    3 Attached primes of local cohomology modules
    -    3.1 Attached primes related to cohomologies of Cousin complexes
    -    3.2 Top local cohomology modules
    -    3.3 Applications to generalized Cohen-Macaulay modules
-    4 Cohen-Macaulay loci of modules
    -    4.1 Openness of Cohen-Macaulay locus
    -    4.2 Rings whose formal fibres are Cohen-Macaulay
    -    4.3 Some comments

## Introduction

Many concepts in commutative algebra are inspired by algebraic geometric
objects. Of particular interest and effective tool in this thesis, is
the Cousin complex of a module which is algebraic analogue of the Cousin
complex introduced in 1963/64 by A. Grothendieck and R. Hartshorne [ 17
, Chapter IV] . They used this notion to prove a duality theorem for
cohomology of quasi–coherent sheaves, with respect to a proper morphism
of locally noetherian preschemes.

In 1969, R. Y. Sharp presented the commutative algebraic analogue of the
Cousin complex (see section 1.3) and approved it as a powerful tool by
characterizing Cohen-Macaulay and Gorenstein rings in terms of Cousin
complexes [ 29 ] . This concept is developed in [ 35 ] by Sharp and is
discussed by S. Goto and K. Watanabe in the @xmath –graded context [ 15
] . In [ 29 ] , Sharp shows that a commutative noetherian ring @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay if and only if the Cousin complex @xmath of @xmath is
exact, which is improved to modules by himself in [ 30 ] , while @xmath
is Gorenstein if and only if @xmath provides the minimal injective
resolution of @xmath . He also introduced Gorenstein modules and
characterized them by using Cousin complexes in [ 30 ] .

From the Cousin complex definition is apparent that it terms are very
much look like non–finitely generated, and despite of it, @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay if and only if @xmath is exact, i.e. its cohomologies are
zero and so finitely generated. Now, one may ask what rings or modules
admit finitely generated Cousin complex cohomologies and what properties
these rings or modules have.

In 2001, M. T. Dibaei and M. Tousi, while studying the structure of
dualizing complexes, found a class of modules whose Cousin complexes
have finitely generated cohomologies. The theory of dualizing complexes
comes also from algebraic geometry which was discussed firstly by
Grothendieck and Hartshorne in 1963/64 and used to prove their duality
theorem [ 17 , Chapter V] . Afterwards Sharp and a number of authors
studied its commutative algebraic analogue and found it as a useful
tool.

For the rest of this section, @xmath is a commutative noetherian ring
and @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module.

A dualizing complex for a ring @xmath is a bounded injective complex
@xmath , where all cohomology modules @xmath are finitely generated
@xmath –modules and the natural map @xmath is quasi isomorphism for any
finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath . A dualizing complex @xmath is
said to be fundamental whenever @xmath , where @xmath is the injective
envelope of @xmath as @xmath –module, i.e. each prime ideal of @xmath
occurs in exactly one term of @xmath and exactly once [ 34 , 1.1] . It
is known that a ring @xmath possesses a dualizing complex if and only if
it possesses a fundamental dualizing complex (see [ 16 , 3.6] and [ 34 ,
1.2] ), which is unique up to isomorphism of complexes and shifting (see
[ 32 , 4.5] and [ 16 , 4.2] ).

Now, a natural and interesting treatment is to determine this unique
complex. In 1998, Dibaei and Tousi described that if a local ring @xmath
which satisfies the condition @xmath , possesses a dualizing complex,
then the fundamental dualizing complex for @xmath is isomorphic to the
Cousin complex of the canonical module of @xmath with respect to the
height filtration (which is equal to the dimension filtration in this
case) [ 8 , 2.4] . As an application they proved that if a local ring
@xmath satisfies the condition @xmath and has a canonical module @xmath
, then finiteness of cohomologies of the Cousin complex of @xmath with
respect to a certain filtration is necessary and sufficient condition
for @xmath to possess a dualizing complex [ 8 , 3.4] . In 2001, they
generalized their structural property of dualizing complex of [ 8 ] and
showed that the Cousin cohomologies of @xmath over a local ring @xmath ,
are finitely generated if @xmath has a dualizing complex and @xmath is
equidimensional which satisfies the condition @xmath , in [ 9 ] . In
continuation of [ 8 ] and [ 9 ] , Dibaei studied some properties of
Cousin complexes through the dualizing complexes in 2005, and proved the
following result.

Theorem 1. [ 4 , Theorem 2.1] Assume that all formal fibres of @xmath
are Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath satisfies @xmath . If @xmath is
equidimensional, then @xmath has finitely generated cohomology modules.

These ideas have been pursued in algebraic geometry by J. Lipman,
S. Nayak and P. Sastry in [ 21 ] . Taking motivation from [ 8 ] and [ 9
] , Kawasaki studied Cousin complex of a module over a noetherian ring
and improved results, independently from [ 4 ] , in [ 20 ] . More
precisely, he proved the following results.

Theorem 2. [ 20 , Theorem 1.1] Assume that @xmath is equidimensional and

(i) @xmath is universally catenary,

(ii) all the formal fibers of all the localizations of @xmath are
Cohen-Macaulay,

(iii) the Cohen-Macaulay locus of each finitely generated @xmath
--algebra is open,

Then all the cohomology modules of the Cousin complex of @xmath are
finitely generated and only finitely many of them are non–zero.

The assumptions of the above result are also necessary in a sense.

Theorem 3. [ 20 , Theorem 1.4] Let @xmath be a catenary ring. Then the
following statements are equivalent.

-   @xmath satisfies the conditions (i), (ii) and (iii) of Theorem 2.

-   for any finitely generated equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath ,
    all the cohomology modules of the Cousin complex of @xmath are
    finitely generated and only finitely many of them are non–zero.

In special case when @xmath is local, Kawasaki obtains a more simple but
interesting version of his result, Theorem 2, as the following.

Theorem 4. [ 20 , Theorem 5.5] Assume that @xmath is a universally
catenary local ring and @xmath is an equidimensional @xmath –module. If
all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay, then all the cohomology
modules of @xmath are finitely generated.

Note that if a local ring @xmath is universally catenary, then @xmath is
equidimensional for each finitely generated equidimensional @xmath
–module @xmath . In the proof of the above theorem, the assumption that
@xmath is universally catenary, is used to show that @xmath is
equidimensional. So one may consider this theorem as a generalization of
Theorem 1.

After reviewing some well known results and basic concepts which we need
throughout the thesis in Chapter 1, we start our study on Cousin
complexes by discussing some useful techniques and essential properties
of cohomology modules of Cousin complexes in the first section of
Chapter 2. As a consequence we remove the condition @xmath from Theorem
1 and recover Theorem 4, in Corollary 2.1.6 and Proposition 2.3.2 .

In all above results about finiteness of the Cousin complex of an @xmath
–module @xmath , there are some crucial common conditions on @xmath and
@xmath :

1.  @xmath is equidimensional;

2.  @xmath is universally catenary;

3.  all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

When @xmath is a local ring, these conditions are sufficient for
finiteness of cohomology modules of @xmath by Theorem 4, and conditions
(b) and (c) are necessary for finiteness of cohomology modules of Cousin
complexes of all equidimensional @xmath –modules by Theorem 3. It is now
natural to ask that which of these conditions are satisfied if @xmath
has finitely generated cohomology modules for an @xmath –module @xmath .

In 2006, C. Zhou studied the properties of noetherian rings containing
uniform local cohomological annihilators and showed that all such rings
are universally catenary and locally equidimensional [ 37 ] . Recall
that an element @xmath is called a uniform local cohomological
annihilator of @xmath , if @xmath and for each maximal ideal @xmath of
@xmath , @xmath for all @xmath .

We continue Chapter 2, improving some results of Zhou for modules which
have uniform local cohomological annihilators and find some
characterizations of these modules in Section 2.2. We show that if a
finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator, then @xmath is locally equidimensional and
@xmath is universally catenary in Proposition 2.2.2 and Corollary 2.2.6
. We also obtain that the property that @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator is independent of the module structure and
depends only on the support of @xmath in Corollary 2.2.5 . Finally we
investigate our main result in this section by proving that if @xmath
has finitely generated cohomology modules, then @xmath has a uniform
local cohomological annihilator in Theorem 2.2.13 and so @xmath is
equidimensional and @xmath is universally catenary.

Our approach in studying Cousin complexes is also useful for discussing
about uniform local cohomological annihilators and helps us to recover
some results in this context by a different and may be simple method,
for instance see Corollary 2.2.9 and Proposition 2.2.11 .

This point of view, also enables us to characterize modules with finite
Cousin cohomologies over a local ring @xmath with Cohen-Macaulay formal
fibres. The last section of Chapter 2 is devoted to some applications of
our approach. In Theorem 2.3.3 , we show that over these rings, @xmath
has finitely generated cohomologies if and only if @xmath has a uniform
local cohomological annihilator, if and only if @xmath is
equidimensional @xmath –module. Our results about the annihilators of
cohomologies of Cousin complexes in Section 2.1, lead us to present the
height of an ideal of @xmath in terms of Cousin complex in Theorem 2.3.5
.

Another important subject which is strongly related to the uniform
annihilators of local cohomology, is the notion @xmath which is defined
for a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath over a local ring @xmath
as @xmath Note that by definition, an @xmath –module @xmath has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator if and only if @xmath . On the
other hand if @xmath , then @xmath if and only if @xmath for some @xmath
(see Lemma 2.2.7 ). These facts motivate us to study the relations
between local cohomology modules and Cousin complexes.

It is well known that for a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath
with finite dimension @xmath , @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.4 ), we start
Chapter 3 by discussing @xmath for certain @xmath , in particular @xmath
, in terms of cohomologies of @xmath . As a consequence we find a
non–vanishing criterion of @xmath when @xmath has finitely generated
cohomologies in Corollary 3.1.6 .

The main object of Section 3.2 is the following question which is raised
by Dibaei and S. Yassemi in [ 10 ] . They investigate the set @xmath for
a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath and an ideal @xmath of @xmath
and show that @xmath . Now it is natural to ask,

Question 5. [ 10 , Question 2.9] For any subset @xmath of @xmath , is
there an ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath ?

Theorem 3.2.11 presents a positive answer to this question in the case
where @xmath is a complete local ring. In [ 11 , Theorem 1.6] , it is
proved that if @xmath is a complete local ring, then for any pair of
ideals @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , if @xmath , then @xmath . As a
consequence we show that the number of non–isomorphic top local
cohomology modules of @xmath with respect to all ideals of @xmath is
equal to @xmath in Corollary 3.2.12 .

In last section 3.3, we use results of sections 3.1 and 3.2 and those of
Chapter 2 for studying the class of generalized Cohen-Macaulay modules.
In Corollary 3.3.4 , we find a new characterization of generalized
Cohen-Macaulay rings in terms of uniform annihilators of local
cohomologies. Our results in this section are useful in the last chapter
of thesis to study the Cohen-Macaulay loci of modules.

The Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is denoted by

@xmath is Cohen-Macaulay as @xmath –module @xmath .

The topological property of Cohen-Macaulay loci of modules and
determining when it is a zariski–open subset of @xmath have been studied
by many authors. Grothendieck in [ 14 ] states that @xmath is a
Zariski–open subset of @xmath whenever @xmath is an excellent ring and
in [ 17 ] , Hartshorne shows that @xmath is open when @xmath possesses a
dualizing complex. In [ 26 ] , C. Rotthaus and L. M. @xmath ega study
the Cohen-Macaulay loci of graded modules over a noetherian homogeneous
graded ring @xmath considered as @xmath –modules.

Our aim in the first section of Chapter 4, is to determine when @xmath
is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath . We find two classes of rings, over
which, @xmath is open for all @xmath –modules @xmath . The first is the
class of rings whose formal fibres are Cohen–Macaulay (see Remark 4.1.7
) and the second is the class of catenary local rings @xmath with finite
non– @xmath , where non– @xmath (see Corollary 4.1.9 ). Finally, we
present examples to show that these two classes of rings are significant
in 4.1.11 and 4.1.12 .

Inspired by the above results, we study rings whose formal fibres are
Cohen-Macaulay in Section 4.2. One of our main results in this section
is Theorem 4.2.2 which gives a characterization of a finitely generated
@xmath –module which admits a uniform local cohomological annihilator in
terms of certain set of formal fibres of @xmath . In particular we show
that, for a prime ideal @xmath of @xmath , @xmath is universally
catenary and the formal fibre of @xmath over @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if
and only if @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator (see
Theorem 4.2.2 and Lemma 2.2.10 ).

Corollary 4.2.3 is a good summary of connections between uniform
annihilators of local cohomologies and Cousin complexes which shows that
a local ring @xmath is universally catenary and all of it’s formal
fibres are Cohen-Macaulay if and only if @xmath has finitely generated
cohomologies for all @xmath , if and only if @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for all @xmath .

Note that for an @xmath –module @xmath , non– @xmath whenever @xmath is
finite (see Corollary 4.2.4 ). We close this section with Theorem which
characterizes those modules @xmath satisfying non– @xmath without
assuming that the Cousin complex of @xmath to be finite, which implies
also that when @xmath is finite, then the formal fibres of @xmath over
some certain prime ideals are Cohen-Macaulay (see Corollary 4.2.9 ).

Observe that if @xmath has finitely generated cohomologies, then @xmath
is locally equidimensional and @xmath is universally catenary by
Corollary 2.3.1 . On the other hand if all formal fibres of a
universally catenary local ring @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath
has finitely generated cohomologies for all equidimensional @xmath
–module @xmath (Theorem 4).

These results strengthen our guess that over a local ring @xmath , if
@xmath has finitely generated cohomologies, then all formal fibres of
@xmath are Cohen-Macaulay (Section 4.4).

Throughout this thesis, all known definitions and statements are quoted
with a reference afterward and all others with no references are
supposed to be new, most of them have been appeared in [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] and
[ 7 ] .

## Chapter 1 Preliminaries

Throughout this thesis @xmath is a commutative, noetherian ring with
non–zero identity and @xmath is an @xmath –module. In the case @xmath is
local, we use @xmath as the @xmath -adic completion of @xmath . The set
of all prime ideals of @xmath is denoted by @xmath and for an ideal
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath denotes the set of all prime ideals of @xmath
contain @xmath . The support of @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the set
@xmath and the set of associated prime ideals of @xmath , denoted by
@xmath , is the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of minimal primes of @xmath , is the set of minimal elements of
@xmath with respect to inclusion and is denoted by @xmath . The Krull
dimension of @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is defined to be the supremum
of lengths of chains of prime ideals of @xmath if this supremum exists,
and @xmath otherwise. By convention, the zero module has Krull dimension
@xmath . For a prime ideal @xmath of @xmath , the @xmath - height of
@xmath , denoted by @xmath is defined as @xmath . Note that @xmath . The
set of those prime ideals @xmath with @xmath , is denoted by @xmath .

When @xmath , @xmath is equidimensional if @xmath . We say that @xmath
is locally equidimensional if @xmath is equidimensional for every
maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath . An element @xmath is said to be @xmath
–regular if @xmath for each non–zero element @xmath . A sequence @xmath
of elements of @xmath is called an @xmath –regular sequence or simply an
@xmath –sequence if @xmath is @xmath –regular, @xmath is @xmath –regular
for all @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath for an ideal @xmath of @xmath ,
then the length of a maximal @xmath –sequence in @xmath is a well
determined integer @xmath and is called the grade of @xmath on @xmath .
We set @xmath if @xmath . If @xmath is local ring, then the grade of
@xmath on @xmath is called the depth of @xmath and is denoted by @xmath
.

### 1.1 Secondary representation theory

The theory of secondary representation of a module is in a certain sense
dual to the more familiar theory of primary decomposition and associated
primes, and provides a very satisfactory tool for studying artinian
modules. In this section we recall the concepts and some main points of
this theory which we need later on. One may find the developed theory by
Macdonald in [ 22 ] , it has been also mentioned by Matsumura in his
book [ 24 , Section 6, Appendix] .

A non–zero @xmath –module @xmath is said to be secondary if its
multiplication map by any element @xmath of @xmath is either surjective
or nilpotent. If @xmath is secondary, then @xmath is a prime ideal, and
@xmath is said to be @xmath –secondary . A secondary representation of
an @xmath –module @xmath is an expression of @xmath as a finite sum of
secondary submodules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The representation is minimal if

-   the prime ideals @xmath are all distinct, and

-   none of the @xmath is redundant (i.e. @xmath ).

An @xmath –module @xmath is called representable if it has a secondary
representation. Note that the sum of the empty family of submodules is
zero and so a zero @xmath –module is representable. It is easy to see
that if @xmath has a secondary representation, then it has a minimal
one.

Consider a minimal secondary representation @xmath of @xmath , where
@xmath is @xmath –secondary for all @xmath . Then the set @xmath is
independent of the choice of minimal secondary representation of @xmath
, is called the set of attached prime ideals of @xmath and is denoted by
@xmath or @xmath . By the attached prime ideals or the attached primes
of @xmath , we mean exactly the members of @xmath .

Here we mention some essential properties and results about secondary
representation and attached prime ideals which are interpreted by
Macdonald in [ 22 ] .

-   [ 22 , 5.2] Any artinian @xmath –module has a secondary
    representation.

-   [ 22 , 2.2] Let @xmath be a representable @xmath –module and let
    @xmath be a prime ideal of @xmath . Then @xmath if and only if there
    is a homomorphic image of @xmath which has annihilator equal to
    @xmath .

-   [ 22 , 4.1] Let @xmath be an exact sequence of representable @xmath
    –modules and @xmath –homomorphisms. Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   [ 22 , 2.6] Let @xmath be a representable @xmath –module and let
    @xmath be an element of @xmath . Then

    -   @xmath if and only if @xmath .

    -   @xmath

The following result follows easily from the above @xmath .

###### Corollary 1.1.1.

Assume that @xmath is a representable @xmath –module.

-    If @xmath is local and @xmath is artinian, then @xmath is finitely
    generated, and so of finite length, if and only if @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

-    All elements of @xmath contains @xmath .

Finally, recall the following result which enables us to change the base
ring in studying attached prime ideals.

###### Theorem 1.1.2.

[ 2 , 8.2.5] Let @xmath be a homomorphism of noetherian rings. Assume
that the @xmath –module @xmath has a secondary representation. Then
@xmath has a secondary representation as an @xmath –module by means of
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.2 Local cohomology modules

In this section, we review some basic definitions and known results
about the local cohomology modules. Our main references are the book of
Brodmann and Sharp [ 2 ] and the lecture of Schenzel [ 28 ] .

Given an ideal @xmath of @xmath , we consider the @xmath –torsion
functor over the category of @xmath –modules, defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath –module @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath is an
additive, covariant, @xmath –linear, and left exact functor on the
category of @xmath –modules and @xmath –homomorphisms. So it makes sense
to consider the right derived functors of @xmath . For each @xmath , the
@xmath th right derived functor of @xmath is denoted by and is called
the @xmath th local cohomology functor with respect to the ideal @xmath
, so that @xmath and @xmath are naturally equivalent. The module is
called the @xmath th local cohomology module of @xmath with respect to
@xmath .
An @xmath –module @xmath is called @xmath --torsion-free if @xmath ,
while it is called @xmath –torsion if @xmath .

The @xmath –torsion functor can be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so for all @xmath , we have functorially

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following basic properties of local cohomology modules will be often
used without further mention.

-   [ 2 , Remark 1.2.3] @xmath .

-   [ 2 , Corollary 2.1.7(i)] If @xmath is @xmath –torsion, then @xmath
    for all @xmath .

-   [ 2 , Corollary 2.1.7(iii)] @xmath , for all @xmath .

-   [ 2 , Exercise 2.1.9] If @xmath is @xmath –torsion, then @xmath for
    all @xmath .

-    Independence theorem [ 2 , 4.2.1] . Let @xmath be a homomorphism of
    rings, @xmath an ideal of @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath
    –module. Then @xmath for all @xmath .

-    Flat base change theorem [ 2 , 4.3.2] . Let @xmath be a flat
    homomorphism of rings, @xmath an ideal of @xmath and let @xmath be
    an @xmath –module. Then @xmath for all @xmath .

-    Long exact sequence of local cohomology modules . Let @xmath be an
    exact sequence of @xmath –modules. Then we have the following long
    exact sequence.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The vanishing of local cohomology modules is an important problem which
there are many results concerning it. The following theorems are of most
famous results.

###### Theorem 1.2.1.

(Grothendieck’s vanishing theorem) [ 2 , 6.1.2] Let @xmath be an @xmath
–module and @xmath be an ideal of @xmath . Then @xmath for all @xmath .

The following result identifies the grade of an ideal in terms of local
cohomology modules.

###### Theorem 1.2.2.

[ 2 , Theorem 6.2.7] Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module
such that @xmath for an ideal @xmath of @xmath . Then the least integer
@xmath for which @xmath is precisely @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.3.

(The Lichtenbaum-Hartshorne vanishing theorem) [ 18 , Theorem 3.1]
Assume that @xmath is a local ring of dimension @xmath and @xmath is a
proper ideal of @xmath . Then the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath is not @xmath –primary for each prime ideal @xmath .

The following results illustrate the utility of the secondary
representation theory as an effective tool for studying local cohomology
modules.

###### Theorem 1.2.4.

(Grothendieck’s non–vanishing theorem—textbf) [ 23 , Theorem 2.2] Assume
that @xmath is a local ring and let @xmath be a non-zero finitely
generated @xmath --module. Then @xmath . In particular @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.5.

[ 12 , Corollary 4] Let @xmath be local, @xmath an ideal of @xmath and
let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Localization in an important tool in commutative algebra. The following
result provides a useful property of attached primes of local cohomology
modules under localization with a condition on the base ring.

###### Theorem 1.2.6.

(Shifted localization principle) [ 31 , Theorem 3.7] Let @xmath be a
local ring which is a homomorphic image of a Gorenstein local ring,
@xmath a finitely generated @xmath –module, @xmath and @xmath . Assume
that @xmath such that @xmath . Then for all @xmath , @xmath if and only
if @xmath .

If we remove the condition that @xmath is a homomorphic image of a
Gorenstein local ring, one have a weaker result.

###### Theorem 1.2.7.

(Weak general shifted localization principle) [ 31 , Theorem 4.8] Let
@xmath be a local ring, @xmath a finitely generated @xmath –module,
@xmath such that @xmath . If for @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath , where
@xmath .

The local cohomology modules of a finitely generated @xmath –module
@xmath are rarely finitely generated. For instance, when @xmath is local
and @xmath is finitely generated @xmath –module, the fact that @xmath is
artinian for all @xmath together with Corollary 1.1.1 (i), implies that
@xmath is finitely generated if and only if @xmath . Now, by
Grothendieck’s non-vanishing theorem ( 1.2.4 ), we obtain that @xmath is
not finitely generated if @xmath . On the other hand for all ideals
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath is a submodule of @xmath and so it is finitely
generated. It is now interesting to find the least integer @xmath for
which @xmath is not finitely generated.

###### Definition 1.2.8.

[ 2 , Definition 9.1.3] Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
–module. We define the finiteness dimension of @xmath relative to an
ideal @xmath of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following result provides further motivation for the concept of
finiteness dimension.

###### Proposition 1.2.9.

[ 2 , Proposition 9.1.2] The following statements are equivalent for a
finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath , an ideal @xmath of @xmath and
an integer @xmath .

1.  @xmath is finitely generated for all @xmath .

2.  @xmath for all @xmath .

In light of the above result we have the following useful statement.

###### Theorem 1.2.10.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module and @xmath an ideal of
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Some times it is more useful and fascinated to weaken the condition
@xmath , using another ideal @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.11.

[ 2 , Definition 9.1.5] Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
–module and let @xmath and @xmath be ideals of @xmath such that @xmath .
We define @xmath –finiteness dimension , @xmath , of @xmath relative to
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.12.

[ 2 , Definition 9.2.2] Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
–module. For a prime ideal @xmath , the @xmath –adjusted depth of @xmath
at @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this is @xmath unless @xmath and @xmath , and then it is
positive integer.

Let @xmath be another ideal of @xmath such that @xmath . We define
@xmath –minimum @xmath –adjusted depth of @xmath , denoted by @xmath ,
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.2.13.

[ 2 , Theorem 9.3.5] Let @xmath and @xmath be ideals of @xmath such that
@xmath , and let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath , when @xmath is
local, is called Cohen-Macaulay if @xmath . In general, when @xmath is
not local, @xmath is called Cohen-Macaulay if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay
for all @xmath . This class of modules are characterized in terms of
local cohomology as well.

###### Remark 1.2.14.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring and @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath –module. Theorem 1.2.2 implies that @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if
and only if for all @xmath .

The Cohen-Macaulay modules have very nice properties and are interesting
to study. As a generalization of this important class of modules, one
may consider those modules, their local cohomologies are finitely
generated at indices less than dimension.

###### Definition 1.2.15.

A finitely generated module @xmath over a local ring @xmath is called a
generalized Cohen-Macaulay (g.CM) module whenever @xmath for some @xmath
and all @xmath . The module @xmath is called quasi--Buchsbaum whenever
@xmath for all @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.16.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring and @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath –module. Then the following statements hold true.

-   [ 2 , 9.5.7(i)] If @xmath is g.CM, then @xmath for all @xmath and
    @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay @xmath –module for all @xmath .

-   [ 2 , 9.5.7(ii)] As a converse of (i) , if

    -   @xmath is a homomorphic image of a regular ring,

    -   @xmath for all @xmath , and

    -   @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay @xmath –module for all @xmath ,

    Then @xmath is g.CM.

-   [ 2 , 9.5.8(i)] Assume that @xmath is g.CM and @xmath is a parameter
    element of @xmath (i.e. @xmath ). Then @xmath is a non–zero–divisor
    on @xmath and @xmath is g.CM.

As another generalization of Cohen-Macaulay modules, an @xmath –module
@xmath satisfies the Serre’s condition @xmath for some integer @xmath ,
if @xmath for all @xmath . A module satisfies @xmath for all @xmath just
when it is a Cohen-Macaulay module.

We close this section by recalling the canonical module over a
homomorphic image of a Gorenstein local ring and some properties which
we will use later on.

Assume that @xmath is a homomorphic image of a Gorenstein local ring
@xmath . We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module, and call it the
canonical module of @xmath (see [ 28 ] ).

There is a natural map @xmath by [ 28 , Theorem 1.11] , which has an
important role in our later discussing.

###### Lemma 1.2.17.

[ 28 , Lemma 1.9] In the above situation, we have the following
statements.

-    If, for all @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath .

-   @xmath , so @xmath .

-   @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.18.

[ 28 , Theorem 1.14] Let @xmath denote a finitely generated,
equidimensional @xmath –module with @xmath , where @xmath is a
homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring. Then the following statements
are equivalent for an integer @xmath .

-   @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath .

-    The natural map @xmath is bijective (resp. injective for @xmath )
    and @xmath for all @xmath .

### 1.3 Cousin complexes

###### Definition 1.3.1.

[ 35 , Definition 1.1] A filtration of @xmath is a descending sequence
@xmath of subsets of @xmath , @xmath with the property that, for each
@xmath , every member of @xmath is a minimal member of @xmath with
respect to inclusion. We say the filtration @xmath admits @xmath if
@xmath .

###### Example and Notation 1.3.2.

[ 35 , Example 1.2] Let @xmath be an @xmath –module. For each @xmath ,
set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sequence @xmath is a filtration of @xmath which admits @xmath and is
called the height filtration of @xmath and is denoted by @xmath .

###### Notation and Remark 1.3.3.

Let @xmath be a filtration of @xmath which admits an @xmath –module
@xmath . An obvious modification of the construction given in @xmath of
[ 29 ] produces a complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denoted by @xmath and called Cousin complex for @xmath with respect to
@xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . The component of
@xmath , for @xmath and @xmath , in @xmath is @xmath . Note that for a
prime ideal @xmath of @xmath , if @xmath denotes the natural
homomorphism given by @xmath for @xmath , then for an element @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath for all but a finite number of prime ideals @xmath by [
29 , 2.2] . Consequently, for all @xmath , there is an @xmath
–homomorphism @xmath for which, if @xmath and @xmath , the component of
@xmath in @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is the canonical epimorphism.

We will denote the Cousin complex for @xmath with respect to @xmath
–height filtration, @xmath , by @xmath . We also use the notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have the following natural exact sequences,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath .
We call the Cousin complex @xmath finite whenever each @xmath is
finitely generated as @xmath –module.

The following Lemma has an important role in our approach for working
with cohomologies of Cousin complexes. For the proof of the first part
we adopt the argument in [ 33 , Theorem] .

###### Lemma 1.3.4.

Let @xmath be an @xmath -module. For any integer @xmath with @xmath ,
the following statements are true.

-   @xmath for all integers @xmath .

-   @xmath for all integers @xmath .

###### Proof.

(a). Set @xmath so that @xmath . For each @xmath and each @xmath with
@xmath , there exists an element @xmath . Thus the multiplication map
@xmath is an automorphism and so the multiplication map @xmath is also
an automorphism for all integers @xmath . One may then conclude that
@xmath . Now, from additivity of local cohomology functors, it follows
that @xmath .

(b). Assume in general that @xmath is an @xmath –module such that @xmath
for all @xmath . We show, by induction on @xmath , @xmath , that @xmath
. For @xmath , one has @xmath which is zero. Assume that @xmath and the
claim is true for any such module @xmath and all @xmath . Choose @xmath
to be an injective hull of @xmath and consider the exact sequence @xmath
, where @xmath . As @xmath , it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .
Thus @xmath , by our induction hypothesis. As, by the above exact
sequence @xmath , the result follows. ∎

We quote the following results as basic facts on Cousin complexes from [
29 ] , [ 30 ] , [ 36 ] and [ 4 ] .

###### Lemma 1.3.5.

[ 4 , Lemma 1.2] Let @xmath , then there exists an isomorphism of
complexes @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.6.

[ 29 , Theorem 3.5] Suppose that @xmath is a multiplicatively closed
subset of @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath –module. Then there is an
isomorphism of complexes of @xmath –modules and @xmath –chain map,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is such that @xmath is the identity.

The following result provide a characterization of Cohen-Macaulay
modules in terms of Cousin complexes

###### Theorem 1.3.7.

[ 30 , Theorem 2.4] Assume that @xmath is a non–zero finitely generated
@xmath –module. Then @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if and only if the Cousin
complex of @xmath , @xmath , is exact.

The structure of Cousin complexes characterize the condition @xmath as
well.

###### Theorem 1.3.8.

[ 36 , Example 4.4] Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath
–module. Then @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath if and only if
@xmath is exact at @xmath th term for @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.9.

[ 29 , 2.7] Assume that @xmath is an @xmath –module. Then

(i) @xmath , and

(ii) @xmath .

The following two lemmas may be considered as easy applications of the
above theorem, which provide useful properties of Cousin cohomologies.

###### Lemma 1.3.10.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module of finite
@xmath and that @xmath is finite, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Theorem 1.3.9 , for all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath . As @xmath , we have @xmath for @xmath , hence Prime
Avoidance Theorem implies that @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 1.3.11.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module with @xmath .

(i) @xmath , if and only if @xmath .

(ii) @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) It is obvious by definition of @xmath and Theorem 1.3.8 .

(ii) It is clear by Theorem 1.3.9 (ii). ∎

## Chapter 2 Finite Cousin complexes

The aim of this chapter is to study the class of modules whose Cousin
complexes have finitely generated cohomology modules, as a subclass of
modules which have uniform local cohomological annihilators. We describe
some essential properties of the structure of Cousin complexes which are
useful in the rest of the thesis, in the first section. In the second
section, we study the theory of uniform annihilators of local cohomology
and show that the class of finite Cousin complex modules is a subset of
this class, and finally we use our approach to get some
characterizations in the last section.

### 2.1 Cohomology modules of Cousin complexes

In this section we study the structure of cohomology modules of Cousin
complexes and develop some techniques which will be used throughout the
rest of the thesis.

Firstly, we discuss the relationship between Cousin complexes of modules
satisfying a short exact sequence.

###### Lemma 2.1.1.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring.

-    If @xmath is an exact sequence of @xmath –modules with the property
    that @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath ; in particular, if @xmath
    and @xmath are finitely generated @xmath –modules, then @xmath is
    finite if and only if @xmath is finite.

-    If @xmath is an exact sequence of @xmath –modules with the property
    that @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath ; in particular, if @xmath
    and @xmath are finitely generated @xmath –modules, @xmath is finite
    if and only if @xmath is finite.

###### Proof.

To prove (a), we argue on the following diagram.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath we may replace @xmath by @xmath and assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact. Since @xmath , @xmath and it follows an isomorphism @xmath
over @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath .

We next consider the natural epimorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which @xmath and consider the map @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
inverse map of @xmath , and show that @xmath is an epimorphism. In order
to prove this, choose an element @xmath , there is an element @xmath
such that @xmath . It follows that @xmath . Thus @xmath for some @xmath
. Hence @xmath . As @xmath , there is an epimorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that @xmath . As a result, for each @xmath with @xmath we
have @xmath .

Now, summing up the localizations of the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at all prime ideals @xmath with @xmath , and taking the natural maps
into consideration, we find the following commutative diagram

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath is an isomorphism, @xmath and @xmath are the natural
epimorphisms and @xmath is the natural homomorphism. It is clear that
@xmath is an isomorphism too. Now, by induction on @xmath , we get a
family of isomorphisms @xmath , @xmath , such that the diagram

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is commutative with exact rows. Now, it follows that there are an exact
sequence @xmath and isomorphisms @xmath , @xmath . Thus the claim
follows.

(b) As @xmath we may replace @xmath by @xmath and assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact. Since @xmath , we get @xmath and there is an isomorphism
@xmath over @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . So that we have the
commutative diagram

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are natural homomorphisms. It is easy
to see that @xmath is an isomorphism. Therefore, there is an isomorphism
@xmath over @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Hence we have the
following commutative diagram where @xmath and @xmath are isomorphisms.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, it follows by induction that @xmath .

To prove the final claim, let us assume that @xmath is finite. It
follows from the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that @xmath is finitely generated. By ( 2.1.3 ), @xmath is finitely
generated and so @xmath is finitely generated. The finiteness of @xmath
, @xmath , follows by the isomorphism @xmath . ∎

As an application of the above lemma, we prove the following result
which will be useful in our later methods.

###### Proposition 2.1.2.

Assume that @xmath is local and @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath
–module. Then there is a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath which
satisfies the condition @xmath with @xmath and @xmath is finite if and
only if @xmath is finite.

###### Proof.

There exists a submodule @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath
(c.f. [ 1 , Page 263, Proposition 4] ). Set @xmath . Now @xmath
satisfies @xmath and considering the exact sequence @xmath and the fact
that @xmath , the result follows by Lemma 2.1.1 (b). ∎

###### Corollary 2.1.3.

Assume that @xmath is local and @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath
–module such that @xmath is finite. Then there exists a finitely
generated @xmath –module @xmath which satisfies @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath is finite.

Consider the assumption and notation of Proposition 2.1.2 . In the
following result we find @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath whenever
@xmath is a homomorphic image of a Gorenestein ring. This result will be
useful to find some sufficient conditions for finiteness of Cousin
complexes.

###### Proposition 2.1.4.

Assume that @xmath is a homomorphic image of a Gorenestein ring and
@xmath is a finitely generated equidimensional @xmath –module. Then
there exists a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath which satisfies
the condition @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is finite if and only if @xmath
is finite.

###### Proof.

By Proposition 2.1.3 , we may assume that @xmath satisfies the condition
@xmath , i.e. @xmath , so that @xmath . Since @xmath is a homomorphic
image of a Gorenestein ring, we may define the canonical module @xmath .
Set @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath satisfy the condition @xmath by
Lemma 1.2.17 (iii). Now, by Theorem 1.2.18 , we may consider the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath such that @xmath , then @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay
module. Thus Theorem 1.2.18 implies that @xmath . By lemma 1.2.17 ,
@xmath so that @xmath and we have @xmath for all @xmath . Now Lemma
2.1.1 (a) implies the result. ∎

Recall that, for a local ring @xmath and the natural ring homomorphism
@xmath and any prime ideal @xmath , the ring @xmath is called the formal
fibre of @xmath over @xmath , where @xmath . Note that all formal fibres
of a homomorphic image of a Gorenestein ring are Cohen-Macaulay.

The following result of H. Petzl, helps us to use Proposition 2.1.4 more
efficiently.

###### Lemma 2.1.5.

[ 25 , Theorem 3.5] Assume that @xmath is a local ring and all formal
fibres of @xmath satisfy the condition @xmath . Let @xmath be a finitely
generated @xmath –module. Then there is a monomorphism of complexes
@xmath More over if all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay, the
quotient complex @xmath , in the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an exact complex. In particular for each @xmath , there exists an
@xmath –isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ 4 , Theorem 2.1] , Dibaei proves that, over a local ring with
Cohen-Macaulay formal fibres, the Cousin complex of a finitely generated
module @xmath is finite provided @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath is
equidimensional. We are now able to show that the condition @xmath is
superfluous. Kawasaki also obtains this result in the proof of [ 20 ,
Theorem 5.5] by a different method.

###### Corollary 2.1.6.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring such that all of its formal fibers
are Cohen-Macaulay. Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath
–module such that @xmath is equidimensional @xmath –module. Then the
Cousin complex of @xmath , @xmath , is finite.

###### Proof.

We may assume that @xmath , by Lemma 1.3.11 (ii). Since for each @xmath
, by Lemma 2.1.5 , there is an isomorphism @xmath , finiteness of @xmath
is equivalent to finiteness of @xmath . Hence we may assume that @xmath
is complete, and so that @xmath is a homomorphic image of a Gorenstein
ring. Now, by Proposition 2.1.4 , there exists a finitely generated
@xmath –module which satisfies the condition @xmath and @xmath is finite
if and only if @xmath is finite.

Since @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath and @xmath , so that @xmath
is equidimensional, [ 4 , Theorem 2.1] implies that @xmath is finite and
so the result follows. ∎

The following technical result will play a key role in the rest of the
chapter.

###### Proposition 2.1.7.

Let @xmath be an @xmath –module and let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath
such that @xmath . Then, for each non–negative integer @xmath with
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is used for product of ideals.

###### Proof.

For each @xmath , recall the natural exact sequences 1.3.1 and 1.3.2 .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath . We prove by induction on @xmath , @xmath , that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In case @xmath , the exact sequence ( 2.1.5 ) implies the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus the case @xmath is justified.

Assume that @xmath and formula ( 2.1.6 ) is settled for @xmath .
Therefore, by Lemma 1.3.4 (b), the exact sequence 2.1.4 implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand the exact sequence ( 2.1.5 ) implies the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.1.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

Now ( 2.1.7 ) and ( 2.1.8 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From ( 2.1.9 ), it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, by the induction hypothesis ( 2.1.6 ), it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the end of the induction argument.

Note that there is an embedding @xmath , by the exact sequence ( 2.1.4
). On the other hand @xmath by Lemma 1.3.4 (b). So that @xmath and now
putting @xmath in ( 2.1.6 ) gives the result. ∎

An immediate corollary to the above result is the following.

###### Corollary 2.1.8.

Assume that @xmath is an ideal of @xmath such that @xmath . Then, for
each integer @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows by Proposition 2.1.7 and the fact that the extension functors
are linear and @xmath . ∎

### 2.2 Uniform annihilators of local cohomology

Recall that an element @xmath is a uniform local cohomological
annihilator of an @xmath –module @xmath if, for every maximal ideal
@xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is called a strong
uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath if @xmath is a uniform
local cohomological annihilator of @xmath for every prime ideal @xmath
in @xmath . @xmath is called universally catenary if every finitely
generated @xmath –algebra is catenary.

As a basic property of a ring @xmath containing a uniform local
cohomological annihilator, it is proved that @xmath must be locally
equidimensional and universally catenary (c.f. [ 37 , Theorem 2.1] ).
One of essential results about uniform annihilators of local cohomology,
is the following result due to Zhou which reduces the property that a
ring @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator to the same
property for @xmath for each minimal prime @xmath of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

[ 37 , Theorem 3.2] Let @xmath be of finite dimension @xmath . Then the
following conditions are equivalent.

1.  @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

2.  @xmath is locally equidimensional, and @xmath has a uniform local
    cohomological annihilator for each minimal prime ideal @xmath of
    @xmath .

The module version of the above theorem is also true. One may use an
almost similar method to prove it. We state the proof more precisely.
First we show that a module which has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator is locally equidimensional.

###### Proposition 2.2.2.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module such that it has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator. Then @xmath is locally
equidimensional.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . We will show that @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath . By assumption, there exists an element @xmath such that @xmath
for all @xmath . As @xmath , and @xmath by using the definition of local
cohomology, we may assume that @xmath is local with the maximal ideal
@xmath and write @xmath .

Assume, to the contrary, that there exists @xmath with @xmath . Set
@xmath and @xmath . There exists a submodule @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath and that @xmath . As @xmath , it
follows that there exists an element @xmath . Thus, trivially, @xmath
for all @xmath . The exact sequence @xmath implies the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath for all @xmath , it follows that @xmath for all @xmath . In
particular, @xmath . Thus @xmath (c.f. [ 2 , Proposition 7.2.11 and
Theorem 7.3.2] ). Therefore @xmath by the choice of @xmath . As @xmath ,
this is a contradiction. ∎

We need the following technical lemma to extend Theorem 2.2.1 to module
version. This result has been proved in [ 37 , Lemma 3.1] for @xmath ,
the same technique works also for an arbitrary @xmath –module @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be a local ring, @xmath a finitely generated @xmath –module
of dimension @xmath , @xmath be a minimal prime ideal of @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a series of short exact sequences of finitely generated @xmath
–modules. Let @xmath be an element of @xmath such that @xmath .

1.   If there is an element @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath
    , then @xmath for @xmath .

2.   If there is an element @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath
    , then @xmath for @xmath .

Now, we are able to present the module version of Theorem 2.2.1 .

###### Proposition 2.2.4.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath --module. Then the following
conditions are equivalent.

1.  @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

2.  @xmath is locally equidimensional and @xmath has a uniform local
    cohomological annihilator for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). By Proposition 2.2.2 , @xmath is locally
equidimensional. Assume that @xmath and that @xmath is a maximal ideal
containing @xmath . As @xmath is an @xmath –module of finite length, we
set @xmath . Then there exists a chain of submodules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath , for @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are exact sequences. Since @xmath is equidimensional, @xmath . As, by
definition of @xmath , @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Choose an
element @xmath . Localizing the above exact sequences at @xmath implies
the following exact sequences.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption, there is an element @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath . Now, by Lemma 2.2.3 , we have @xmath for all @xmath and for
some integer @xmath .

(ii) @xmath (i). One may use a similar method as above to get the
result. ∎

The following result is an easy application of the above proposition
which shows that the property that a module @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator is independent of the module structure and
depends only on the support of @xmath .

###### Corollary 2.2.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be finitely generated @xmath –modules of finite
dimensions such that @xmath . Then @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator if and only if @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator.

###### Corollary 2.2.6.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module that has a uniform
local cohomological annihilator. Then @xmath is universally catenary.

###### Proof.

It follows by Corollary 2.2.5 and [ 37 , Theorem 2.1] . ∎

Recall that for a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath over a local
ring @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that by definition, an @xmath –module @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator if and only if @xmath . On the other hand if
@xmath , then @xmath if and only if @xmath for some @xmath . More
precisely we have the following result.

###### Lemma 2.2.7.

Assume that @xmath is local and that @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath –module of dimension @xmath . Then @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.
Therefore there is an element @xmath satisfying @xmath for all @xmath .
Thus, by Corollary 1.1.1 (iii), @xmath for all @xmath . Now the claim is
clear.

Conversely, note that if @xmath , then @xmath for some prime ideal
@xmath , by prime avoidance theorem. Therefore, @xmath for some @xmath .
On the other hand one has @xmath which gives @xmath . Thus @xmath and so
@xmath by Corollary 1.1.1 (ii), which contradicts our assumption. Hence
@xmath and the result follows. ∎

The following lemma provides a relation between prime ideals containing
@xmath and those @xmath which @xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Lemma 2.2.8.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring, @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath –module and @xmath such that @xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay. Then
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and assume contrarily that @xmath . Then by Theorem 1.2.13 ,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath which is a contradiction. ∎

As an immediate corollary of the above lemma, we have the following
result which Zhou has also proved it, in [ 37 , Corollary 2.3] , for
@xmath and by a different method.

###### Corollary 2.2.9.

Assume that @xmath is a uniform local cohomological annihilator of a
finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath . Then @xmath is a
Cohen-Macaulay @xmath –module.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a maximal ideal of @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath , for
any prime ideal @xmath with @xmath , we have @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by
Lemma 2.2.8 . ∎

Another property of rings which contain uniform local cohomological
annihilators is a result of Zhou [ 37 , Theorem 2.2] which proves that
if @xmath is a uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath , then
a power of @xmath is a strong uniform local cohomological annihilator of
@xmath . Using the above result and our approach to uniform annihilators
of local cohomology, we are able to recover this result in special case
when @xmath is local, by a different method. Before that, we mention the
following well known fact.

###### Lemma 2.2.10.

[ 24 , Thorem 31.7] Assume that @xmath is universally catenary local
ring and @xmath is finitely generated and equidimensional. Then @xmath
is equidimensional @xmath -module.

###### Proposition 2.2.11.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring, @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath –module and @xmath is a uniform local cohomological annihilator
of @xmath , then a power of @xmath is a strong uniform local
cohomological annihilator of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Note that @xmath is equidimensional by Proposition 2.2.2
and @xmath is universally catenary by Corollary 2.2.6 . Thus Lemma
2.2.10 , implies that @xmath is equidimensional.

Let @xmath with @xmath . We may choose elements @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . Set @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath .

Note that @xmath is finite, by Corollary 2.1.6 and @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay by Corollary 2.2.9 , which means that @xmath for all
@xmath . Since @xmath is finitely generated @xmath –module, there exists
a positive integer @xmath such that @xmath (note that @xmath for @xmath
).

Now, Corollary 2.1.8 implies that @xmath for @xmath . Hence @xmath for
@xmath and the result follows by the fact that @xmath . ∎

The following theorem gives a characterization for a finitely generated
module @xmath over a local ring to have a uniform local cohomological
annihilator in terms of the existence of a specific parameter element of
@xmath . In proving (ii) @xmath (i) of this theorem, A. Talemi–Eshmanani
had a fruitful cooperation.

###### Theorem 2.2.12.

Let @xmath be local and @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath –module
with dimension @xmath . Then the following statements are equivalent.

1.  @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

2.  @xmath is catenary and equidimensional, there exists a parameter
    element @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and all modules @xmath ,
    @xmath , have a common uniform local cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

In the following argument we fix @xmath to be a submodule of @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath (see [ 1 , Page 263, Proposition 4] for existence
of @xmath ).

(i) @xmath (ii) By Proposition 2.2.2 , @xmath is equidimensional and
@xmath is catenary by Corollary 2.2.6 . Set @xmath . It can be easily
checked that @xmath and it is a subset of @xmath so that @xmath is a
finite set. Assume that @xmath is an element of @xmath which is a
uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath . If @xmath is unit
element then @xmath is Cohen–Macaulay and the claim follows by choosing
@xmath to be a non–zero–divisor on @xmath .

Therefore we assume that @xmath , so that @xmath . Note that, as @xmath
is equidimensional and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Hence there
exist

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It follows that @xmath .

We claim that @xmath . Otherwise @xmath for some @xmath and so @xmath
which implies that @xmath . This contradicts with the chosen @xmath in (
2.2.1 ).

Next we claim that @xmath . Otherwise @xmath for some @xmath . Thus
@xmath and @xmath which shows that @xmath . This also contradicts with (
2.2.1 ). As a result there exists an element @xmath . Now consider the
induced exact sequences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath for all @xmath , we get @xmath for
all @xmath .

Now, for the module @xmath , we have @xmath and so, by ( 2.2.1 ), each
of the elements @xmath is a non–zero–divisor on @xmath . Choose an
arbitrary positive integer @xmath and consider the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which induces the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath for @xmath , we get @xmath for all @xmath .

On the other hand the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies the exact sequences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .

Finally, the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies the exact sequences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath implies that @xmath for all @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

As @xmath and @xmath , the element @xmath is a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for @xmath .

(ii) @xmath (i). Assume that all modules @xmath , @xmath , have a common
uniform local cohomological annihilator @xmath , say. We first observe
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Otherwise there is a prime ideal @xmath which @xmath . As @xmath and
@xmath , we find that @xmath and so @xmath which contradicts our
assumption @xmath . As a result there is an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider an arbitrary positive integer @xmath . From the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows the induced exact sequences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath is a uniform local cohomological annihilator of
@xmath , it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .

On the other hand, the exact sequence @xmath implies the exact sequences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .

From the fact that @xmath is catenary and equidimensional and that
@xmath is a parameter element of @xmath it follows that @xmath and so
@xmath .

Our next step is to show that @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath and
choose an arbitrary element @xmath . By torsionness of local cohomology
modules, there is a positive integer @xmath such that @xmath . As @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath is a non–zero–divisor on @xmath . Thus the exact
sequence @xmath implies the exact sequence @xmath and also the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , we obtain that @xmath . In particular, @xmath . Therefore,
as @xmath , @xmath is a uniform local cohomological annihilator of
@xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator, by Corollary 2.2.5 . ∎

Now we introduce an important class of modules which have uniform local
cohomological annihilators. This is the class of modules with finite
Cousin complexes. In next chapter, we will show that these two classes
coincide, if all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Theorem 2.2.13.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module of finite
@xmath and that @xmath is finite, then @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 1.3.10 , there exists an element @xmath . Now @xmath is a
uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath , by Corollary 2.1.8 .
∎

In Theorem 2.2.12 , we have shown that if @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator, then there exists a parameter element @xmath
of @xmath which @xmath has also a uniform local cohomological
annihilator. Now, when @xmath is finite, we may show this property for
all parameter elements of @xmath . Firstly we see the result for each
non–zero–divisor @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.2.14.

Let @xmath be local ring and let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
–module with @xmath such that @xmath is finite. Then, for each
non–zero–divisor @xmath of @xmath , the quotient module @xmath has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator. Moreover, @xmath and all
modules @xmath , @xmath , have a common uniform local cohomological
annihilator.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath and so @xmath for all @xmath by Theorem 1.3.9
(ii). If @xmath then @xmath and so @xmath which contradicts with the
fact that @xmath is a non–zero–divisor on @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, there is an element @xmath . Now, from the exact sequence
@xmath we get the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Corollary 2.1.8 , @xmath for all @xmath . Then the above exact
sequence implies that @xmath for all @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath is a
uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath for all positive
integers @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 2.2.15.

Let @xmath be a local ring and let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
–module with finite Cousin complex. Then @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for any parameter element @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

There is a submodule @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath (c.f.
[ 1 , Page 263, Proposition 4] ). As in the exact sequence @xmath we
have @xmath for all @xmath , Lemma 2.1.1 (b) implies that @xmath is
finite. Assume that @xmath is parameter element of @xmath . As @xmath is
a non–zero–divisor on @xmath , Proposition 2.2.14 implies that @xmath
has a uniform local cohomological annihilator. Note that @xmath so, by
Corollary 2.2.5 , @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.
∎

### 2.3 Applications

Our study of properties of Cousin cohomologies in Section 2.1, provides
a new approach to the property of uniform annihilators of local
cohomologies. This point of view enabled us to study both classes of
modules, more deeply in section 2.2. In this section we present some
more applications to characterize modules with finite cousin complexes
(over rings with some extra conditions) and also to investigate a new
formula for height of an ideal in terms of cohomologies of Cousin
complexes.

#### 2.3.1 Partial characterizations

We start with the following result which has an essential role in our
approach.

###### Corollary 2.3.1.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module with finite
dimension and that @xmath is finite. Then @xmath is locally
equidimensional and @xmath is universally catenary.

###### Proof.

It is clear from Theorem 2.2.13 , Proposition 2.2.2 and Corollary 2.2.6
. ∎

Now it is easy to provide an example of a module whose Cousin complex
has at least one non–finitely generated cohomology.

Example. Consider a noetherian local ring @xmath of dimension @xmath .
Choose any pair of prime ideals @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with
conditions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then @xmath and so @xmath is
not an equidimensional @xmath –module and thus its Cousin complex is not
finite.

In [ 37 , Corollary 3.3] , Zhou proves that any locally equidimensional
noetherian ring has a uniform local cohomological annihilator provided
it is a homomorphic image of a Cohen-Macaulay ring of finite dimension.
Note that any homomorphic image of a Cohen-Macaulay ring is universally
catenary and all of it’s formal fibres are Cohen-Macaulay. Here we
extend this result to any universally catenary local ring with
Cohen-Macaulay formal fibres, by showing that over these rings, every
equidimensional module has finite Cousin complex, which also recovers
the result of Kawasaki, [ 20 , Theorem 5.5] , by a different method.

###### Proposition 2.3.2.

Assume that @xmath is universally catenary and all formal fibres of
@xmath are Cohen-Macaulay. If @xmath is a finitely generated and
equidimensional @xmath –module, then @xmath is finite; in particular
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 2.2.10 , @xmath is equidimensional, so Corollary 2.1.6 implies
the result. ∎

We are now ready to present the following result which, for a finitely
generated @xmath –module @xmath , shows connections of finiteness of its
Cousin complex, existence of a uniform local cohomological annihilator
for @xmath , and equidimensionality of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.3.

Assume that @xmath is local and all formal fibers of @xmath are
Cohen-Macaulay. Then the following statements are equivalent for a
finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath .

-   @xmath ia an equidimensional @xmath –module.

-    The Cousin complex of @xmath is finite.

-   @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). This is Corollary 2.1.6 .

(ii) @xmath (iii). This is Theorem 2.2.13 .

(iii) @xmath (i). There exists an element @xmath such that @xmath for
all @xmath , so that @xmath for all @xmath . Now @xmath is
equidimensional by Proposition 2.2.2 . ∎

#### 2.3.2 Height of an ideal

We use some results about the annihilators of cohomologies of Cousin
complexes, to present the height of an ideal in terms of Cousin
complexes.

As mentioned in Corollary 2.1.8 , we may write the following result.

###### Corollary 2.3.4.

For any finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath and any ideal @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now raise the question that whether it is possible to improve the
upper bound restriction.
Question. Does the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hold?

It will be proved that the answer is negative for the class of finitely
generated @xmath –modules with finite Cousin cohomologies. More
precisely,

###### Theorem 2.3.5.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module of finite
dimension and that its Cousin complex @xmath is finite. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all ideals @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath for all @xmath . Hence we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Thus it is sufficient to show that @xmath . By Independence Theorem of
local cohomology, @xmath as @xmath –module, where @xmath . Note that
@xmath and that @xmath by Lemma 1.3.5 .

Hence we may assume that @xmath . Set @xmath . Let @xmath . As @xmath ,
there exists a minimal prime @xmath over @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath . Hence @xmath . Thus, by any choice of @xmath we have @xmath
(see Theorem 1.2.4 and Corollary 1.1.1 (iii)) and so @xmath . Therefore,
one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, by Lemma 1.3.10 , @xmath , from which it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## Chapter 3 Attached primes of local cohomology modules

Throughout this chapter ( @xmath ) is a local ring and @xmath is a
finitely generated @xmath –module of dimension @xmath . Recall that
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilators if and only if
@xmath . On the other hand we have seen in Lemma 2.2.7 , that if @xmath
, then @xmath if and only if @xmath for some @xmath . Inspired by these
facts, we study @xmath for certain @xmath , in particular @xmath , in
terms of cohomologies of @xmath and obtain a non–vanishing criterion of
@xmath when @xmath is finite, in section 3.1. We continue by study the
attached prime ideals of the top local cohomology module @xmath in the
second section and present a positive answer to a question of [ 10 ] ,
in the case when @xmath is complete. The last section of this chapter is
devoted to some applications of our results to find a new
characterization of generalized Cohen-Macaulay modules.

### 3.1 Attached primes related to cohomologies of Cousin complexes

In this section we study some relations between the set of attached
primes of local cohomology modules @xmath and those of cohomologies of
the Cousin complex of @xmath .

The following result describes the situation when all cohomology modules
@xmath of the Cousin complex of @xmath are local cohomology modules of
@xmath .

###### Lemma 3.1.1.

Assume that @xmath is an integer with @xmath . The following statements
are equivalent.

1.  @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath .

2.  @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath is an integer such that @xmath and @xmath .
Considering the exact sequence ( 1.3.1 ) with @xmath , gives the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all integers @xmath . As @xmath , by Lemma 1.3.4 (a), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next consider the exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath which gives the
exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choosing @xmath in the above exact sequence we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As a consequence, from ( 3.1.1 ) and ( 3.1.2 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath .

(i) @xmath (ii). Let @xmath . By repeated use of ( 3.1.3 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the exact sequence ( 1.3.1 ) with @xmath we have @xmath (because
@xmath and Lemma 1.3.4 ). Hence the exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath
implies that @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

(ii) @xmath (i) is clear. ∎

Theorem 1.3.9 , implies that @xmath for all @xmath . The following lemma
states some properties for @xmath th local cohomology modules of @xmath
, whenever @xmath for all @xmath , in particular for @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.1.2.

Assume that @xmath is an integer such that @xmath , for all @xmath .
Then the following statements hold true.

-   @xmath

-    There is an epimorphism @xmath .

-    Assume that @xmath is finite. Then @xmath is non–zero if and only
    if @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i). We prove by induction on @xmath , @xmath , that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Due to @xmath , the Grothendieck’s vanishing theorem implies that @xmath
. The exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath , implies the exact sequence
@xmath . Thus we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume that @xmath and ( 3.1.4 ) holds. First note that ( 1.3.1 ) with
@xmath implies the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , by Lemma 1.3.4 , therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand from the exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath we have
the exact sequence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath , ( 3.1.5 ) with the exact sequence ( 3.1.6 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, ( 3.1.7 ) and ( 3.1.4 ) complete the induction argument. Thus we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, considering the fact that @xmath , it follows from
the exact sequence ( 1.3.1 ) with @xmath , that @xmath .

(ii). Consider the exact sequence ( 1.3.1 ) with @xmath which imply the
exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath we get @xmath and so @xmath , by Lemma 1.3.4 . Therefore
we have isomorphisms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath , @xmath .

Consider the exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath which induces the
exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As, by assumption @xmath , we have @xmath and so one obtains an
epimorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By successive use of ( 3.1.9 ) and ( 3.1.8 ) one obtains an epimorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, we have seen at the end of part (i) that, we have
@xmath . Therefore, from the exact sequence ( 1.3.2 ) with @xmath , we
get @xmath which results an epimorphism

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(iii). Assume that @xmath . As, by assumption @xmath , we have @xmath
and so @xmath . Now ( 3.1.10 ) implies that @xmath .

Conversely, assume that @xmath . By part (i), @xmath for some @xmath ,
@xmath , and thus @xmath . As @xmath we have equality @xmath . Note that
@xmath is finitely generated and so @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.4 ) from
which it follows that @xmath , i.e. @xmath ∎

It is known that @xmath (Theorem 1.2.4 ). The following result provides
some information about @xmath for certain @xmath , in particular for
@xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1.3.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Let @xmath , @xmath , be an integer such
that @xmath , for all @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath by Lemma 3.1.2
(i). As @xmath , we have the equality @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath .

Conversely, assume that @xmath and that @xmath such that @xmath . Set
@xmath and @xmath .

As @xmath is finite, @xmath is equidimensional and @xmath is catenary by
Proposition 2.2.2 and Corollary 2.2.6 , we have @xmath . Note that
@xmath so that @xmath for all @xmath . As @xmath , we find that @xmath
for all @xmath . On the other hand @xmath . Lemma 3.1.2 (iii), replacing
@xmath by @xmath implies that @xmath . Finally the Weak General Shifted
Localization Principle ( 1.2.6 ), implies that @xmath that is @xmath . ∎

As a consequence of the above result, we may find a connection between
vanishing of certain local cohomology modules and the dimensions of
cohomologies of Cousin complex.

###### Corollary 3.1.4.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Let @xmath be an integer. The following
statements are equivalent.

-   @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). We prove it by descending induction on @xmath . For
@xmath we have nothing to prove by Lemma 1.3.4 . Assume that @xmath . We
have, by induction hypothesis, that @xmath for all @xmath and for all
@xmath . If, for an ideal @xmath and an integer @xmath , @xmath , then
we get @xmath and so @xmath by Proposition 3.1.3 , which contradicts the
assumption. Therefore @xmath for any @xmath and all @xmath . That is
@xmath for all @xmath . In other words, @xmath for all @xmath .

(ii) @xmath (i). By descending induction on @xmath . For @xmath we have
nothing to prove. Assume that @xmath . As @xmath for all @xmath , we
have, by induction hypothesis, that @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath .
Moreover, Proposition 3.1.3 implies that @xmath is empty so that @xmath
. ∎

The following result is now a clear conclusion of the above corollary.

###### Corollary 3.1.5.

Assume that @xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay and that @xmath is finite. Set
@xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

The following corollary gives us a non–vanishing criterion of @xmath
when @xmath is finite.

###### Corollary 3.1.6.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Then

-   @xmath

-   @xmath if and only if @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is clear by Proposition 3.1.3 . ∎

### 3.2 Top local cohomology modules

In this section we assume that @xmath is a local ring. We say that
@xmath is complete precisely when it is complete with respect to the
@xmath –adic topology.

As mentioned before, by Theorem 1.2.4 , @xmath . The following result is
due to Dibaei and Yassemi.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

[ 12 , Theorem A] For any ideal @xmath of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the cohomological dimension of an @xmath –module @xmath
with respect to @xmath , that is @xmath .

Note that if @xmath such that @xmath , then @xmath . Therefore @xmath .
The number of subsets @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , for some ideal
@xmath of a complete ring @xmath , is exactly the number of
non–isomorphic top local cohomology modules of @xmath with respect to
all ideals of @xmath , by the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.2.2.

[ 11 , Theorem 1.6] Assume that @xmath is complete. Then for any pair of
ideals @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , if @xmath , then @xmath .

Now it is natural interesting to ask,

###### Question 3.2.3.

[ 10 , Question 2.9] For any subset @xmath of @xmath , is there an ideal
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath ?

Note that if @xmath , then the maximal ideal is the answer. Thus through
this section we always assume that @xmath is a non–empty proper subset
of @xmath .

In special case when @xmath , it is easy to deal Question 3.2.3 .

###### Proposition 3.2.4.

If @xmath , then any subset @xmath of @xmath is equal to the set @xmath
for some ideal @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . Note that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .
Thus @xmath if and only if @xmath . ∎

In the following result we find a characterization for a subset of
@xmath to be the set of attached primes of the top local cohomology of
@xmath with respect to an ideal @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.2.5.

Assume that @xmath is complete, @xmath and set @xmath . The following
statements are equivalent.

1.   There exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

2.   For each @xmath , there exists @xmath with @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

With @xmath , as above, @xmath where @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). By Theorem 3.2.1 , @xmath for all @xmath , that is
@xmath is @xmath –primary for all @xmath , by the Lichtenbaum-Hartshorne
Theorem( 1.2.3 ). On the other hand, for @xmath which is equivalent to
say that @xmath is not an @xmath –primary ideal. Hence there exists a
prime ideal @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . It follows that @xmath
.
(ii) @xmath (i). Set @xmath . For each @xmath , @xmath implies that
@xmath is not @xmath –primary and so @xmath . Thus by Theorem 3.2.2
@xmath . Assume @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath for
some @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath , so @xmath . Hence @xmath
is @xmath –primary ideal. Now, by the Lichtenbaum-Hartshorne Theorem(
1.2.3 ), and Theorem 3.2.1 , it follows that @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.6.

If @xmath and @xmath is complete, then there is an ideal @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then @xmath by Theorem 3.2.2 . Otherwise @xmath and @xmath
is a proper subset of @xmath . Set @xmath . By Proposition 3.2.5 , there
are @xmath with @xmath , such that @xmath with @xmath . Now, by Theorem
3.2.2 , we have @xmath . As @xmath , the proof is complete. ∎

Proposition 3.2.5 provides a useful method to find examples of top local
cohomology modules with specified attached primes.

###### Example 3.2.7.

Set @xmath , where @xmath is a field and @xmath are independent
indeterminates. Then @xmath is a complete Noetherian local ring with
maximal ideal @xmath . Consider prime ideals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and set @xmath as an @xmath –module, so that we have @xmath and @xmath .
We get @xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, we have @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2.8.

Assume that @xmath is complete, @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath .
Then there exists a prime ideal @xmath with @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . We have @xmath , otherwise @xmath which contradicts the
condition @xmath .

As @xmath is catenary, we have @xmath . We first prove, by induction on
@xmath , @xmath , that there exists a chain of prime ideals

@xmath

such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

There is @xmath such that @xmath . Note that @xmath . Now, assume that
@xmath and that we have proved the existence of a chain @xmath of prime
ideals such that @xmath , @xmath and that @xmath .
Since @xmath , the set @xmath defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is non–empty and so, by Ratliff’s weak existence theorem [ 24 , Theorem
31.2] , is not finite. As @xmath , we have @xmath . If, for @xmath ,
@xmath , then @xmath is a minimal prime of @xmath . As @xmath is an
infinite set, there is @xmath such that @xmath . Thus the induction is
complete. Now by taking @xmath and by Proposition 3.2.5 , the claim
follows. ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.9.

Assume that @xmath is complete and @xmath . Then there is an ideal
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Note that @xmath is a singleton set @xmath , say, and so @xmath and
@xmath . Therefore the result follows by Lemma 3.2.8 . ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.10.

Let @xmath and @xmath be ideals of a complete ring @xmath . Then there
exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath and @xmath . We may assume that @xmath is a non-empty proper
subset of @xmath . Assume that @xmath . By Proposition 3.2.5 , there
exists @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Now, by
Proposition 3.2.5 , again there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath such
that @xmath . ∎

Now we are ready to present our main result.

###### Theorem 3.2.11.

Assume that @xmath is complete and @xmath , then there exists an ideal
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Corollary 3.2.4 , we may assume that @xmath and that @xmath is a
non-empty proper subset of @xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath . We use
induction on @xmath . For @xmath , Corollary 3.2.9 proves the first step
of induction. Assume that @xmath and that the case @xmath is proved. Set
@xmath and @xmath . By induction assumption there exist ideals @xmath
and @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Now by the Lemma
3.2.10 , there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 3.2.12.

(See [ 3 , Corollary 1.7] ) Assume that @xmath is complete. Then the
number of non–isomorphic top local cohomology modules of @xmath with
respect to all ideals of @xmath is equal to @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows from Theorem 3.2.11 and Theorem 3.2.2 . ∎

### 3.3 Applications to generalized Cohen-Macaulay modules

In this section we study some properties of a generalized Cohen-Macaulay
modules in terms of certain prime ideals @xmath which @xmath has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator and we give a new
characterization of these modules.

###### Lemma 3.3.1.

Let @xmath be a g.CM local ring. Then @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for all @xmath . In particular, any
equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator.

###### Proof.

Note that if @xmath , then there is nothing to prove. So we assume that
@xmath . Let @xmath with @xmath . As @xmath is g.CM and @xmath , @xmath
has a uniform local cohomological annihilator and thus @xmath has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator by Theorem 2.2.1 . Assume that
@xmath . There is a subset of system of parameters @xmath of @xmath
contained in @xmath . By Theorem 1.2.16 (iii), @xmath is g.CM and so it
has a uniform local cohomological annihilator. In particular @xmath has
a uniform local cohomological annihilator by Theorem 2.2.1 . The final
part follows immediately from the first part and Proposition 2.2.4 . ∎

The converse of the above result is not true in general, but we may get
a positive answer in a special case where @xmath is a Cohen-macaulay
@xmath –module for all @xmath . We need the following lemma which is
straightforward and we give a proof for completeness.

###### Lemma 3.3.2.

Assume that @xmath is a noetherian local ring. Then

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

-    If @xmath is universally catenary and @xmath is equidimensional,
    then @xmath is equidimensional as @xmath –module.

###### Proof.

(a). It follows that @xmath by the Going Down Theorem. Assume that
@xmath such that @xmath . The exact sequence @xmath implies the exact
sequence @xmath . Therefore @xmath and so @xmath .

(b). Assume that @xmath . By the Going Down Theorem, @xmath from which
we have @xmath . As, by part (a), @xmath and using the fact that @xmath
is formally equidimensional, we get @xmath which implies that @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 3.3.3.

Assume that @xmath is a local ring such that @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for all @xmath . Then the following statements
are equivalent.

-   @xmath is equidimensional @xmath –module and for all @xmath , @xmath
    is a Cohen-macaulay @xmath –module.

-   @xmath is a g.CM module.

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). Since @xmath for @xmath , we may assume that @xmath and
so @xmath . As, for each @xmath , @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, so @xmath .
Thus @xmath , by Lemma 1.3.11 . Since @xmath is equidimensional and
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator for all @xmath ,
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator by Proposition
2.2.4 , and so @xmath is universally catenary by Corollary 2.2.6 . As a
result, considering @xmath as an @xmath –module, Lemma 3.3.2 implies
that @xmath is equidimensional. Hence @xmath is finite by Corollary
2.1.6 .

Now, we prove the statement by using induction on @xmath . For @xmath ,
we have, by Corollary 3.1.6 , that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath . On the other hand,
since @xmath , @xmath by Theorem 1.1.2 which contradicts, with Lemma
2.2.7 . Hence @xmath . Now, Corollary 1.1.1 (i) implies that @xmath is
finitely generated @xmath –module and it is the first step of the
induction.

Now assume that @xmath and the statement holds up to @xmath . Let @xmath
be a uniform local cohomological annihilator of @xmath . Since @xmath ,
@xmath is a nonzero divisor on @xmath by using its definition. On the
other hand, as @xmath is catenary, it is straightforward to see that
@xmath satisfies the induction hypothesis for @xmath . Therefore, @xmath
is finitely generated for all @xmath . The exact sequence @xmath implies
the long exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for @xmath , we get the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Now the result follows.

(ii) @xmath (i) is clear by Theorem 1.2.16 (i). ∎

Now we can state a criterion for an equidimensional local ring to be a
g.CM ring in terms of uniform local cohomological annihilators.

###### Corollary 3.3.4.

Assume that @xmath is an equidimensional noetherian local ring. The
following statements are equivalent.

-   @xmath is g.CM.

-    For all @xmath , @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay ring and @xmath has a
    uniform local cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). We know that @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay for all @xmath ,
by Theorem 1.2.16 (i). The rest is the subject of Lemma 3.3.1 .

(ii) @xmath (i) is immediate from Lemma 3.3.3 . ∎

The following remark is easy but we bring it here for completeness and
future reference.

###### Remark 3.3.5.

Assume that @xmath is local.

1.   A finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath is g.CM if and only if
    all cohomology modules of @xmath are of finite lengths.

2.   A finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath is quasi–Buchsbaum
    module if and only if @xmath is finite and @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i). Assume that @xmath is g.CM. By Theorem 1.2.16 (i), we have @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay for all @xmath . So that @xmath and, by Lemma 3.3.3 ,
the result follows. The converse is clear by Lemma 3.3.3

(ii). It is similar to (i). ∎

## Chapter 4 Cohen-Macaulay loci of modules

Throughout this chapter @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module.
In the case @xmath is local, we use as the completion of @xmath with
respect to @xmath . The main objective of this chapter is to study the
Cohen-Macaulay locus of a module. We show that it is a Zariski–open
subset of @xmath in certain cases. Our results are also related to
Cohen-Macaulayness of formal fibres over certain prime ideals.

### 4.1 Openness of Cohen-Macaulay locus

The Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is denoted by

@xmath is Cohen-Macaulay as @xmath –module @xmath .

Let non– @xmath . Trivially the Cohen-Macaulay locus of a Cohen-Macaulay
module is @xmath and of a generalized Cohen-Macaulay module @xmath over
a local ring @xmath contains @xmath by Theorem 1.2.16 (i). In these
cases @xmath are Zariski–open subsets of @xmath .

The objective of this section is to study the Cohen-Macaulay locus of
@xmath and find out when it is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath . We
first mention a remark for future references.

###### Remark 4.1.1.

For an @xmath –module @xmath of finite dimension, if the Cousin complex
of @xmath is finite, then non - @xmath so that @xmath is open.

###### Proof.

It is clear, by Theorem 1.3.7 and Theorem 1.3.6 , that

@xmath

∎

As we have seen in Corollary 2.1.6 , the Cousin complex of every
equidimensional module over a complete local ring is finite. So it is
natural to ask, over which rings the openness of Cohen-Macaulay locus
property is heritable from the completion ring. As an example of such
rings one may consider the rings whose formal fibres are Cohen-Macaulay.
To see this, recall first the standard dimension and depth formula.

###### Lemma 4.1.2.

[ 14 , Chapitre IV, (6.1.2), (6.1.3),(6.3.3)] Assume that @xmath and
@xmath are local rings with @xmath and @xmath is a flat local
homomorphism. For a finitely generated @xmath –module @xmath , @xmath is
a finitely generated @xmath –module and the following statements hold
true.

(i) @xmath ;

(ii) @xmath ;

(iii) @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay @xmath –module if and only if @xmath is a
Cohen-Macaulay @xmath –module and @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay ring.

As an immediate corollary of the above lemma, we have the following
result.

###### Corollary 4.1.3.

Assume that @xmath and @xmath . If the formal fibre @xmath over @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if and only if @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

Note that the natural local homomorphism @xmath is flat, so that the
result follows by the above lemma. ∎

Now we may easily see that the openness of Cohen-Macaulay locus property
is heritable from the completion ring, if all formal fibres are
Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Corollary 4.1.4.

Assume that all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay. If the
Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath , then
the Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Equivalently, we prove that @xmath non– @xmath is a finite set. Choose
@xmath non– @xmath and let @xmath be a minimal member of the non–empty
set

@xmath

Since the formal fibre of @xmath over @xmath is Cohen–Macaulay, @xmath
is not Cohen-Macaulay by Corollary 4.1.3 . On the other hand, for each
@xmath with @xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay again
by Corollary 4.1.3 . Hence @xmath non– @xmath which is a finite set. ∎

The following lemma shows that the Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is
open if it is true for certain submodules of @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.5.

Let
@xmath : there exists @xmath such that @xmath is constant for all @xmath
. For each @xmath , we assign a submodule @xmath of @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For each @xmath , there exists a submodule @xmath of @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath (c.f. [ 1 , Page 263, Proposition 4] ). it is clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and set @xmath . As @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, @xmath for all
@xmath and so @xmath . We claim that @xmath . Assuming contrary, there
is @xmath such that @xmath . Hence @xmath which implies that @xmath .
This contradicts with the fact that @xmath . Therefore from the exact
sequence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get @xmath so that @xmath .

Conversely, assume that @xmath and that @xmath . That is @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath . Therefore @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by (
4.1.1 ), replacing @xmath by @xmath . ∎

Note that if @xmath is catenary, then each module @xmath in the above
lemma is an equidimensional @xmath --module. Therefore one can state the
following remark.

###### Remark 4.1.6.

If @xmath is catenary and @xmath is open for all equidimensional
submodules @xmath of @xmath , then @xmath is open.

It is now a routine check to see that, over a local ring @xmath with
Cohen-Macaulay formal fibres, the Cohen-Macaulay locus of any finitely
generated @xmath –module is open.

###### Remark 4.1.7.

Assume that all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay. Then the
Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Corollary 4.1.4 , it is enough to show that @xmath is a Zariski–open
subset of @xmath . As @xmath is catenary, we may assume that @xmath is
equidimensional @xmath –module by Remark 4.1.6 . Finally, Corollary
2.1.6 implies that @xmath has finite cohomologies and so @xmath is open
by Remark 4.1.1 . ∎

We are now able to prove that any minimal element of non- @xmath is
either an attached prime of @xmath for some @xmath or @xmath is not a
Cohen-Macaulay ring.

###### Theorem 4.1.8.

Assume that @xmath is a catenary local ring and that @xmath is
equidimensional @xmath –module. Then

@xmath non – @xmath non – @xmath .

###### Proof.

Choose @xmath non– @xmath . As @xmath is catenary and @xmath is
equidimensional, @xmath is also equidimensional as @xmath –module.
Assume that @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay ring. For each @xmath with @xmath
, @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator by Proposition
2.3.2 . Therefore, by Lemma 3.3.3 , @xmath is a g.CM @xmath –module. As
@xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay, @xmath for some integer @xmath , @xmath .
In particular, @xmath is a non–zero finite length @xmath –module so that
@xmath . By Weak general shifted localization principle (Theorem 1.2.7
), @xmath , where @xmath . Now the result follows. ∎

###### Corollary 4.1.9.

Assume that @xmath is a catenary local ring and that the non– @xmath is
a finite set. Then the Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is open.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.1.5 , we may assume that @xmath is equidimensional. Now
Theorem 4.1.8 implies that @xmath non– @xmath is a finite set. In other
words non– @xmath is a Zariski–closed subset of @xmath . ∎

Here is an example of local rings which satisfy the above condition.

###### Example 4.1.10.

Consider a local ring @xmath satisfying Serre’s condition @xmath ,
@xmath , such that @xmath is finite. Then @xmath for @xmath and @xmath ,
by Theorem 1.3.8 Lemma 1.3.11 (ii). Now, @xmath and @xmath , by Theorem
1.3.9 (ii). Thus non– @xmath is a finite set.

By Remark 4.1.7 , for a local ring @xmath , if all formal fibres of
@xmath are Cohen-Macaulay, then the Cohen-Macaulay locus of each
finitely generated @xmath –module is open and in Corollary 4.1.9 , we
have seen that the same statement holds if @xmath is a catenary local
ring and that the non– @xmath is a finite set. The following examples,
show that these two conditions are significant.

Example 4.1.11 gives a local ring @xmath with Cohen-Macaulay formal
fibres for which the set non– @xmath is infinite. Example 4.1.12
presents a local ring @xmath which admits a non–Cohen-Macaulay formal
fibre with finite non– @xmath .

###### Example 4.1.11.

Set @xmath , where @xmath is a field. It is clear that @xmath is a local
ring with Cohen-Macaulay formal fibres. By Ratliff’s weak existence
theorem [ 24 , Theorem 31.2] , there are infinitely many prime ideals
@xmath of @xmath , with @xmath . For any such prime ideal @xmath ,
@xmath is not equidimensional and so it is not Cohen-Macaulay. In other
words, non– @xmath is infinite.

###### Example 4.1.12.

It is shown in [ 13 , Proposition 3.3] that there exists a local
integral domain @xmath of dimension 2 such that @xmath , where @xmath is
the field of complex numbers and @xmath for some @xmath . As @xmath ,
@xmath does not satisfy @xmath . Thus @xmath while @xmath , by Theorem
1.3.8 . Now Lemma 2.1.5 implies that there exists a formal fibre of
@xmath which is not Cohen-Macaulay. As @xmath is an integral local
domain, we have non– @xmath .

### 4.2 Rings whose formal fibres are Cohen-Macaulay

It is shown in Corollary 4.1.4 that if all formal fibres of @xmath are
Cohen-Macaulay, then the Cohen-Macaulay locus of any finitely generated
@xmath –module @xmath is a Zariski–open subset of @xmath . This result
motivates us to determine rings whose formal fibres are Cohen-Macaulay.
More precisely, we study the affect of certain formal fibres being
Cohen-Macaulay on the structure of a module.

Throughout this section @xmath is a local ring and @xmath is a finitely
generated @xmath –module of dimension @xmath .

We begin with the following result which is the heart of the proof of
our main result Theorem 4.2.2

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

Assume that @xmath is a prime ideal of @xmath such that @xmath has a
uniform local cohomological annihilator. Then the formal fibre of @xmath
over @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

It is well known that @xmath , where @xmath is the image of @xmath in
@xmath . Therefore we want to show that @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay for all
@xmath with @xmath . It is enough to show that @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay
@xmath –module. Since @xmath has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator, @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator which,
in particular, implies that @xmath is equidimensional by Proposition
2.2.2 . Assume, contrarily, @xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay. We may assume
that @xmath and that @xmath . In other words, @xmath and @xmath .

Let us replace @xmath and @xmath in Lemma 4.1.6 by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Note that @xmath is equidimensional for all @xmath , so
that @xmath is finite by Proposition 2.3.2 and thus @xmath is finite.
Therefore @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator as @xmath
–module for all @xmath with @xmath by Theorem 2.2.13 . As @xmath is
equidimensional, we can apply Lemma 3.3.3 to deduce that @xmath is g.CM
as @xmath –module. In particular, @xmath is a non–zero @xmath –module of
finite length for some @xmath for which we get @xmath . Now, the weak
general shifted localization principle (Theorem 1.2.7 ) implies that
@xmath for some @xmath which gives @xmath . This contradicts with Lemma
2.2.7 . ∎

The above proposition enables us to give a characterization of a
finitely generated module which admits a uniform local cohomological
annihilator in terms of a certain set of formal fibres of the ground
ring.

###### Theorem 4.2.2.

The following statements are equivalent.

-   @xmath is equidimensional @xmath –module and all formal fibres of
    @xmath over minimal members of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

-   @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator.

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii). By Proposition 2.3.2 , @xmath is finite, which implies
that the Cohen-Macaulay locus of @xmath is open or equivalently @xmath
non- @xmath is a finite set (see Remark 4.1.1 ). Thus Lemma 1.3.10
implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that for an element @xmath , Corollary 2.1.8 implies that @xmath
for some positive integer @xmath and for all @xmath . On the other hand
@xmath , so it is enough to show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Assume contrarily that ( 4.2.2 ) does not hold. Then since @xmath is a
finite set, there is @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath . Note that
@xmath is a faithfully flat ring homomorphism and its fibre ring over
@xmath is @xmath which is Cohen-Macaulay by our assumption. Therefore,
by Corollary 4.1.3 , @xmath is not Cohen-Macaulay. This contradicts with
the fact that @xmath .

(ii) @xmath (i). As @xmath has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator, @xmath is equidimensional and @xmath has uniform local
cohomological annihilator for all minimal prime @xmath of @xmath , by
Proposition 2.2.4 . Thus the formal fibre over @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay
for @xmath by Proposition 4.2.1 . ∎

The following result shows that if all formal fibres of a ring @xmath
are Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath is universally catenary if and only if
@xmath is finite for all @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.2.3.

The following statements are equivalent.

-   @xmath is universally catenary ring and all of its formal fibres are
    Cohen-Macaulay.

-    The Cousin complex @xmath is finite for all @xmath .

-   @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator for all @xmath
    .

###### Proof.

(i) @xmath (ii) is clear by Proposition 2.3.2 .

(ii) @xmath (iii) is clear by Theorem 2.2.13 .

(iii) @xmath (i). By Corollary 2.2.6 , @xmath is universally catenary
for all primes @xmath and so is @xmath . The rest is clear by
Proposition 4.2.1 .

∎

As we have seen in Lemma 2.2.8 , non– @xmath . Our final goal is to
investigate that when the equality holds. In 1982, Schenzel proved that
the equality holds when @xmath is equidimensional and @xmath posses a
dualizing complex [ 27 , p. 52] . Recall that if a local @xmath posses a
dualizing complex then it is a homomorphic image of a Gorenstein local
ring by [ 19 , Theorem 6.1] and so @xmath is universally catenary and
all formal fibres of @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay. Hence @xmath is finite
for all equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath by Corollary 2.1.6 and
Lemma 2.2.10 .

In the following, we see that non– @xmath whenever @xmath is finite.

###### Corollary 4.2.4.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module of dimension
@xmath and that @xmath is finite. Then

@xmath non – @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first equality is in Remark 4.1.1 . The second inequality is clear
by Lemma 2.2.8 and Corollary 2.1.8 . ∎

As we have seen in Proposition 4.2.1 , if @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator, then the formal fibre of @xmath over @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay. So to find the Cohen-Macaulay formal fibres, it is
useful to study those prime ideals @xmath such that @xmath has a uniform
local cohomological annihilator. Characterizing these ideals enables
also us to characterize those modules @xmath with non– @xmath (see also
Corollary 4.2.3 ).

###### Proposition 4.2.5.

Assume that @xmath . A necessary and sufficient condition for @xmath to
have a uniform local cohomological annihilator is that there exists an
equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

The necessary condition is clear by taking @xmath . For the converse,
assume that there is an equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath such that
@xmath . We prove the claim by induction on @xmath . When @xmath , we
have @xmath . Choose a submodule @xmath of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
. It is clear that @xmath so that @xmath for some @xmath . On the other
hand the fact that @xmath implies that there is @xmath such that @xmath
for all @xmath . The exact sequence @xmath implies @xmath for all @xmath
. As @xmath , @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator by
Proposition 2.2.4 .

Now assume that @xmath . For any @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath so
that @xmath has a uniform local annihilator by induction hypothesis. As
@xmath , @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, by Corollary 4.2.4 . Choose a
submodule @xmath of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath then there
is @xmath with @xmath . Therefore @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, so is @xmath which gives @xmath , which is a
contradiction. Hence we have @xmath which yields @xmath for some @xmath
and so, by applying local cohomology to the exact sequence @xmath , it
follows that @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath ,
there is @xmath which is non–zero–divisor on @xmath . The exact sequence
@xmath implies that @xmath which implies that @xmath . As @xmath ,
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator by the induction
hypothesis. ∎

As our first application of the above proposition, we have the following
result.

###### Corollary 4.2.6.

Assume that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath –module which
satisfies the condition @xmath . If @xmath is finite, then the formal
fibres of @xmath over all prime ideals @xmath with @xmath are
Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath with @xmath . Note that @xmath non- @xmath by Corollary 4.2.4
. On the other hand @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, so that the result follows
by Proposition 4.2.5 . ∎

Now we may show that if @xmath is finite, then the formal fibres of
@xmath over some certain prime ideals are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Corollary 4.2.7.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Then the formal fibres of @xmath over all
prime ideals @xmath with @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

By Corollary 2.1.3 , there exists a finitely generated @xmath –module
@xmath which satisfies @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is finite. Now the
result follows by Corollary 4.2.6 . ∎

In Corollary 4.2.4 , it is shown that, for a finitely generated @xmath
–module @xmath , non– @xmath whenever @xmath is finite. In the following
we characterize those modules @xmath satisfying non– @xmath without
assuming that the Cousin complex of @xmath to be finite.

###### Theorem 4.2.8.

For an equidimensional @xmath –module @xmath , the following statements
are equivalent.

-   @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator for all @xmath
    .

-   @xmath is equidimensional @xmath –module and the formal fibre ring
    @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay for all @xmath .

-   non – @xmath .

-   non – @xmath .

###### Proof.

The equivalence of (i) and (i @xmath ) is the subject of Theorem 4.2.2 .

(i) @xmath (ii). The inclusion non- @xmath is clear by Lemma 2.2.8 .

Now assume that @xmath . Thus there is an integer @xmath , @xmath , such
that @xmath . There is @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . To show @xmath
non– @xmath it is enough to show that @xmath non– @xmath . Assuming
contrarily, @xmath , @xmath has a uniform local cohomological
annihilator by our assumption and so the formal fibre @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, by Theorem 4.2.2 . As the map @xmath is faithfully flat
ring homomorphism, we find that @xmath is also Cohen-Macaulay. Therefore
the standard dimension and depth formulas (Lemma 4.1.2 ), applied to the
faithfully flat extension @xmath , implies that @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay. On the other hand, @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator for all @xmath (simply because in this case
@xmath has zero dimension and so @xmath ). Thus, by Proposition 2.2.4 ,
@xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator and so does @xmath
. Therefore, by Proposition 2.2.2 @xmath is equidimensional. Thus
Corollary 2.1.6 implies that the Cousin complex @xmath is finite. As
@xmath , we have, by Corollary 4.2.4 , @xmath non– @xmath . This is a
contradiction.

(iii) @xmath (i). Assume that @xmath so that @xmath by our assumption.
Now Proposition 4.2.5 implies that @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator. ∎

Our last result in this section is a consequence of the above theorem,
which improves Corollary 4.2.7 to a generalization of the fact that, all
formal fibres of a Cohen-Macaulay ring are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Corollary 4.2.9.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Then the formal fibres of @xmath over all
prime ideals @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

By Corollary 4.2.7 all formal fibres of @xmath over prime ideals @xmath
with @xmath , are Cohen-Macaulay. On the other hand non– @xmath by
Corollary 4.2.4 . Now, Theorem 4.2.8 completes the proof.∎

### 4.3 Some comments

Throughout this section @xmath is a local ring. As we have seen in
Corollary 2.3.1 , if @xmath is finite, then @xmath is equidimensional
and @xmath is universally catenary. On the other hand, Proposition 2.3.2
shows that, if all formal fibres of a universally catenary local ring
@xmath are Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath is finite for all equidimensional
@xmath –module @xmath . These results lead us to the following natural
question.

###### Question 4.3.1.

Assume that @xmath is finite. Are the formal fibres of @xmath over all
prime ideals @xmath , Cohen-Macaulay?

Corollary 4.2.7 shows that if @xmath is finite, then the formal fibres
of @xmath over all prime ideals @xmath with @xmath , are Cohen-Macaulay.
As a consequence we may have a positive answer for the above question in
the following special case.

###### Corollary 4.3.2.

Assume that @xmath is finite and @xmath . Then the formal fibres of
@xmath over all prime ideals @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . If @xmath , then the formal fibre over @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay by Corollary 4.2.7 . Now assume that @xmath . Thus @xmath
and so @xmath has a uniform local cohomological annihilator. Hence the
formal fibre over @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by Proposition 4.2.1 . ∎

In Corollary 4.2.9 , we have seen that if @xmath is finite, then the
formal fibres of @xmath over all prime ideals @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.
Thus we have the following result in which,

@xmath non– @xmath non– @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.3.3.

Assume that @xmath is finite and @xmath (non – @xmath . Then the formal
fibres of @xmath over all prime ideals @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, the formal fibre of @xmath
over @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by Corollary 4.2.9 . Now, assume that
@xmath non– @xmath . Thus @xmath and so that @xmath has a uniform local
cohomological annihilator. Hence the formal fibre over @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay by Proposition 4.2.1 . ∎

One way of dealing Question 4.3.1 , is to find a reduction technique
e.g. for dimension of the module. In this connection, we propose the
following.

###### Problem 4.3.4.

Assume that @xmath is finite and @xmath is a non–zero–divisor on @xmath
. Then @xmath is finite.

Assume that @xmath is finite and @xmath . Consider the submodule @xmath
of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath (c.f. [ 1 , Page 263, Proposition 4] ).
As in the exact sequence @xmath we have @xmath for all @xmath , Lemma
2.1.1 (b) implies that @xmath is finite. Note that @xmath and so @xmath
. Since @xmath , @xmath contains a non–zero–divisor @xmath on @xmath .
If we have positive answer for the above problem, the Cousin complex
@xmath is finite. Now by an induction argument on @xmath and using
Corollary 4.3.2 one finds that the formal fibre of @xmath over @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay.

Note that if @xmath is finite, then @xmath is equidimensional and @xmath
is universally catenary by Corollary 2.3.1 and so @xmath is
equidimensional. Now, if the formal fibres over all @xmath are
Cohen-Macaulay, then Proposition 2.3.2 follows that @xmath is finite.
Hence solving Problem 4.3.4 is equivalent to find an answer for Question
4.3.1 .