# Chapter 1 Introduction

Microquasars and Active Galactic Nuclei, despite decades of research,
are still not sufficiently understood. The basic theory of accretion
disks gives us insight into physics involved in the process of accretion
but is unable to explain the observed characteristic and time evolution
of real accretion disks. Our understanding of the source of viscosity,
spectral states, quasi-periodical oscillations, jets etc. is still far
from satisfactory. New ideas and models are necessary to better
understand one of the most powerful objects in the Universe.

### 1.1 Origins of black hole physics

As early as in the end of 18th century John Michell ¹ ¹ 1 “If the
semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed
that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an
infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater
velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be
attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae (inertial
mass), with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be
made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.” ( Michell , 1784 )
and Laplace noted that according to the Newton’s theory of gravity and
the corpuscular theory of light an object so massive and compact that
even single photon is not able to escape to infinity may exist. However,
this reasoning found only few supporters.

In the early 1910’s the general theory of relativity was established
when Albert Einstein published a series of papers on gravitational field
( Einstein , 1915 ) . These works were followed in a short time by Karl
Schwarzschild’s solution of Einstein’s equations in the vicinity of a
spherically symmetric mass ( Schwarzschild , 1916 ) . Both scientists
appreciated this discovery but at that time they were not aware of the
fact that it is the complete solution for spacetime surrounding a
non-rotating, uncharged black hole (BH).

In 1930’s Chandrasekhar discovered an upper mass limit for spherical
stars built from degenerate matter ( Chandrasekhar , 1931 ) . A few
years later Baade & Zwicky ( 1934 ) proposed that supernovae represent
the transition of normal stars to neutron stars - compact objects
supported by the pressure of degenerate neutrons. This discovery was
followed by Eddington’s remark that existence of the Chandrasekhar limit
inevitably leads to a collapse of a sufficiently massive object to a BH
( Eddington , 1935 ) . However, he considered such objects unlikely and
tried to modify the degenerate equation of state to obtain stable,
non-collapsed, solutions for any mass of a star. Such an approach was
common among astronomers at that time.

Oppenheimer & Snyder ( 1939 ) considered the collapse of a uniform,
pressureless sphere of gas in the framework of the general theory of
relativity. They analytically proved that an object resulting from the
collapse is, at its particular stage, cut off from information exchange
with the surroundings. For the first time an astrophysical process
leading to the creation of a BH was proposed.

Due to the lack of further research BHs remained outside the interest of
most physicists until 1960’s when Kerr ( 1963 ) solved Einstein’s
equations in the vicinity of a rotating, uncharged compact object. This
solution was generalized by Newman et al. ( 1965 ) to charged objects.
Today we know that the Kerr-Newman geometry perfectly describes the
gravitational and electromagnetic fields of a stationary, solitary BHs.
However, the importance of these discoveries were appreciated only a
dozen or so years later.

Since that time a large number of papers devoted to different aspects of
the BH theory have been published. The research was motivated by new
discoveries: quasars ( Schmidt , 1963 ) , pulsars ( Hewish et al. , 1968
) and X-ray binaries ( Oda et al. , 1971 ) . The observations of the
Cygnus X-1 microquasar became first evidence for the existence of BHs in
the Universe.

### 1.2 Black holes in the Universe

Astrophysical BHs originate mainly through the process of a
gravitational collapse. It takes place when the gravity force acting on
a massive object is not balanced by other forces e.g., gas or radiation
pressure. Gravitational collapse has been common in the Universe. Such a
process led to the creation of separated clouds of matter after the Big
Bang, which later transformed into clusters of galaxies and ultimately
into galaxies, stellar clusters, clusters and planets.

Gravitational collapse is especially important in the stellar evolution.
Protostellar clouds of matter collapse leading to the increase of the
pressure and temperature, and, as a result, to the ignition of the
nucleosynthesis in their centers. Stars collapse also in the end of
their evolution once their internal sources of energy have run out. If
the core contraction is stopped by the pressure of degenerate electrons,
a white dwarf originates. This scenario is possible only for low mass
stars. If the Zero Age Main Sequence (ZAMS) mass of a star exceeds
@xmath then the core exceeds the maximal mass of a white dwarf ( @xmath
, the Chandrasekhar mass) and continues its collapse. Only the pressure
of degenerate neutrons can stop this process leading to a neutron star
remnant. However, the cores of most massive stars ( @xmath ) exceed the
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff mass ( Oppenheimer & Volkov , 1939 ) and even
degenerated neutrons are not able to prevent further collapse. Such an
objects continues its contraction and, once it has fallen inside its own
event horizon, becomes a BH.

The scenario described in the previous paragraph leads to the creation
of stellar-mass BHs. The resulting mass of the remnant depends mostly on
the initial (ZAMS) mass of a star and its metallicity. According to the
current evolutionary models (e.g., Hurley et al. ( 2002 ) ), masses of
BHs resulting from evolution of single stars in the Galaxy range between
@xmath and @xmath depending on the initial stellar mass. In
low-metallicity environments, e.g., globular clusters, their masses may
be much higher, reaching @xmath , due to decreased efficiency of stellar
winds.

During the supernova explosion, BHs resulting from the stellar evolution
may remain in binary systems if the remnant does not obtain a kick
sufficiently strong to disrupt a binary system or if the BH originates
as a result of a direct collapse of the star. If the binary is close
enough, the BH companion may fill its Roche lobe and start transferring
mass onto the compact object. It may also happen that the companion’s
envelope embraces the BH. During such an event, called the common
envelope, the system circularizes or, if there is not enough orbital
energy to eject the envelope, merges giving rise to a more massive
single BH or a Thorne-Zytkow object ( Thorne & Zytkow , 1977 ) .

As it will be pointed out in detail in this thesis, matter falling onto
a compact object loses its angular momentum in an accretion disk and
emits radiation. In case of stellar mass BHs this emission falls into
X-rays and is amenable to observations by X-ray satellites (e.g.,
XMM-Newton or RXTE). Detailed observations of light curves, together
with spectroscopic research, provided estimates of BH masses in a number
of systems (Table 1.1 ). In case of these objects, the lower mass
estimates are higher than @xmath , which makes them likely BH
candidates. So far, these objects have been the only galactic BHs known.

BHs of masses exceeding @xmath are called supermassive and form another
class of astrophysical BHs. They are observed indirectly in nuclei of
many galaxies, in particular in the center of the Milky Way. It is
assumed that the evolution of most, if not all, galaxies leads to the
creation of a very massive BH in their nuclei.

The existence of supermassive BHs in active galactic nuclei (AGN) is
supported by observations of visual/UV spectra of accretion disks which
may be explained only under the assumption that they surround
supermassive compact objects. In case of other than AGN types of
galaxies we base on the Doppler measurements of water masers movement in
the vicinity of nuclei. Their velocities reflect the existence of
massive, dark objects in nuclei of galaxies. According to our knowledge,
only BHs are compatible with provided characteristics. Finally, the
observed orbital motion of stars in the vicinity of the Milky Way center
(Sgr A*) suggests the supermassive BH of mass @xmath ( Doeleman et al. ,
2008 ) .

BHs of masses of the order of hundreds or thousands of solar masses form
one more, so far only hypothetical, class of astrophysical compact
objects - intermediate mass BHs. Observed Ultra-luminous X-ray Sources
(ULXs) in nearby galaxies seem to suggest that BHs of such masses exist.
However, the observed high luminosities may be explained by different
processes e.g., by super-critical accretion onto stellar mass BHs.
Doppler measurements of the velocities of objects gravitationally bound
to intermediate mass BHs would provide evidence for their existence.
However, so far no such observation has been obtained. It is also not
clear how intermediate mass BHs would originate. They are too massive to
result from the evolution of a single star of Population I or II. The
regions where they are found differ significantly from galactic nuclei
so the processes giving rise to supermassive BHs cannot be involved.
Intermediate mass BHs could be a product of hierarchical mergers of
massive, unevolved stars into very massive objects collapsing into a BH.

There is one more class of BHs that still remains hypothetical — mini
BHs, with masses smaller than any BH resulting from a stellar collapse.
It is possible that such quantum primordial BHs were created in the
high-density environment of the early Universe (or big bang), or
possibly through subsequent phase transitions. They are expected to emit
weak Hawking radiation, but direct detection of them will be impossible
in the nearest future.

### 1.3 Accretion onto compact objects

In astrophysics the term accretion is used to describe the process of
acquiring matter, typically gaseous, by a massive body. As a result of
the infall, the gravitational energy is extracted. Its amount is roughly
proportional to the ratio of the mass and radius of the attracting
object: @xmath . It is clear that the more massive and compact the
object is, the larger amount of energy may be released. Accretion onto
compact objects (BHs, neutron stars or white dwarfs) is therefore an
extremely important process in the astrophysical context, as it
transforms the gravitational energy into radiation in many of the most
luminous classes of objects in the Universe.

The spherically symmetric (zero angular momentum) accretion on a
gravitating body is the simplest case one can imagine. It was first
studied by Bondi ( 1952 ) and is called the Bondi accretion . It was
shown that the solution describing such a process is unique and that the
flow becomes transonic crossing the critical (sonic) radius. It is
currently accepted that Bondi-type of accretion hardly occurs in the
Universe because all potential sources of accreting matter (e.g., gas
clouds or stars) have non-zero angular momentum.

As an example let us consider a molecular cloud collapsing under the
gravity of the central compact object. As it becomes denser, the random
gas motions that were originally present in the cloud, average out in
favor of the direction of the nebula’s net angular momentum.
Conservation of angular momentum causes the angular velocities to
increase as the nebula becomes smaller. This rotation causes the cloud
to flatten out and take the form of a disk.

Formation of a disk is required to support the accretion rate. A free
particle with a given angular momentum will rotate around the central
object in an eccentric orbit. As long as angular momentum is conserved,
the test particle will not fall onto the gravitating body nor release
its potential energy. In such a case there is no accretion and no energy
is released. To support the accretion and form a luminous accretion disk
the angular momentum must be transported outward enabling particles to
flow inward. Such a process occurs due to the action of viscous torques
within the disk. It may be shown that laminar viscosity cannot provide
sufficiently high magnitude of torque which would lead to the observed
disk luminosities. Turbulent motions are required to explain the angular
momentum transport in accretion disks. The exact mechanism leading to
turbulence is discussed in Section 2.2 .

Accretion disks appear in many astrophysical objects. Protostellar
clouds of molecular gas create protoplanetary disks surrounding newly
formed stars. Stars in close compact binary systems transfer mass
through accretion disks when they fill their Roche lobe or due to strong
stellar winds. Supermassive BHs in AGNs are believed to accrete cold
matter from their vicinity. According to the collapsar model, short
@xmath -ray bursts accrete the ejecta at super-critical rates shortly
after the outbursts. Other examples of accretion disks in the Universe
may also be given. Accretion appears to be involved in most of the
high-luminosity phenomena in the Universe.

### 1.4 Spectral states

The timescale for propagation of matter in accretion disks (the drift
timescale) is much longer for disks around supermassive BHs than for
disks in microquasars. For the latter, the changing mass supply from the
companion may cause variability on the timescale of days. All of the
observed microquasars exhibit this kind of variability proving that the
process of accretion is not, in general, stationary. In the top panel of
Fig. 1.1 we present, after Dunn et al. ( 2008 ) , light curves in the
hard and soft bands of microquasar GX 339-4 during the period March 2002
— July 2003. Both fluxes vary over a few orders of magnitude. They are,
however, anticorrelated which means that the shape of the spectrum has
to change significantly. The bottom panel presents luminosity vs
hardness ratio. The microquasar exhibits the behavior typical for all
objects of this kind: a given cycle starts with a hard spectrum of low
luminosity (bottom right corner) which is followed by rapid increase of
luminosity and softening of the spectrum leading to quasi-stationary
state characterized by soft spectrum and high luminosity (top left).
Close to the end of the cycle, the microquasar decreases its luminosity
preserving, however, soft spectrum (left branch). Finally, the spectrum
hardens again, but this time the change of hardness takes place at lower
luminosity than during the beginning of the cycle.

Two dominant spectral states can be distinguished: high/soft (soft
spectrum and high luminosity) and low/hard (hard spectrum, low
luminosity). Fig. 1.2 presents schematic pictures of the spectral energy
distributions corresponding to these states on left and right panels,
respectively. During the high/soft state the spectrum is dominated by
the soft component which may be well modeled by superposition of black
body radiation with different effective temperatures and magnitudes
(multicolor black body) which corresponds to the emission predicted for
an accretion disk (see e.g., Eq. 3.18 ). The high energy tail comes most
probably from photons up-scattered by hot electrons above the disk. The
low/hard state is, on the contrary, dominated by the hard component,
while the disk radiation contribute only to small fraction of the total
emitted energy.

The disk structure behind the high/soft state is relatively easy to
resolve — the spectrum can be explained by an optically thick accretion
disk extending down to the BH horizon, which emits the
viscosity-generated heat as multicolor black body radiation. The
low/hard state, on the contrary, requires much more complicated disk
structure. To obtain the observed relation between the hard and soft
components one has to assume that the standard, optically thick
accretion disk terminates far away from the BH, at radii of the order of
hundreds of the gravitational radius. Inside this transition radius the
flow has to be radiatively inefficient and hot so that it can up-scatter
photons originating in the outer disk regions.

A self-consistent model explaining the characteristic features of the
low/hard spectral state has not been developed yet. The transition from
the optically thick to thin disk may be a result of disk evaporation due
to conductive heating from the corona (e.g., Meyer et al. ( 2000 ) ).
The high/soft state, on the contrary, is well understood and consistent
models of the underlying optically thick disks have been in use for many
years. In this dissertation we address this state of accretion disks
only.

## Chapter 2 Accretion disk theory

### 2.1 Conservation laws

The flow of matter accreting onto a compact object through an accretion
disk may be described by the equations of hydro- (or, more general,
magnetohydro-) dynamics as the typical mean free path of collisions of
microscopic particles in such medium is much shorter than the
characteristic macroscopic length of the disk (e.g., its thickness).

The first fundamental equation describing fluid dynamics is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the hydrodynamical stress-energy tensor has the general form ¹ ¹ 1
In the case of magnetohydrodynamics, when the viscosity results directly
from magnetorotational instability, as discussed in Section 2.2.2 , the
stress-energy tensor is,

@xmath (2.2)

The contravariant fluid-frame magnetic field is given by @xmath , and is
related to the lab-frame three-field @xmath by,

@xmath (2.3)

where @xmath is a projection tensor. Throughout this dissertation we use
the @xmath signature. ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the matter four-velocity, @xmath is the total pressure,
@xmath is gas internal energy, @xmath is the Kronecker delta, @xmath is
the radiative energy flux and the viscous stress tensor @xmath is given
by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath is the kinematic viscosity coefficient and @xmath is the shear
tensor of the velocity field).

The second fundamental equation is that of the conservation of the
baryonic number of particles,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gas density.

These general equations of hydrodynamics are used to construct all
relativistic, hydrodynamical models of accretion disks. In Appendix B we
give a detailed derivation of the non-stationary equations describing
advective, optically thick, vertically-integrated, @xmath -disks. In
this section we introduce and discuss, basing mostly on Kato et al. (
2008 ) , the equations governing the stationary, axisymmetric accretion
flow in the non-relativistic limit.

Under this approximation the fluid dynamics is described by the
Navier-Stokes equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fluid velocity, @xmath is the gravitational
potential and @xmath is the viscous stress tensor.

The surface layers of accretion disks usually do not extend far from the
equatorial plane. It is therefore possible to use the cylindrical system
of coordinates ( @xmath ). The equation of continuity takes the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We neglect both time and azimuthal derivatives and, following the common
approach, we integrate this equation vertically between the disk
vertical boundaries at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the density @xmath is very low at the disk boundary, the second is
negligible. Therefore, we may write,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the surface density and density-weighted radial velocity,
respectively. Finally, integrating Eq. 2.12 we may introduce the
integration constant @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the accretion rate of gas. This equation describes the
conservation of mass.

Taking the @xmath component of Eq. 2.8 we get, under the same
assumptions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is angular velocity of the fluid and @xmath is the only
non-negligible component of the viscous stress tensor. Introducing the
angular momentum per unit mass @xmath and integrating over @xmath and
@xmath we obtain the angular momentum conservation law:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have assumed that there is no torque at the inner boundary (i.e., BH
horizon) so that the integration constant @xmath can be interpreted as
the angular momentum of the matter at the inner edge. Eq. 2.17 reflects
the conservation of angular momentum which is transported outward by
viscous stresses.

Energy is another conserved quantity. Three mechanisms of
heating/cooling are involved for advective accretion disks: viscosity,
advection and radiation. The energy balance may be formulated in the
following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reflects the fact that the heating or cooling rate by advection (
@xmath ) must be equal to the difference between the amount of heat
generated by viscosity ( @xmath ) and the radiative cooling rate (
@xmath ).

### 2.2 Source of viscosity

The angular momentum in accretion disks is transported by viscosity. In
this section we will discuss this process in general, describe the
@xmath formalism and discuss the magnetorotational instability which is
considered the most likely source of turbulence in disks.

Let us consider parallel shear flow (left panel of Fig. 2.1 ). As the
upper layer moves with greater velocity the momentum transfer occurs
from the top to bottom. As a result the upper layer will be decelerated
while the bottom accelerated. Viscosity tends to reduce shear and
produce uniform layers.

The viscous force exerted in the horizontal ( @xmath ) direction on the
unit surface of the interface plane is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normal to the interface, @xmath is the coefficient
of dynamical viscosity and @xmath is the velocity gradient.

In the case of accretion disks we do not deal with parallel layers.
Instead, we have differentially rotating annuli (right panel of Fig. 2.1
). The rotational velocity increases in Keplerian flows inward.
Therefore, the viscosity will transfer angular momentum from the inner
annulus to the outer. In such a way, matter loses angular momentum and
moves inward. If the disk was cut off at a certain outer radius and no
external force acted on the disk, the outermost annuli would receive all
the transported angular momentum and move outward to infinity.

The viscous force per unit area exerted in the azimuthal direction of
the interface plane between differentially rotating annuli is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.1 @xmath prescription

In 1970s the understanding of viscous processes which take place in
accretion disks was very poor. Nevertheless, Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 )
proposed an extremely elegant and plausible formalism which has been
used effectively for many years, making progress in accretion disk
theory possible. They assumed correctly that the source of viscosity in
accretion disk is connected in some way to turbulence in gas-dynamical
flow. The nature of this turbulent motion was not known at that time.
They assumed a simple expression for kinematic viscosity coefficient:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath stand for typical turbulent motion velocity and
length scale, respectively. Assuming that the velocity of turbulent
elements cannot exceed the speed of sound @xmath and their typical size
cannot be larger that the disk thickness @xmath one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the vertical equilibrium condition (Eq. 3.13 ), this expression
may be put in the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stress is given by Eq. 2.20 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking Eq. 2.23 into account one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, a non-dimensional viscosity parameter @xmath satisfying the
condition @xmath , may be introduced:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression for viscosity, proposed for the first time by Shakura &
Sunyaev ( 1973 ) , is called the @xmath or the @xmath prescription and
has been widely used for many years in accretion disk theory. The most
modern magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) simulations (e.g., Hirose et al. (
2009b ) ) support application of the @xmath formalism to mean accretion
flow dynamics.

#### 2.2.2 Magnetorotational instability

For almost twenty years the source of the turbulent motion responsible
for viscosity in accretion disks remained unknown. Only in 1991 Balbus &
Hawley ( 1991 ) identified the process which might lead to turbulent
motion in accretion disks. They noted that in astrophysical disks a
magnetorotational instability (MRI) may set in, amplifying the initial
weak magnetic field and leading to the required angular momentum
transport. Since that time a number of numerical methods have been
developed to verify this possibility. They gave positive results and
therefore magnetorotational instability is currently thought to be the
most likely explanation of turbulent motion in accretion disks. However,
it was suggested by Umurhan et al. ( 2007 ) on the basis of perturbative
weakly nonlinear analysis that the transport due to the nonlinearly
developed MRI may be very small in experimental setups with the Prandtl
number @xmath . Several authors studied an alternative picture of
turbulence arousal in non-magnetized astrophysical disks, related to
their non-axisymmetric hydrodynamical disturbances, which can, in
principle, precipitate secondary instabilities ( Rebusco et al. , 2009 )
.

MRI was first noticed by Velikhov ( 1959 ) who studied stability of an
ideally conducting liquid flowing between cylinders rotating in a
magnetic field. His results were generalized by Chandrasekhar ( 1960 ) .
Only in 1990’s astrophysicists realized its paramount importance for
triggering accretion in astrophysical objects.

The general idea of MRI may be illustrated in the following way. Let us
consider a disk of fluid rotating with Keplerian angular velocities in a
weak axially symmetric magnetic field. The magnetic tension acting on
two fluid elements may be imagined as a spring connecting them. As the
inner element orbits with higher angular velocity than the outer one,
the spring stretches. In such a way the magnetic tension slows down the
inner element and forces the other one to speed up. As a result, the
inner loses its angular momentum while the angular momentum of the outer
element increases moving the elements apart. In this way the angular
momentum is transported outward making accretion possible. The crucial
condition for arising of MRI is that the angular velocity of a
magnetized fluid decreases with radius:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied in the astrophysical context, e.g., for the Keplerian
profile of rotation.

Most of research devoted to MRI is based on numerical simulations
solving the equations of magnetohydrodynamics. They may be solved either
globally in three-dimensions (e.g., Penna et al. ( 2010 ) ) or locally
in the shearing-box approximation (e.g., Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) ). So
far, the radiative transfer has been neglected as it immensely increases
the required computational power. Instead, different, purely numerical,
methods of cooling are assumed. Only recently, first MHD simulations
accounting for radiation, however axially symmetric, were performed (
Ohsuga et al. , 2009 ) .

The crucial question from the point of view of hydrodynamical @xmath
models of accretion disks is whether the assumption made by Shakura &
Sunyaev remains valid facing the MHD physics. Fig. 2.2 shows
time-dependence of the value of @xmath (defined as the ratio of the
box-integrated stress to the different box-integrated pressure
quantities) for various stress prescriptions for simulation 1112a from
Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) . The short-time variability reflects the
fluctuations in the @xmath stress component. The total (gas plus
radiation) case has the least variation of the @xmath profile (by a
factor of 4), while the largest (by a factor of 10) is for the gas
pressure only case. Therefore, the stress component never follows the
pressure precisely, but one may say that the @xmath prescription (with
@xmath being the total pressure) quite well describes the mean dynamics
of the flow.

### 2.3 Efficiency of accretion

Let us consider the energetic balance of the accreted fluid between two
radii: @xmath and @xmath . The amount of generated energy (luminosity)
between these two radii can be estimated from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the torque at a given radius, @xmath is the outward
energy transport due to viscosity and @xmath is the specific energy. If
the disk extends to large radii, we may put @xmath and @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ratio of the viscous torque to the advective flux of
angular momentum (see Figs. 4.18 and 4.19 ).

If the torque at the inner edge of the disk is negligible ( @xmath ),
the efficiency of accretion @xmath depends mainly on the specific energy
at the inner edge, @xmath , given by ² ² 2 Throughout this dissertation
we use the geometrical ( @xmath ) units. In these units mass is measured
in meters, @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming @xmath we get,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The farther away the inner edge from the innermost stable circular orbit
³ ³ 3 The innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO) is often called the
marginally stable orbit. (ISCO, Appendix A.3 ) is (and the closer to the
BH), the smaller the efficiency.

For accretion disks terminating at ISCO, we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 2.3 presents the dependence of the efficiency of accretion on the
BH spin parameter @xmath . For non-rotating BHs it equals @xmath . The
efficiency rapidly increases for BH spin values close to unity — even
small difference in angular momentum (e.g., @xmath vs @xmath ) implies
significant difference in the efficiency of extracting gravitational
energy from the flow.

## Chapter 3 Classical models of accretion disks

Figure 3.1 shows the locations of analytic and semi-analytic models of
hydrodynamical accretion disks ¹ ¹ 1 For detailed reviews of these
solutions see, http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Accretion_discs or
Kato et al. ( 2008 ) . , in the parameter space described by the
vertical optical depth @xmath , dimensionless vertical thickness and
dimensionless accretion rate @xmath (defined in Eq. 4.35 ). In the
following sections we describe in detail Polish doughnuts and
radiatively efficient disks ( Shakura & Sunyaev , 1973 ; Novikov &
Thorne , 1973 ) . Slim disks are introduced and discussed in Chapters 4
— 8 .

### 3.1 Polish doughnuts

One of the simplest and most useful models of geometrically thick
accretion disks may be obtained adopting the following assumptions (
Abramowicz et al. , 1978 ) : the matter is distributed uniformly and
axisymmetrically, it orbits the BH along circular trajectories with
given angular momentum @xmath and the stress energy tensor @xmath is
given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the matter four-velocity, @xmath the total pressure,
@xmath the total energy density and @xmath is the Kronecker delta.

The four velocity of a particle on a circular orbit has the following
form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Killing vectors associated with the time
and axis symmetry, respectively (Appendix A.1 ) and @xmath is the
angular velocity. The normalization constant @xmath comes from the
@xmath condition,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the general equation @xmath it follows,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term vanishes as it reflects the conservation of number of
particles. Thus, we have,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The acceleration term may be expressed as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last term vanishes as @xmath . In the above derivation we have used
the Killing equation ( @xmath ). Finally, we get,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

By rewriting the @xmath and @xmath components of this equation and
dividing them side by side we may get the following expression for the
shape of the equipressure surfaces ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Knowing the angular velocity (or the specific angular momentum @xmath )
one can integrate the function given above and obtain the exact profiles
of equipressure surfaces. Qian et al. ( 2009 ) have recently made a
comprehensive study of their shapes. They parametrized the angular
momentum distribution by introducing the following function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the radius of the marginally stable orbit. @xmath
corresponds to the limit of constant (in radius) angular momentum, while
@xmath and @xmath gives the Keplerian profile ( @xmath ) at the
equatorial plane. The vertical distribution of angular momentum depends
on the value of @xmath . Fig. 3.2 presents profiles of the equipressure
surfaces in the Polish doughnut model for a non-rotating BH. Rows
correspond to increasing value of @xmath from @xmath (top) to @xmath
(bottom). Columns show @xmath ( @xmath ) dependence. The upper left
panel shows a “standard“ Polish doughnut. The lower right panel shows an
almost Keplerian disk at the equatorial plane, surrounded by a very low
angular momentum envelope.

Fig. 3.3 presents the comparison of equipressure surfaces profiles with
results of a modern MHD simulation ( Fragile et al. , 2007a , b ) . It
is clear that appropriate choice of parameters describing the analytical
model may reproduce most of the relevant features of the numerical
results, including the locations of the cusp and pressure maximum, as
well as the vertical thickness of the disk. The discrepancy inside the
cusp (the numerical solution maintains constant vertical height while
the analytical equipressure surfaces diverge) is due to significant
radial velocities in this region which are not consistent with the
adopted assumption of circular motion of fluid.

### 3.2 Radiatively efficient, optically thick disks

#### 3.2.1 Shakura & Sunyaev (1973)

When discussing the history of models describing disk accretion onto a
compact object one has to mention the outstanding, milestone work of
Shakura & Sunyaev (1973) . The importance of this work was mainly due to
innovative approach to viscosity which was described in details in
Section 2.2.1 . The authors introduced several assumptions which are
common for most of models describing disk accretion: (1) the companion
star in a close binary has negligible gravitational influence on the
disk; (2) the self-gravitation of the disk is not important; (3) disk is
axisymmetric ( @xmath ) (4) disk is thin ( @xmath ) (5) disk is in
stationary state ( @xmath ), (6) particles move around the compact
object on Keplerian circular orbits and (7) disk is radiatively
efficient (radiative cooling is the only cooling mechanism).

The physics of disk accretion under the assumptions given above is
described by four formulae: conservation of rest-mass and angular
momentum, vertical equilibrium of forces and energy balance. First two
have already been derived in Section 2.1 :

(i) conservation of rest-mass (Eq. 2.15 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for mass accretion rate (which is constant due to
@xmath assumption), @xmath is surface density defined as @xmath and
@xmath is the density-averaged radial velocity of matter.

(ii) transport of angular momentum (Eq. 2.17 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, assuming that there is no torque at the inner edge of the disk,
the integration constant @xmath can be interpreted as the angular
momentum of the matter at the inner edge ( @xmath for the Newtonian
potential), @xmath is the angular momentum and @xmath is the only
non-negligible component of the viscous stress tensor.

(iii) vertical momentum conservation
According to the assumption that the disk is in the stationary state, it
reduces to a simple hydrostatic equilibrium condition. Writing down the
balance of the vertical component of the gravitational force and the
vertical pressure gradient we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the standard approach, we replace the differentials with
finite differences ( @xmath and @xmath ) obtaining the formula for disk
semi-thickness @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sound speed in the midplane of the disk.

For a Newtonian accretion disk, the @xmath component of the viscous
stress tensor is given by (compare Eq. 2.20 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the kinematic viscosity coefficient which has not been
defined yet. It can be shown (e.g., Shapiro & Teukolsky ( 1983 ) ) that
the heat is generated locally by viscosity at the rate:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. 3.11 we can express @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting Eqs. 3.14 and 3.16 into Eq. 3.15 we obtain the total heat
generation rate at radius @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the heat generated by viscosity is immediately radiated
away we get the following expression for the outcoming flux of energy
from one face of the disk (top or bottom):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the energy conservation law in the disk. It is of extreme
importance to note that the expression for the outcoming flux does not
depend on the viscosity prescription which we have not determined yet.
This fact will have major consequences in estimating BH spin basing on
X-ray spectra (see the appropriate section or Shafee et al. ( 2006 ) ).

Let us now precise the treatment of radiation transport. The simplest
thing one can do is to take the diffusive approximation (Section 6.1 )
and replace differentials with finite differences (as we did when
formulating the vertical equilibrium):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Rosseland-mean opacity coefficient and @xmath
denotes the temperature at the equatorial plane. In this thesis we often
use the Kramer’s formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total pressure of mixture of gas and radiation is given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Accretion disks are typically supported by the gas pressure with
exception to the innermost regions where radiation pressure dominates.
The formula given above assumes that the magnetic pressure is
negligible.

To close this set of equations, the @xmath component of the viscous
stress tensor has to be specified. Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) introduced
a non-dimensional viscosity parameter @xmath satisfying the condition
@xmath (Section 2.2.1 ), so that,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression for viscosity is called the @xmath prescription and has
been widely used for many years in accretion disk theory.

The equations given above form a set which can be solved algebraically,
e.g., for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It turns out that an accretion
disk can be divided into three regions: (i) an outer region dominated by
gas pressure and ”free-free“ absorptions, (ii) a middle region in which
gas pressure and electron scatterings dominate and (iii) an inner region
dominated by radiation pressure and electron scatterings (for low enough
accretion rates, the middle and inner regions may not occur). Full
formulae describing accretion disks in all three regimes may be found in
the original work, as well as in, e.g., Kato et al. ( 2008 ) .

The seminal paper by Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) laid the foundations of
the theory of accretion disks. For the first time astrophysicists were
able to investigate their structure. The @xmath prescription, introduced
by the authors, has remained in wide use in astrophysics.

In Fig. 3.4 we present a schematic picture of a radiatively efficient,
geometrically thin accretion disk.

#### 3.2.2 Novikov & Thorne (1973)

The obvious upgrade of the model given by Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) was
to write its equations in full general relativity. It was done a few
months later by Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) . They considered accretion in
the equatorial plane of a BH in the framework of the Kerr spacetime
metric. The authors introduced a convenient formalism of splitting
formulae into Newtonian limits times relativistic corrections. However,
to retain compatibility with other relativistic models we describe in
this paper, we will present Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) disk solutions
using formalism proposed in Abramowicz et al. ( 1996 ) .

Throughout this paragraph we will use the Kerr metric in cylindrical
coordinates close to the equatorial plane (see Appendix A ). We use
geometrical units ( @xmath ) and the following form of the stress-energy
tensor of matter in the disk (compare Eq. 2.4 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the rest mass density, @xmath is the viscous stress
tensor and @xmath is the radiative energy flux. All physical values in
this paragraph, if not stated otherwise, are averaged in the same sense
as in Section 2.1 . We assume that the density of gas internal energy is
much smaller than the density of gravitational binding energy.

The rest mass conservation law requires that the covariant derivative of
the product of rest mass density and four velocity disappears:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integration over @xmath introduces an integration constant which can be
interpreted as the mass accretion rate:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is disk surface density, @xmath , and @xmath is now the
fluid radial velocity as measured in the local rest frame.

The general form of the angular momentum conservation law is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kerr metric Killing vector along @xmath direction
(Appendix A.1 ). After some algebra we derive:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for the specific angular momentum per unit mass for
circular orbit (please note that @xmath is a constant of motion for
perfect fluid) and @xmath is the outcoming flux of energy from one face
of the disk. It can be shown ( Lasota , 1994 ) that the @xmath component
of the stress tensor is related to the comoving @xmath by the following
relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lorentz @xmath factor is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the angular velocity of the Keplerian orbits in the Kerr metric. Let
us denote the integrated shear stress @xmath by @xmath . Now, the
angular momentum equation takes the following form:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.31)
  -- -- -- --------

Similarly like in the Newtonian case, one can prove the following
relation between shear and stress tensor components and the flux
emerging from one side of the disk ( Novikov & Thorne , 1973 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the shear of the equatorial geodesic orbits which is
equal to ( Gammie & Popham , 1998 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting the definition of flux from Eqs. 3.32 and 3.33 into Eq. 3.31 we
finally obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only unknown function is @xmath . Therefore, the above equation can
be directly integrated. Originally, Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) gave in
their work a formula for @xmath involving integrals. However, the
following paper of Page & Thorne ( 1974 ) gave explicit, algebraic
expression for this quantity. Once we know the integrated shear stress,
we can use Eq. 3.32 to calculate outcoming flux. To resolve radial
dependencies of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath etc. we must introduce formulae
for viscosity, vertical structure and opacity.

The authors followed Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) and assumed that the
comoving @xmath component of the viscous stress tensor can be expressed
as (Section 2.2.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the total pressure. This assumption leads to,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vertically integrated pressure.

The vertical hydrostatic equilibrium is constructed assuming that the
pressure gradient is balanced by the vertical component of the
gravitational force which corresponds to the vertical epicyclic
frequency @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are relativistic correction factor defined in
Eq. 4.3 . Once again, we replace differentials by finite differences to
obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

To close this set of equations we need to describe the energy balance .
Similarly like in the previous section we assume that radiative
transport is the only cooling mechanism. Introducing finite differences
into the diffusive approximation we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total optical depth.

Taking all the equations given above together we get a set which can be
solved in algebraic way, like in the Newtonian case. Similarly, we can
distinguish three regions in the accretion disk depending on the
dominating pressure and opacity sources. Explicit expressions for
outgoing flux, surface density, disk semi-thickness, central temperature
etc. are given in Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) with additional formulae in
Page & Thorne ( 1974 ) .

## Chapter 4 Relativistic, stationary slim accretion disks

Standard models of thin disks ( Shakura & Sunyaev , 1973 ; Novikov &
Thorne , 1973 ) assume that all the heat generated at a given radius by
viscosity is immediately radiated away, meaning that the thermal
equilibrium is determined by the local balance of viscous heating and
radiative cooling, @xmath . No other cooling mechanisms are considered
in the standard model. This assumption is fairly consistent and correct
only for sufficiency small accretion rates. For high accretion rates it
fails as the simple argument below shows.

The “advective” radial flux of heat, @xmath , is a consequence of the
radial motion of hot matter. It can be estimated as ( Kato et al. , 2008
) ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming @xmath and taking the rate of radiative cooling, @xmath , we
may estimate this expression in the following way,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is then obvious, that for @xmath ( @xmath increases with @xmath ),
advective cooling predicted by the Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) model is
larger than the radiative cooling @xmath , and that the standard thin
accretion model cannot be adequate at such accretion rates. Detailed
calculations show that advection starts to modify the disk structure at
accretion rates corresponding to @xmath (Section 4.4 ).

Abramowicz et al. ( 1988 ) constructed optically thick “slim“ accretion
disk model which accounts for the advective cooling and does not impose
the Keplerian angular momentum. Therefore, it may be applied to disks at
any accretion rate.

Advection appears also at much smaller (sub-Eddington) accretion rates,
but for optically very thin disks. These disks, today known as
advection-dominated accretion flows (ADAFs), were propheted in a paper
by Ichimaru ( 1977 ) (see also Rees et al. ( 1982 ) ). Only after their
rediscovery in the mid 1990s by Narayan & Yi ( 1994 , 1995 ) and by
Abramowicz et al. ( 1995 ) , ADAFs started to be intensely studied by
many authors (see reviews in Lasota ( 1999a , b ) and Narayan &
McClintock ( 2008 ) ).

In this doctoral thesis, we study optically thick slim disks only, and
this Chapter is devoted to the discussion of their relativistic,
stationary model.

### 4.1 Equations

#### Assumptions

We assume an axisymmetric, stationary fluid configuration in the Kerr
metric with fixed values of BH mass @xmath and BH spin @xmath parameters
¹ ¹ 1 @xmath is the angular momentum per unit mass, @xmath , while
@xmath is called the dimensionless spin parameter. . The disk is
symmetric under reflection in the equatorial plane. Matter is supplied
at a steady rate, @xmath , through a boundary “at infinity” and angular
momentum is removed through the same boundary, whereas zero torque is
assumed at the BH horizon. We include no self-irradiation of the disk,
and we neglect the magnetic pressure, as well as the angular momentum
carried away by radiation. Dissipation and angular momentum transport
are given by the @xmath prescription (Section 2.2.1 ), with a constant
value of @xmath in radius. We assume that the dissipation rate is
proportional to the total pressure, @xmath .

We take @xmath and put @xmath for the cylindrical radius. We also define
the following expressions involving the BH spin:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . The radial gas velocity, @xmath , as measured
by the observer co-rotating with the fluid at a fixed value of @xmath ,
is given by the relation ( Abramowicz et al. , 1996 ) ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We adopt an equation of state corresponding to the choice @xmath , and
@xmath , with @xmath the Boltzmann constant, @xmath the proton mass, and
@xmath the radiation constant (no confusion with the spin parameter may
arise). The mean molecular weight is taken to be @xmath corresponding to
@xmath and @xmath .

Only for the purpose of integrating the vertical structure, we assume
the polytropic equation of state with the polytropic index @xmath :
@xmath ( @xmath and @xmath correspond to a mixture of gas and radiation
with constant pressure ratio). The vertical integration of the
hydrostatic equilibrium formula (Eq. 3.37 ), gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the previous equation and the polytropic equation of state, it
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote density and temperature at the equatorial
plane, respectively.

#### Equations

In this section we present equations describing relativistic, stationary
slim disks. They were derived originally by Lasota ( 1994 ) and improved
by several other authors including Abramowicz et al. ( 1996 ) , Gammie &
Popham ( 1998 ) and Kato et al. ( 2008 ) . More general derivation for
the non-stationary case is given in Appendix B .

(i) The mass conservation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is disk surface density.

(ii) The radial momentum conservation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the angular velocity with respect to the stationary
observer, @xmath is the angular velocity with respect to the inertial
observer, @xmath are the angular frequencies of the co-rotating and
counter-rotating Keplerian orbits, @xmath and @xmath is vertically
integrated pressure.

(iii) The angular momentum conservation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the angular momentum at the disk inner edge,
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Lorentz factor.

(iv) The vertical equilibrium:

Integration of Eq. 3.37 , taking into account Eq. 4.5 , leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the vertical epicyclic frequency and @xmath corresponds to the disk
thickness. Herein, we always assume @xmath .

(v) The energy conservation:

The advective cooling is defined, in terms of the vertically integrated
quantities, as ( Kato et al. , 2008 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the height-integrated energy density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the mass conservation (Eq. 4.7 ), hydrostatic equilibrium (Eq.
3.37 ), and the following derivation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath may be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Formulae for coefficients @xmath and @xmath are given below.

The amount of heat advected @xmath is equal to the difference between
viscous heating and radiative cooling:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature at the equatorial plane. The opacity
coefficient @xmath is calculated using the Kramer’s approximation (Eq.
3.20 ).

(vi) The equation of state (in terms of vertically integrated
quantities)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The radial derivative of the height-integrated pressure takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath .

The coefficients @xmath to @xmath are given by, and equal to (assuming
Eqs. 4.5 and 4.6 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where ² ² 2 @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.2 Numerical methods

The equations given above form a two-dimensional set of ordinary
differential equations with a critical (sonic) point. One may choose
e.g., @xmath and @xmath as the dependent variables. By a series of
algebraic manipulations of Eqs. 4.7 , 4.8 , 4.10 , 4.16 , and 4.19 , we
obtain the following set of ordinary differential equations for @xmath
and @xmath ³ ³ 3 For clarity and compatibility with Chapter 6 , we leave
the radial derivatives of @xmath to @xmath in Eqs. 4.27 and 4.28 . They
are reduced to the derivatives of @xmath and @xmath , but the ultimate
formulae are long and unreadable. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To obtain the regular solution one has to solve these equations together
with outer boundary conditions given at some large radius @xmath and the
following regularity conditions at the sonic radius @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provides additional condition for calculating @xmath which is the
eigenvalue of the problem. The location of the sonic point is not known
a priori . A mathematical problem defined in such a way can be
classified as a two point boundary value problem which we solve applying
the relaxation technique ( Press , 2002 ) . To start the relaxation
process one has to provide a trial solution . The convergence strictly
depends on the quality of such initial guess. In this work we apply the
following method of searching for the proper initial conditions for
relaxation.

The angular momentum at the inner edge of the disk, @xmath , is the
eigenvalue of the problem and must be chosen properly to satisfy the
regularity conditions given by Eq. 4.31 . The value of @xmath determines
the shape of a solution. It turns out that the topology of slim disk
solutions with @xmath higher and @xmath lower than the proper value
@xmath is different. The former branch of solutions terminates as soon
as the denominator @xmath vanishes (the regularity condition is not
satisfied). The latter does not cross the sonic point at all ( @xmath is
always positive). The self-consistent solution is expected to be the
common limit of these two branches. A trial solution can be achieved in
a few iteration steps. We start integration at @xmath assuming the
Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) boundary conditions and we use the implicit
Runge-Kutta method of the 4th order.

Once the trial solution is found one can start relaxation process
between @xmath and the estimated position of the sonic radius @xmath .
The standard approach has to be modified due to the fact that we expect
singularity at the inner boundary. Thus, we treat the problem as a free
boundary problem and introduce one more variable describing the position
of the critical point ( Press , 2002 ) . In this work we usually use 100
mesh points spaced logarithmically in radius between the sonic point and
the outer boundary.

A relaxed solution is obtained in a few iteration steps and is then used
as the initial condition for relaxation when looking for the solution of
a problem with one parameter (e.g., mass accretion rate @xmath or BH
spin @xmath ) slightly modified. For the new system parameters we look
for the outer boundary conditions at @xmath by integrating the equations
from @xmath (assuming the same outer boundary conditions as before)
until we reach @xmath . In such a way a full spectrum of system
parameters can be achieved effectively.

Once the solution outside the sonic point is found we numerically
estimate the radial derivatives of @xmath and @xmath at the sonic point
using values given at @xmath . Taking them into account we make a small
step from the innermost mesh point (which corresponds to the sonic
point) inward. Then we start integrating using standard Runge-Kutta
method until we get close enough to the horizon.

### 4.3 Solutions

#### Definitions

We introduce the following critical (Eddington) luminosity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and mass accretion rate ⁴ ⁴ 4 Many authors use a different definition,
@xmath . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the electron scattering opacity and here we take @xmath
being the hydrogen mass fraction. We also define the efficiency of
accretion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath in Eqs. 4.33 and 4.34 resembles the fact that the
efficiency of accretion in the Pseudo-Newtonian potential for a thin,
Shakura-Sunyaev disk, is @xmath (compare Section 2.3 ). In such a way we
may consider @xmath as an accretion rate for which, in case of a
non-rotating BH only, the disk luminosity is close to @xmath . We also
introduce a dimensionless accretion rate @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Disk appearance

In this paragraph we discuss most important properties of slim disk
solutions for the purpose of spectra modeling.

In Fig. 4.2 we present profiles of the emitted flux for a Schwarzschild
BH and a range of accretion rates. Profiles for two values of the @xmath
parameter are shown: @xmath (solid black) and @xmath (red dashed lines).
In the limit of low accretion rates the flux profiles coincide with the
Novikov & Thorne solution - no flux emerges from inside the marginally
stable orbit. The higher the accretion rate, the higher departure from
the standard profile as the advection of heat becomes more important.
For accretion rates exceeding @xmath the disk emission is significantly
shifted inward. The emission profile in the inner disk regions for
super-Eddington accretion rates has a different slope ( @xmath ) instead
of @xmath for radiatively efficient disks. Such behavior is valid for
all values of the viscosity parameter @xmath . However, the higher the
value of @xmath , the earlier advection affects the disk emission.

Fig. 4.3 presents profiles of emission from a disk with @xmath for a few
values of BH spin. They all coincide at large radii, where the impact of
BH rotation is negligible. The larger BH spin, the closer to the horizon
the marginally stable orbit is, and, as a result, the disk emission
extends much closer to the horizon, well below @xmath . It is clear,
that the luminosity of a disk increases with BH spin. This increase of
luminosity corresponds exactly to the increase of the efficiency of
accretion (Eq. 2.30 ) for low accretion rates.

Profiles of the radial velocity ( @xmath ) and surface density ( @xmath
) are shown in the top and bottom panels of Fig. 4.4 , respectively. The
black lines present solutions for @xmath , while the red dashed lines
for @xmath . The radial velocity for large radii coincides with values
given by Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) which are assumed as the outer
boundary conditions, and approaches the speed of light when getting
close to the horizon. At a given radius the radial velocity increases
with mass accretion rate. The radial velocity is directly related to the
surface density through the mass conservation equation (Eq. 4.7 ). For
large radii, where the disk is gas pressure dominated, the surface
density increases with accretion rate (this region corresponds to the
lower branch of solutions on the ( @xmath , @xmath ) plane, (see e.g.,
Abramowicz et al. ( 1988 ) ) while for moderate radii the relation is
opposite (the middle branch). For the highest accretion rates ( @xmath )
the solutions enter the upper, advection dominated branch. As the
surface density is expected to be inversely proportional to @xmath , its
values for @xmath are roughly ten times smaller than for @xmath .

It has been proven ( Sądowski et al. , 2009 ) that the disk photosphere
location should be taken into account when performing ray-tracing of
photons emitted from an accretion disk. It becomes of major importance
when the accretion rates are high and disks are no longer geometrically
thin. In Fig. 4.5 we plot profiles of the photosphere (disk height,
@xmath ) for different accretion rates and a non-rotating BH. It is
clearly visible that for accretion rates @xmath the inner regions are
thicker due to the radiation pressure. For @xmath the highest value of
@xmath ratio exceeds @xmath . In Fig. 7.1 similar profiles are plotted
using the same scale on both axes.

In Fig. 4.7 we present profiles of the angular momentum for two
representative values of @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath on left and right
panel, respectively) and a few accretion rates. For low accretion rates
the angular momentum follows the Keplerian profile (down to the
marginally stable orbit) for both cases. For higher accretion rates it
departs from the Keplerian flow. For the lower value of @xmath the flow
is super-Keplerian for moderate radii. The higher mass accretion rate
the more significant deviation from the Keplerian profile. For the
higher @xmath ( @xmath ) the behavior is quantitatively different as the
angular momentum at the horizon ( @xmath ) falls below the Keplerian
value at the marginally stable orbit. The higher the accretion rate the
smaller the value. The impact of @xmath on the slim disk solution
topology has been extensively studied in Abramowicz et al. ( 2010 ) .
Figure 4.8 shows how @xmath depends on both the accretion rate and the
@xmath viscosity parameter.

Accretion disks are expected to be gas-pressure dominated in the limit
of low accretion rates ( Shakura & Sunyaev , 1973 ) . However, the
temperature, and corresponding radiation pressure, increases with
accretion rate. As a result, for accretion rates higher than a
particular value (e.g., @xmath for @xmath ), there is a
radiation-pressure dominated region, the extent of which increases with
further grow of accretion rate. This behavior is presented in Fig. 4.9
which shows the gas pressure to total pressure ratio ( @xmath ) for
different accretion rates and two representative values of @xmath . For
@xmath , the region between @xmath and @xmath is dominated by radiation
pressure. The pressure ratio drops below @xmath which is the critical
value for triggering the thermal instability according to the standard
theory (for detailed discussion see Section 5.1 ). For the Eddington
accretion rate ( @xmath ) the unstable region extends between @xmath and
@xmath . For super-Eddington accretion rates the disk is
radiation-pressure supported down to BH horizon.

Standard thin accretion disks are radiatively efficient — viscous
heating is balanced by radiative cooling. This is not the case for
accretion rates close to, and higher than the Eddington one. Such disks
are thick and are characterized by high radial velocity of gas. As a
result, additional mechanism of cooling triggers in: advection. In Fig.
4.10 we plot the advection coefficient @xmath defined as the ratio of
the advective to radiative cooling rates. Values close to zero denote
radiatively efficient disk regions, higher than unity — regions where
advective cooling dominates over radiative cooling, negative — regions
where heat advected from outer disk annuli is released (advective
heating). Disk solutions for the lowest accretion rates are in fact
radiatively efficient ( @xmath ). For accretion rates close to @xmath
the region @xmath is significantly affected by advection, e.g., the
advective cooling equals up to 30% of the radiative cooling for @xmath .
The region inside @xmath is characterized by negative advection
coefficient. Radiative cooling balances both viscous and advective
heating. The heat advected into this region is the only heating
mechanism inside ISCO ( @xmath ), causing the emission from inside this
radius visible in Fig. 4.2 . For strongly super-Eddington accretion
rates (e.g., @xmath ) the advective cooling rate overwhelms the rate of
radiative cooling outside ISCO, while advection heating still dominates
close to BH horizon.

The advection of heat in slim disks significantly changes disk
properties for luminosities @xmath . This fact is clearly visible in
Fig. 4.11 . In the top panel we plot the relation between disk
luminosity and mass accretion rate for three values of BH spin. For
sub-Eddington regime the luminosities are proportional to the accretion
rates as the efficiency of accretion ( @xmath , plotted in the bottom
panel) remains constant. For higher accretion rates, however, the
efficiency drops down as some amount of heat generated by viscosity is
captured in the flow and advected onto the BH. The higher the accretion
rate, the lower the efficiency of accretion. For @xmath it decreases by
an order of magnitude for @xmath .

In Fig. 4.12 we present a schematic picture of a slim accretion disk
with super-Eddington accretion rate.

### 4.4 Inner edge(s)

Accretion flows onto BHs must change character before matter crosses the
event horizon, for two reasons. First, matter must cross the black-hole
surface at the speed of light as measured by a local inertial observer (
Gourgoulhon & Jaramillo , 2006 ) , so that if the flow is subsonic far
away from the black-hole (in practice it is always the case) it will
have to cross the sound barrier (well) before reaching the horizon. This
is the property of all realistic flows independent of their angular
momentum. This sonic surface can be considered as the inner edge of the
accretion flow.

The second reason is related to angular momentum. Far from the hole many
(most probably most) rotating accretion flows adapt the Keplerian
angular momentum profile. Because of the existence of the innermost
stable circular orbit (ISCO), these flows must stop to be Keplerian
there. At high accretion rates when pressure gradients become important,
the flow may extend below the ISCO but the presence of the innermost
bound circular orbit (IBCO) defines another limit to a circular flow
(the absolute limit being given by the circular photon orbit, the CPO).
These critical circular orbits provide another possible definition of
the inner edge of the flow, in this case of an accretion disk.

The question is: what is the relation between the accretion flow edges?
In the case of geometrically thin disks the sonic and Keplerian edges
coincide and one can define the ISCO as the inner edge of these disks.
Paczyński ( 2000 ) showed rigorously that independent of e.g., viscosity
mechanism and the presence of magnetic fields, the ISCO is the universal
inner disk’s edge for not too-high viscosities. The case of thin disks
is therefore settled ⁵ ⁵ 5 Penna et al. ( 2010 ) studied the effects of
magnetic fields on thin accretion disk (the disk thickness @xmath . They
found that to within a few percent the magnetized disks are consistent
with the Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) model, in which the inner edge
coincides with the ISCO. .

However, this is not the case for non-thin accretion disks, i.e., of
medium and high luminosities. The problem of defining the inner edge of
an accretion disk is not just a formal exercise. Afshordi & Paczyński (
2003 ) explored several reasons which made discussing the precise
location of inner edge @xmath of the BH accretion disks an interesting
and important issue. One of them was,

Theory of accretion disks is several decades old. With time ever more
sophisticated and more diverse models of accretion onto BHs have been
introduced. However, when it comes to modeling disk spectra,
conventional steady state, geometrically thin-disk models are still
used, adopting the classical “no torque” inner boundary condition at the
marginally stable orbit.

Krolik & Hawley ( 2002 ) proposed several “empirical” definitions of the
inner edge, each serving a different practical purpose (see also the
follow-up investigation by Beckwith et al. ( 2002 ) ). We add to these a
few more definitions. The list of the inner edges considered in this
section consists of ⁶ ⁶ 6 Krolik & Hawley defined the inner edges no. 4,
5 and 6 and in addition a seventh edge 7, the turbulence edge , where
flux-freezing becomes more important than turbulence in determining the
magnetic field structure. Magnetic fields are not considered for slim
accretion disks, and we therefore do not discuss 7. ,

1.   The potential spout edge @xmath , where the effective potential
    forms a self-crossing Roche lobe, and accretion is governed by the
    Roche lobe overflow.

2.   The sonic edge @xmath , where the transition from subsonic to
    transonic accretion occurs. Hydrodynamical disturbances do not
    propagate upstream a supersonic flow, and therefore the subsonic
    part of the flow is “causally” disconnected from the supersonic
    part.

3.   The variability edge @xmath , the smallest radius where orbital
    motion of coherent spots may produce quasi-periodic variability.

4.   The stress edge @xmath , the outermost radius where the Reynolds
    stress is small, and plunging matter has no dynamical contact with
    the outer accretion flow.

5.   The radiation edge @xmath , the innermost place from which
    significant luminosity emerges.

6.   The reflection edge @xmath , the smallest radius capable of
    producing significant fluorescent iron line.

In the next six subsections, we discuss these six edges one by one
basing on the solutions of the relativistic slim disk model presented in
the previous section. This discussion is similar to the study of
Abramowicz et al. ( 2010 ) but is based on a slim disk model with more
consistent (i.e., polytropic) treatment of the vertical structure.
Qualitative behavior is exactly the same. However, the impact of
advection sets on at a higher ( @xmath versus @xmath ) accretion rate.
We also point out here that locations of some of these inner edges are
sensitive to the assumed value of the @xmath parameter. Solutions
presented in the previous Secion are based on the @xmath assumption.
This assumption, however, may not be satisfied inside the marginally
stable orbit, as some of the most recent GRMHD simulations show (e.g.,
Penna et al. ( 2010 ) ). Results presented in this Section should be
therefore considered qualitative only.

#### 4.4.1 Potential spout edge

The idea of the “relativistic Roche lobe overflow” governing accretion
close to the BH was first explained by Paczyński (see Kozłowski et al. (
1978 ) ). It was later explored in detail by many authors analytically
(e.g., Abramowicz ( 1981 , 1985 ) ) and by large-scale hydrodynamical
simulations (e.g., Igumenshchev & Beloborodov ( 1997 ) ). It became a
standard concept in BH accretion theory. Figure 4.13 schematically
illustrates the Roche lobe overflow mechanism. The leftmost panel
presents a demonstrative profile of disk angular momentum, which reaches
the Keplerian value at the radius corresponding to the self-crossing of
the equipotential surfaces presented in the middle panel. To flow
through this “cusp”, matter must have potential energy higher than the
value of the potential at this point, i.e., the “potential barrier” is
crossed only when the matter overflows its Roche lobe.

The potential difference between the horizon and the spout is infinite,
and therefore no external force can prevent the matter located there
from plunging into the BH. At radii greater that @xmath , the potential
barrier at @xmath retains the matter inside this radius. We note, that
because the dynamical equilibrium is given (approximately) by @xmath ,
with @xmath being the density, one may also say that it is the pressure
gradient (the pressure stress) that holds the matter within @xmath .

The specific angular momentum in the Novikov-Thorne model is assumed to
be Keplerian. Slim disk models do not a priori assume an angular
momentum distribution, but self-consistently calculate it from the
relevant equations of hydrodynamics (see Section 4.1 ). These
calculations indicate that the type of angular momentum distribution
depends on whether the accretion rate and viscosity constrain the flow
to be either disk-like or Bondi-like type.

In the Bondi-type accretion flows, the angular momentum is everywhere
sub-Keplerian, @xmath . These flows are typical of high viscosities and
high accretion rates, as the case of @xmath and @xmath shown in the
bottom panel of Fig. 4.7 . This is the only Bondi-like flow in this
figure.

In the disk-like accretion flows, the angular momentum of the matter in
the disk is sub-Keplerian everywhere, except the strong-gravity region
@xmath , where the flow is super-Keplerian , @xmath . The radius @xmath
corresponds to the ring of the maximal pressure in the accretion disk.
This is also the minimum of the effective potential. The radius @xmath
delineates a saddle point for both pressure and effective potential;
this is also the location of the “potential spout inner edge”, @xmath .

We note that in the classic solutions for spherically accretion flows
found by Bondi ( 1952 ) the viscosity is unimportant and the sonic point
is saddle, while in the “Bondi-like” flows discussed here, angular
momentum transport by viscosity is essentially important and the sonic
point is usually nodal. Therefore, one should keep in mind that the
difference between these types of accretion flows is also determined by
the relative importance of pressure and viscosity. For this reason, a
different terminology is often used. Instead of “disk-like”, one uses
the term “pressure-driven”, and instead of “Bondi-like”, one uses
“viscosity-driven” (see e.g., Matsumoto et al. ( 1984 ) ; Kato et al. (
2008 ) ).

From the above discussion, it is clear that the location of this
particular inner edge @xmath is formally given as the smaller of the two
roots, @xmath , of the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The larger root corresponds to @xmath . Obviously, Eq. 4.36 has always a
solution for the disk-like flows, and never for the Bondi-like flows.

The location of the potential spout inner edge @xmath is shown in Fig.
4.14 for @xmath . We note that for low accretion rates, (e.g., @xmath
for @xmath ), the location of the potential spout inner edge coincides
with ISCO. At @xmath , the location of the potential spout jumps to a
new position, which is close to the radius of the innermost bound
circular orbit, @xmath . This behavior has long been recognized first by
Kozłowski et al. ( 1978 ) for Polish doughnuts, and then by Abramowicz
et al. ( 1988 ) for slim disks.

#### 4.4.2 Sonic edge

As it has already been discussed, by a series of algebraic
manipulations, one may reduce the slim disk equations into a set of two
ordinary differential equations for two dependent variables, e.g., the
radial velocity @xmath and the central temperature @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For a non-singular physical solution, the numerators @xmath and @xmath
must vanish at the same radius as the denominator @xmath . The
denominator vanishes at the sonic edge (or sonic radius) where the Mach
number is close to unity, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

For low mass accretion rates, lower than about @xmath in the case of
@xmath , the sonic edge @xmath is close to ISCO, independently of the
viscosity @xmath , as Fig. 4.15 shows. At about @xmath , a qualitative
change occurs, resembling a “phase transition” from the Shakura-Sunyaev
behavior to a very different slim disk behavior.

For higher accretion rates, the location of the sonic point
significantly departs from ISCO. For low values of @xmath , the sonic
point moves closer to the horizon down to @xmath for @xmath . For @xmath
, the sonic point moves outward with increasing accretion rate reaching
values as high as @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . This effect was first
noticed for low accretion rates by Muchotrzeb-Czerny ( 1986 ) and later
investigated for a wide range of accretion rates by Abramowicz et al. (
1988 ) , who explained it in terms of the disk-Bondi dichotomy. The
dependence of the sonic point location on the accretion rate in the
near-Eddington regime is more complicated and is related to, for this
range of accretion rates, the transition from the radiatively efficient
disk to the slim disk occurring close to the sonic radius. It is also
sensitive to the coefficients of the vertical integration introduced in
Eqs. 4.20 — 4.23 , as comparison with similar plots in Sądowski ( 2009 )
and Abramowicz et al. ( 2010 ) shows.

The topology of the sonic point is important, because physically
acceptable solutions must be of the saddle or nodal type, the spiral
type being forbidden. The topology may be classified by the eigenvalues
@xmath of the Jacobi matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath , only two eigenvalues @xmath are non-zero, and the
quadratic characteristic equation that determines them takes the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nodal type is given by @xmath and the saddle type by @xmath . For
the lowest values of @xmath , only the saddle-type solutions exist. For
moderate values of @xmath ( @xmath ), the topological type of the sonic
point changes at least once with increasing accretion rate. For the
highest @xmath , solutions have only nodal-type critical points.

#### 4.4.3 Variability edge

Axially symmetric and stationary states of slim accretion disks are,
obviously, theoretical idealizations. Real disks are non-axial and
non-steady. In particular, one expects transient coherent features at
accretion disk surfaces — clumps, flares, and vortices. The orbital
motion of these features could quasi-periodically modulate the observed
flux of radiation, mostly by means of the Doppler effect and the
relativistic beaming. We define @xmath to be the “averaged” variability
period, and @xmath a change in the period during one period caused by
the radial motion of a spot.

The variability quality factor @xmath may be estimated by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are contravariant components of the
four velocity. The period is given in terms of the orbital angular
velocity by @xmath . Using the relations (see Eqs. 4.3 for the
explanation of the notation used)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radial velocity measured by an observer co-rotating
with the fluid, one obtains

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.43)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . From their definitions, it is clear that @xmath outside the
BH horizon. We note that in the Newtonian limit it is @xmath and one has
@xmath . In this limit, @xmath and @xmath are the radial and azimuthal
components of velocity, and Eq. 4.43 takes its obvious Newtonian form.

The behavior of the quality factor @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.17 .
Profiles for four accretion rates are drawn. As Fig. 4.16 shows, the
lower accretion rate, the smaller radial velocity component, hence the
quality factor @xmath in general increases with decreasing accretion
rate. For the lowest values of @xmath , a rapid drop is visible at ISCO
corresponding to the change in the nature of the flow (gas enters the
free-fall region below ISCO). For higher accretion rates, this behavior
is suppressed as the trajectories become wide open spirals well outside
ISCO.

We note that our definition given in Eq. 4.41 of the quality factor
@xmath , essentially agrees with a practical definition of the
variability quality factor @xmath defined by observers with the help of
the observationally constructed Fourier variability power spectra,
@xmath . Here @xmath is the observed variability power (i.e. the square
of the observed amplitude) at a particular observed variability
frequency @xmath . Any observed quasi periodic variability of the
frequency @xmath can clearly be seen in the power spectrum as a local
peak in @xmath , centered on a particular frequency @xmath . The
half-width @xmath of the peak defines the variability quality factor by
@xmath .

Quasi-periodic variability of kHz frequencies, called kHz QPO, is
observed from several low-mass neutron star and BH binaries. In a
pioneering and important piece of research, Barret et al. ( 2005 )
carefully measured the quality factor for a particular source in this
class (4U 1608-52) and found that @xmath , i.e. that the kHz signals are
very coherent. They argued that @xmath cannot be due to kinematic
effects in the orbital motion of hot spots, clumps, or other similar
features located at the accretion disk surface, because these features
are too quickly sheared out by the differential rotation of the disk
(see also Bath et al. ( 1974 ) ; Pringle ( 1981 ) ). They also argued
that although coherent vortices may survive much longer times at the
disk surface (e.g., Abramowicz et al. ( 1995 ) ), if they participate in
the inward radial motion, the observed variability @xmath cannot be
high. Our results shown in Fig. 4.17 illustrate and strengthen this
point. We also agree with the conclusion reached by Barret et al. ( 2005
) that the observational evidence against orbiting clumps as a possible
explanation of the phenomenon of kHz QPO, seems to indicate that this
phenomenon is probably caused by the accretion disk global oscillations
⁷ ⁷ 7 Barret et al. ( 2005 ) also found how @xmath varies in time for
each of the two individual oscillations in the “twin-peak QPO”. This
places strong observational constraints on possible oscillatory models
of the twin peak kHZ QPO; see also Boutelier et al. ( 2010 ) . . For
excellent reviews of the QPO oscillatory models, we refer to Wagoner (
1999 ) and Kato ( 2001 ) .

Although clumps, hot-spots, vortices or magnetic flares cannot explain
the coherent kHz QPOs with @xmath , they certainly are important in
explaining the continuous, featureless Fourier variability power spectra
(see e.g., Abramowicz et al. ( 1991 ) ; Schnittman ( 2005 ) ; Pecháček,
Karas & Czerny ( 2008 ) and references quoted there). Our results shown
in Fig. 4.17 indicate that: (i) at low accretion rates, a sharp
high-frequency cut-off in @xmath may be expected at about the ISCO
frequency; (ii) at high accretion rates, there should be no cut-off in
@xmath at any frequency; and (iii) the logarithmic slope @xmath should
depend on @xmath .

#### 4.4.4 Stress edge

The Shakura-Sunyaev model assumes that there is no torque at the inner
edge of the disk, which in this model coincides with ISCO. Slim disk
model assumes that there is no torque at the horizon of the BH. It makes
no assumption about the torque at the disk inner edge, but calculations
prove that the torque is small there.

The zero-torque at the horizon is consistent with the small torque at
the inner edge of slim disks, as Fig. 4.18 shows.

The Figure presents the relative importance of the torque @xmath by
comparing it with the “advective” flux of angular momentum @xmath (
@xmath ). For the viscosity parameter @xmath smaller than about @xmath ,
the ratio @xmath at both @xmath and @xmath is smaller than @xmath even
for highly super-Eddington accretion rates, and for low accretion rates
the ratio is vanishingly small, @xmath . For high viscosity, @xmath ,
the ratio is small for low accretion rates, @xmath and smaller than
@xmath for super-Eddington accretion rates (calculated at the sonic
radius, as the disk enters the Bondi-like regime at these high accretion
rates). For two highest viscosity models ( @xmath and @xmath ) the
@xmath parameter calculated at @xmath exceeds @xmath for accretion rates
close to the disk-Bondi limiting value what may suggest the no-stress at
the disk inner edge assumption is violated for such high viscosities.

To define the stress inner edge @xmath , one has to specify the
characteristic value of the torque parameter @xmath . Profiles of @xmath
for a few values of @xmath and @xmath are shown in Fig. 4.19 . The
stress edge for @xmath is located at ISCO for low accretion rates. When
the accretion rate exceeds @xmath , the edge departs from ISCO and moves
closer to BH approaching its horizon with increasing @xmath . The
behavior of @xmath profiles for higher ( @xmath ) values of @xmath is
different - they move away from the BH as the angular momentum profiles
become flatter with increasing accretion rates (compare Fig. 4.7 ).

By pushing the MHD numerical simulations to their limits, Shafee et al.
( 2006 ) and Penna et al. ( 2010 ) calculated a thin, @xmath , disk-like
accretion flow, and demonstrated that its inner edge torque is in fact
small.

#### 4.4.5 Radiation edge

As discussed in the previous section, the torque at @xmath is small, but
non-zero and therefore there is also orbital energy dissipation at radii
smaller than ISCO. Thus, some radiation does originate in this region.
Moreover, the heat advected with the flow may be radiated away in this
region. As a result, the radiation edge @xmath is not expected to
coincide with ISCO. In Fig. 4.20 , we present profiles of @xmath defined
as the radii limiting area emitting a given fraction of the disk total
luminosity. For low accretion rates ( @xmath ), the disk emission
terminates close to ISCO as the classical models of accretion disks
predict. The locations of the presented @xmath are determined by the
regular Novikov & Thorne flux radial profile. For higher accretion
rates, the disk becomes advective and the maximum of the emission moves
significantly inward. As a consequence of the increasing rate of
advection (and resulting inward shift of @xmath ), the efficiency of
accretion drops down.

We emphasize that the location of the radiation edge is not determined
by the location of the stress edge (as some authors seem to believe),
but by the significant advection flux bringing energy into the region
well below ISCO.

#### 4.4.6 Reflection edge

The iron K @xmath fluorescent line is an observed characteristic feature
of many sources with BH accretion disks ( Miller , 2006 ; Remillard &
McClintock , 2006 ) . The intensity and the shape of this line depends
strongly on the physical conditions close to the inner edge. This has
been discussed by many authors, including Reynolds & Fabian ( 2008 ) who
gave three conditions for line formation: (i) the flow has to be
Thomson-thick in the vertical direction; (ii) disk has to be irradiated
by an external source of X-rays (hard X-ray irradiation plays a crucial
role in the process of fluorescence and changes the ionization degree of
matter); and (iii) the ionization state should be sufficiently low (iron
cannot be fully ionized).

Nevertheless, since fluorescent iron-line emission depends on many
aspects, such as the energy distribution of illuminating photons,
temperature, ionization state, and density of the emitting matter as
well as iron abundance, there is no obvious condition for the reflection
edge (defined as the minimal radius where the reflection features
originate). Additional computations of reflection models show that for
some set of parameters iron fluorescent line may arise even from
Thomson-thin matter ( Dumont et al. , 2002 ) . In this paper, we assume
that the reflection edge is connected to the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, one has to keep in mind that the effective optical depth at the
iron line band may be much larger than the above, frequency-averaged
value.

In Fig. 4.21 , we show profiles of the effective optical depth @xmath in
different regimes of accretion rates for @xmath and @xmath . Three
characteristic types of their behavior are shown: sharp drop , maximum
and monotonic at the top, middle, and bottom panels, respectively. The
behavior of different values of @xmath and @xmath is qualitatively
similar (but not quantitatively as in general @xmath increases with
decreasing @xmath ). The top panel of the figure, corresponding to the
lowest accretion rates, shows a sharp drop in @xmath near ISCO. The same
behavior was noticed previously e.g., by Reynolds & Fabian ( 2008 ) .
The drop may clearly define the inner reflection edge @xmath , limiting
the radii where formation of the fluorescent iron line is prominent. The
middle panel, corresponding to moderate accretion rates, shows a maximum
in @xmath near ISCO. The non-monotonic behavior is caused by the regions
of moderate radii outside ISCO being both radiation pressure and
scattering dominated. We note, that the top of the maximum of @xmath
remains close to ISCO for a range of accretion rates, but for accretion
rates higher than @xmath , it moves closer to the black hole with
increasing @xmath as the disk emission profile changes due to advection.
The bottommost panel corresponds to super-Eddington accretion rates. The
profiles are monotonic in @xmath and define no characteristic inner
reflection edge. Close to the BH, these flows are effectively optically
thin reaching @xmath at about a few tens of gravitational radii.

When the effective optical depth of the flow becomes less then unity,
opacities becomes invalid. In these cases, full radiative transfer
through accretion disk atmospheres has to be considered (e.g., Davis
et al. ( 2005 ) ; Różańska & Madej ( 2008 ) ). Nevertheless, our results
allow us to estimate roughly how far from the black hole the iron line
formation is most prominent, assuming that the disk is uniformly
illuminated by an exterior X-ray source. For accretion rates lower than
@xmath , the reflection edge is located very close to ISCO and we may
identify the shape of the iron line with the gravitational and dynamical
effects of the ISCO. In the case of higher but sub-Eddington accretion
rates, the maximum of the effective optical depth is located inside the
ISCO, which may possibly allow us to study extreme gravitational effects
on the iron line profile. However, the assumption that the line is
formed at the ISCO is no longer satisfied. The super-Eddington flows
have smooth and monotonic profiles of effective optical depth.
Therefore, the reflection edge cannot be uniquely defined and no
relation between the shape of the fluorescent lines and ISCO exists.
Finally, we note that these lines may be successfully modeled by clumpy
absorbing material and have nothing to do with relativistic effects (see
e.g., Miller et al. ( 2009 ) and references therein). The role of the
ISCO in determining the shape of the Fe lines was also questioned in the
past (based on different reasoning) by Reynolds & Begelman ( 1997 ) ,
whose arguments were then refuted by Young et al. ( 1998 ) .

#### 4.4.7 Summary

We have addressed the inner edge issue by discussing the behavior of six
differently defined “inner edges” of slim accretion disks around a Kerr
BH. We have found that the slim disk inner edges behave very differently
than the corresponding Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) and Novikov & Thorne (
1973 ) ones. The differences are qualitative and become important for
the same range of luminosities independently of the BH spin. Even at
moderate luminosities, @xmath , there is no unique inner edge.
Differently defined edges are located at different places. For nearly
Eddington luminosities, the differences are huge and the notion of the
inner edge loses all practical significance. We summarize the properties
and locations of the six inner edges in Table 4.1 .

### 4.5 Spectra

The rate of viscous heating at given radius depends (in the @xmath
approximation) on the disk pressure and the rate of shear. These
parameters change with radius what implies that the heating (and the
corresponding cooling rate) significantly depends on radius too
(profiles of the emitted flux of energy are presented e.g., in Fig. 4.2
). In the standard framework (assuming e.g., large optical thickness),
the gas is assumed to radiate locally as a blackbody with the
characteristic effective temperature corresponding to the amount of
energy released in the form of the radiative flux. Since this quantity
changes with radius, the outcoming spectrum of an accretion disk is a
superposition of the black body spectra with a wide range of effective
temperatures (multicolor blackbody).

Let us consider the spectrum of a radiatively efficient disk. The
outcoming flux of energy is given by the corresponding formulae of
Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) and Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) . For the
non-relativistic case it is given by (Eq. 3.18 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is assumed that at given radius disk radiates the blackbody radiation
corresponding to the effective temperature @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The observed spectrum may be calculated by integrating the specific
intensities ( @xmath ) over the whole surface of the disk ⁸ ⁸ 8 This
formula neglects the gravitational g-factor. The precise way of
calculating spectrum is given in Section 4.5.2 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inclination angle and @xmath is the distance to the
observer.

Useful quantitative results may be obtained if we neglect the variations
of @xmath near to the inner edge which have little impact on the shape
of the total spectrum. Let us then approximate the radial profile of the
effective temperature with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the effective temperature at the inner edge ( @xmath for
thin disks). According to Eq. 4.46 the exponent @xmath for radiatively
efficient disks is @xmath , while for advection-dominated flows (e.g.,
slim disks in the limit of high accretion rates) it is equal @xmath .
Under this approximation, the spectral flux is given by,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The observed spectrum consists therefore of a power-law component

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

limited by the low- and high-energy cutoffs:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a standard thin disk with @xmath , the spectrum is given by @xmath ,
while for advection dominated accretion ( @xmath ) it is @xmath . In
Figure 4.22 we show an exemplary spectrum for @xmath case. Its middle
part ( @xmath ) follows the @xmath profile while the low and high energy
tails follow the corresponding limits of the Planck function (Eq. 4.47 )
for the effective temperatures at @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

#### 4.5.1 Spectral hardening

Real accretion disks do not radiate as a perfect blackbody. The emission
is affected by such factors as the absorption opacity, density structure
of the plasma, optical depth, rate of electron scattering, etc. Out of
these effects most important in case of disks in X-ray binaries is the
Compton scattering on hot electrons in the disk atmosphere. It distorts
the spectrum towards temperatures that are higher than the effective
temperature at given radius. However, when integrated over the disk, the
total emergent disk spectrum can still be approximated to a good
accuracy by a multicolor disc blackbody, but with different
characteristic temperatures ( Shimura & Takahara , 1995 ; Merloni et al.
, 2000 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is called the color temperature correction, or spectral
hardening factor, since it is always greater then unity. In general,
@xmath is a function of disk luminosity and its particular value depends
on the disk structure close to its photosphere.

To calculate the proper, hardened spectrum of an accretion disk one has
to perform full radiative transfer calculations. Davis et al. ( 2005 )
calculated disk atmosphere models (BHSPEC) spanned on a grid of
effective temperatures, effective gravity and surface densities relevant
to disks in X-ray binaries. In the spectral model described in the
following section, we either assume some particular value of the
hardening factor @xmath or take the local spectra directly from the
BHSPEC model.

In Fig. 4.23 we present emission profiles of slim disk solutions for
@xmath and three accretion rates: @xmath and @xmath . For the highest
accretion rate (corresponding to luminosity @xmath ) the inward shift of
emission caused by advection is visible. The dashed lines present
profiles of the relativistic standard thin disk solutions ( Novikov &
Thorne , 1973 ) . The following figures (Figs. 4.24 and 4.25 ) present
spectra calculated basing on these emission profiles. The spectra were
obtained using ray-tracing routines developed by Bursa ( 2005 ) assuming
either constant value of the hardening factor ( @xmath , Fig. 4.24 ) or
using BHSPEC atmospheric models (Fig. 4.25 ). The slim disk solutions
give in general slightly harder spectra, as they reach higher maximal
effective temperatures in comparison to Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) model
(Fig. 4.23 ). Detailed discussion of the slim disk spectra will be given
in Bursa & Sądowski ( 2011 ) .

#### 4.5.2 slimbb XSPEC fitting routine

Using the numerical solutions of the slim accretion disk equations and
an advanced ray-tracing technique ( Bursa , 2005 ) , we have calculated
tables of spectra and developed a new model called slimbb for use with
the X-ray spectral fitting package XSPEC ( Arnaud , 1996 ) . This model
provides spectra of slim disks on a three-dimensional grid of the
black-hole spin parameter, disk luminosity and inclination angle. They
were calculated assuming either constant hardening factor @xmath , or
using the BHSPEC disk atmosphere model ( Davis et al. , 2005 ; Davis &
Hubeny , 2006 ) . In the following subsections we describe most
important properties of the model.

##### Disk model

Slim disk solutions (Section 4.3 ) provide radial profiles of the
following quantities: total amount of emitted flux @xmath , radial
velocity @xmath , specific angular momentum @xmath , surface density
@xmath and disk height @xmath . They are used to construct and
tabularize spectra of slim accretion disks at a grid spanned on
accretion rate, BH spin and inclination angle.

##### disk spectrum as observed by a distant observer

The specific flux density of the disk radiation as observed by a distant
observer at energy @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the photon redshift (Eq. 4.60 ) and @xmath is the
element of the solid angle subtended by the image of the disk on the
observer’s detector plane. @xmath is the specific intensity of the
radiation coming out from a point on the disk in the right direction to
reach the observer as measured in the fluid comoving frame. Generally,
it is a function of energy, place of emission and emission angle. slimbb
model assumes for @xmath either a diluted blackbody or takes the
emerging radiation spectrum from BHSPEC.

In the case of a diluted blackbody radiation, the specific intensity is
given by Planck’s law with color-modified temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective temperature @xmath can be obtained from the total energy
flux @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The color hardening factor @xmath accounts for the effect of free
electrons in the disk atmosphere on photons and the fact that the
locally observed color temperature of the emitted radiation is generally
higher than the effective temperature of the disk related to the locally
dissipated energy (see Section 4.5.1 ). @xmath describes the dependence
on the photon emission angle (the angle between the emitted photon
wavevector and the disk surface normal), which is @xmath for isotropic
emission or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

if the emission is assumed to be limb-darkened. @xmath is the cosine of
the emission angle.

##### g-factor and disk emision angle

Most of the flux emitted by disk comes from the region of strong gravity
and high velocities, and is subject to intense Doppler boosting and
gravitational redshift.

The combined effect of gravitational and Doppler energy shift is
described by @xmath -factor, which is the ratio between energy at which
the photon is observed and energy at which it has been emitted. It is
calculated using the general formula,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is photon four-momentum and we obtain @xmath by a
transformation from the co-rotating frame, @xmath . The fluid velocity
measured by a co-rotating observer has only the radial component @xmath
and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , although negative, is taken with the minus sign as the
radial vector @xmath of the orthonormal frame points in the inward
direction.

The emission angle is the angle between the direction of the normal to
the disk surface and the direction of escaping photon momentum. The
cosine of the emission angle is given by the general formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normal vector to the disk surface. The disk normal
can be easily expressed in the co-rotating frame, where it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angle @xmath between the disk surface normal and the direction of
the poloidal basis vector @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the poloidal coordinate angle of the place of emission
and @xmath is the disk height derivative with respect to the cylindrical
radius @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Boyer-Lindquist frame, the disk normal vector, normalized to unity,
is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

An example of how slim disk changes the profiles of @xmath -factor and
emission angle is given in Fig. 4.26 . For a chosen observer’s viewing
angle of @xmath and BH spin @xmath we compare these two quantities for
two different mass accretion rates.

For luminosities less than @xmath (mass accretion rates @xmath for
@xmath ) the two models differ only slightly. For higher luminosities,
presented in Fig. 4.26 , the increasing difference between these models
comes from the fact that the radiation inner edge of slim disks shifts
to smaller radii, that the disk thickness increases, and due to more and
more significant departure of angular momentum from the Keplerian
profile (see Section 4.3 ).

##### Self-obscuration

We may notice an interesting consequence, unknown to thin disks, namely
that at this inclination the inner regions of slim disks may be obscured
by its outer parts. This fact is noticeable in the plot of the emission
angle, where we see regions from which the radiation comes almost
parallel to the disk surface. Full obscuration of the central BH takes
place only for super-Eddington luminosities. This effect has also
obvious and important implications for the temperature–luminosity
relations.

The condition for self-obscuration is roughly that @xmath somewhere in
the disk is larger than the cosine of inclination. If for higher
luminosities the radiation pressure becomes important, the @xmath ratio
typically has a maximum near radius where radiation pressure dominates
over gas pressure. The most luminous part of the disk, however, lies
still inside this radius and thus if the condition @xmath is met, the
strongly radiating part of the disk disk becomes partially or even fully
obscured by an outer part. This, of course, has important observational
consequences.

Let us consider our model example of a source with disk inclination
@xmath . The critical @xmath ratio is @xmath and the situation is
illustrated in Figure 4.27 . The plot shows the profiles of the disk
photosphere for several luminosities and compares them with trajectories
of photons sent from infinity with zero azimuthal angular momentum. For
zero spin case (top panel), we see that already at luminosity @xmath
photons from the part of the disk near the BH need to escape almost
parallel to disk surface to reach the observer. For even larger
luminosities this part of the disk starts to be completely obscured and
at @xmath the large part of the inner disk is eclipsed including the BH
itself. For high spin case (bottom panel), the situation is quite
similar, only the luminosity has to be higher.

##### Model parameters

The SLIMBB model comes in a form of a FITS table with precalculated
spectra and a small routine which reads the data and produces the final
spectrum in terms of linear interpolation in the parameter space. For
five different values of @xmath viscosity the table contains extensive
three dimensional grids of spectra spanned on the spin, luminosity and
inclination. These parameters vary within the limits given in Table 4.2
with steps chosen to ensure that the spectra differ roughly equally
between any two adjacent steps.

The model has all together nine parameters with the following meaning
(see Table 4.2 for their limit values):
M – mass of the central BH in units of solar masses,
a – specific angular momentum of the central BH in units of @xmath ,
L – disk luminosity in units of Eddington luminosity @xmath ,
inc – inclination of the observer with respect to the symmetry axis in
degrees,
D – distance of the source in kiloparsecs,
f_hard – hardening factor (if positive) or a switch for BHSPEC (if
negative),
alpha – the value of @xmath -viscosity parameter,
lflag – switch for isotropic (0) or limb-darkened (1) emission,
vflag – switch for equatorial plane (0) or photospheric (1) ray-tracing.
Most up-to-date version of SLIMBB and its detailed description may be
found at
http://astro.cas.cz/bursa/projects/slimbb .

## Chapter 5 Relativistic, non-stationary slim accretion disks

X-ray binaries and AGN exhibit different types of variability taking
place at different timescales. Some of them may result from intrinsic
instabilities of accretion disks. Other may result e.g., from the
orbital motion. Instabilities caused by the viscous and non-adiabatic
processes in disks may be classified into three types ( Kato et al. ,
2008 ) : thermal, secular instabilities and overstabilities of waves and
oscillations. The first one takes place on the thermal timescale what
makes it most profound. Its origins will be discussed in the following
paragraph, while in the next sections we will present numerical model of
non-stationary slim accretion disks which is able to reproduce the limit
cycles resulting from the thermal instability.

### 5.1 Thermal instability

Thermal instability takes place when a temperature perturbation over the
equilibrium is amplified by a thermal process. Therefore, the
characteristic timescale is the thermal timescale ( Kato et al. , 2008 )
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

over which the disk temperature changes. The following relations are
satisfied,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the hydrodynamical timescale, over which the vertical
disk structure varies, while @xmath is the viscous timescale determining
the radial disk structure changes.

When studying the secular and thermal instabilities one has to filter
out the acoustic oscillations occurring on timescales shorter than both
thermal and viscous ones. It can be done by neglecting the time
derivatives in the momentum equations. On the contrary, as the
instability involves temperature perturbations, the energy equation
should be taken into account in a time-dependent form. The dynamical
equilibrium may be adopted as it is achieved over the dynamical
timescale, much shorter than the thermal one. Finally, since we consider
the force balance between the gravitational and centrifugal forces, we
may assume the gas motion resulting from a temperature change occurs
only in the vertical direction ( @xmath ).

Under these assumptions we may perform a simple thermal stability study.
Full mathematical derivation of the stability criterion for both thermal
and secular instabilities has been given e.g., in Shakura & Sunyaev (
1976 ) and Piran ( 1978 ) . Recently, Ciesielski et al. ( 2011 ) have
generalized the perturbative analysis of the stability criterion to
account for modified (delayed, advanced or with different
stress-to-pressure response factors) viscosity prescriptions.

Let us write the vertical equilibrium equation in the following form
(compare Eq. 3.13 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the innermost region of an accretion disk we have @xmath and @xmath .
The viscous heating rate is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under the @xmath assumption (Section 2.2.1 ) and taking Eq. 5.3 into
account, we have,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The radiative cooling rate per unit surface is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we used again Eq. 5.3 . If the temperature exceeds slightly the
equilibrium ( @xmath ) value, the disk expands in the vertical direction
as @xmath (Eq. 5.3 ). As a result, both @xmath and @xmath increase, but
the rate is larger for the heating component. This means that the
specific entropy of the gas (and temperature) increases, which leads to
a further increase of @xmath . In this way, the positive feedback occurs
and the disk becomes unstable.

In the gas dominated case, the heating rate is still given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, the radiative cooling is now expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath , @xmath and hence @xmath . For such dependence of the
heating and cooling on @xmath , the reasoning given above will not be
valid. The disk in the gas pressure-dominated case is thermally stable.

The general criterion for the thermal stability may be put in the form (
Pringle , 1976 ) ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. 5.3 we can relate the small-amplitude perturbation of pressure
@xmath superposed on the equilibrium value @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where similar perturbations of the disk thickness have been introduced.
Using the general equation of state (Eq. 3.21 ), we may also write,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gas pressure to total pressure ratio. The heating
rate, @xmath , follows @xmath and therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, the perturbation of @xmath follows @xmath and thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting the equations given above into Eq. 5.9 we obtain the stability
criterion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The regions of accretion disks with @xmath are thermally unstable. This
is the case if only the accretion rate exceeds some critical value, e.g.
@xmath for a non-rotating BH.

Fig. 5.1 summarizes results of a more detailed, based on the
perturbative analysis, study of thermal and secular types of
instabilities in accretion disks. The growth rates of perturbations
(solutions of the dispersion relation) for some arbitrary values of
@xmath are plotted against the perturbation wave number @xmath .
Positive values correspond to the unstable case, while negative prove
stability. It is clear that only for @xmath the solutions lie above the
x-axis. These curves have two branches: the lower (approaching zero for
@xmath ) corresponds to the secular instability, while the upper to the
thermal one. For @xmath the disk is marginally stable in the long
wavelength limit and stable for finite wavelengths. Higher values of
@xmath give solutions with the negative sign reflecting their stability.

The stability criterion (Eq. 5.14 ) is very strong. It predicts that
only disks with very low accretion rates are stable. One could therefore
expect strong variability of this type in most accretion disks. However,
it is not the case since most of observed microquasars exhibit in their
high/soft states stable emission for periods of time much longer than
the corresponding thermal timescales. Moreover, most recent MHD
simulations ( Hirose et al. , 2009a ) show that thermal instability may
not occur in real accretion disks. This inconsistency has not yet been
resolved. Recently, Ciesielski et al. ( 2011 ) have addressed this
issue, showing that time delays in heating or reduced stress-to-pressure
response may quench the thermal instability.

Considering the unique limit-cycle behavior of GRS 1915+105, which
contains near-extreme Kerr BH and exhibits limit-cycle-like luminosity
variations, we suggest that the classical theory may be indeed correct
in predicting the radiation pressure instability, but under some, so far
unknown, conditions this behavior is suppressed, as observed in most
X-ray binaries. Since the proper description of viscosity is still
developing, the limited classical theory is the only reasonable choice
for our study before a widely accepted new theory is presented. In the
next sections we investigate the time-dependent behavior of relativistic
slim accretion disks that exhibit limit cycles resulting from the
classical thermal instability.

### 5.2 Equations

In this Chapter, we consider axisymmetrical relativistic accretion flows
onto Kerr BHs. We use the Boyer-Lindquist spherical coordinates ( @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) to describe the spacetime around a BH.
Putting all of the complicated derivations into Appendix B , we give
here the basic equations governing the dynamical behavior of the flow.
Assuming @xmath , they all reduce, upto the coefficients related to the
vertical integration, to the equations given in Section 4.1 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
     @xmath      (5.16)
     @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath      (5.18)
     @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the Lorentz factor. Equations 5.15 ,
5.16 , 5.17 , and 5.20 , defining the time derivatives of the surface
density, radial velocity, angular momentum and central temperature,
respectively, represent corresponding conservation laws. Equations 5.18
and 5.19 determine the evolution of the disk thickness and the vertical
acceleration. We adopt the diffusive form of viscosity (Eq. 2.20 ) in
equations 5.17 and 5.20 . In these equations, surface density @xmath ,
radial velocity @xmath , specific angular momentum @xmath , half
thickness @xmath , vertical velocity @xmath , and temperature @xmath ,
are six essential quantities describing the structure of disk.

The other symbols denote the following auxiliary quantities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath      (5.23)
     @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where equation ( 5.26 ) gives a bridging formula that is valid for both
optically thick and thin regimes ( Hubeny , 1990 ) , @xmath is the
viscosity parameter, @xmath is the radiation pressure, and @xmath and
@xmath are the Rosseland and Planck mean optical depths ( Szuszkiewicz &
Miller , 1998 ) .

The properties of an accretion flow depend on three crucial parameters:

-   Dimensionless BH spin @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Diffusive viscosity parameter @xmath (Eq. 5.21 ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Dimensionless mass supply rate @xmath (compare Eq. 4.35 ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath is the BH mass and @xmath is the accretion rate at the
outer boundary ( @xmath ).

### 5.3 Numerical methods

The given set of equations may be put in the following, general form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for all six functions involved ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) and @xmath is a partial
differential operator. Such a set of equations may be solved numerically
by discretizing in time and radius. For the purpose of solving the
non-stationary equations of slim disks we applied the standard Chebyshev
pseudospectral method for the spatial, and combined Runge-Kutta and
third-order backward differentiation explicit schemes for the time
discretization, respectively.

#### 5.3.1 Spatial discretization

A physical quantity @xmath is approximated by the following series with
a finite number of terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -order Chebyshev polynomial; @xmath ( @xmath
) represents the Chebyshev-Gauss-Lobatto collocation points, with @xmath
being the number of collocation points; @xmath is the mapping from the
Chebyshev-Gauss-Lobatto collocation points @xmath to the physical
collocation points @xmath and is a strictly increasing function that
satisfies both @xmath and @xmath ; and the @xmath are the spectral
coefficients and can be calculated from the physical values @xmath with
a fast discrete cosine transform (FDCT; Press ( 2002 ) ).

In a similar way one may approximate radial derivatives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spectral coefficients @xmath are evaluated basing on @xmath
using the following recursive relations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Calculation of these coefficients is
followed by an inverse FDCT of @xmath providing @xmath and, finally,
discrete spatial derivatives @xmath .

#### 5.3.2 Time discretization

The integration in time is performed using two algorithms. First two
time-steps are integrated using the third order total variation
diminishing (TVD) Runge-Kutta scheme ( Shu & Osher , 1988 ) , while the
further time-evolution using the third order backward-differentiation
explicit scheme ( Peyret , 2002 ) which provides good enough accuracy
and is less CPU-consuming.

The third order TVD Runge-Kutta scheme may be expressed as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the time-step; @xmath and @xmath are the values of the
physical quantity @xmath at the @xmath -th and @xmath -th time-levels,
respectively; and @xmath and @xmath are two temporary variables.

The third order backward-differentiation explicit scheme is defined as
follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath being the values of time of the @xmath
-th, @xmath -th, and @xmath -th time-steps, respectively. This scheme
consumes about three times less computational time than the Runge-Kutta
scheme but is not able to start the time-integration by itself.
Therefore, we combine these approaches and start integration with the
latter, followed by the faster third order backward-differentiation
explicit scheme. In such a way we are able to obtain a sufficient high
order accuracy with minimal CPU-time consumption.

#### 5.3.3 Specific techniques and assumptions

Besides discretizing the equations describing non-stationary evolution
of an accretion disk (Eqs. 5.15 - 5.20 ) one has also to treat properly
several numerical issues which may affect the integration. In order to
obtain a physical, transonic and numerically stable solution in a finite
domain, it is necessary to impose appropriate boundary conditions and to
apply some filtering techniques to overcome the inevitable spurious
nonlinear numerical instabilities in the code. For the purpose of this
project we applied the following techniques:

(i) domain decomposition into 7 subdomains so that each sub-domain
contains at most one single region of rapid variation,

(ii) spectral filtering by using an exponential filer in space to filter
out the high-frequency modes in each time step,

(iii) small numerical viscosity which makes the lowest density regions
stable. Details of these algorithms are given in Li et al. ( 2007 ) .

### 5.4 Limit cycles

In this section we briefly discuss the limit-cycle evolution of an
accretion disk for a non-rotating BH and mass accretion rate high enough
to trigger the instability (we choose @xmath ) assuming @xmath . Such a
disk is radiation pressure dominated in its inner parts and is expected
to exhibit the thermal instability.

The top-most panel of Figure 5.2 presents the disk thickness just before
the start of the cycle ( @xmath ). As the accretion rate is relatively
low, the disk is geometrically thin ( @xmath ). The disk structure does
not correspond precisely to the stationary solution of a slim disk with
the same model parameters, as the fluid configuration is not stationary
and the disk is in the process of reformation which is terminated by the
onset of the instability. As it sets in ( @xmath , the second panel of
Figure 5.2 and corresponding lines in Figure 5.3 ) the temperature rises
rapidly, the disk expands in the vertical direction and a shock appears
in the surface density and accretion rate profiles. These shocks move
outward with time, forming an expansion wave, heating the inner
material, pushing it into the BH, and perturbing the outer gas. It is
worth mentioning that the accretion rate at the shocked region (the
border between the expanding medium and the quasi-stationary disk) is
negative which means radial outflows, causing the outer, incoming gas to
further pile up.

At @xmath (e.g., the third panel of Fig. 5.2 ) the disk thickness and
the negative spike of the mass accretion rate in the expanding region
reach their maximum values. The local @xmath inside the wavefront,
however, exceeds @xmath which is far above the initial value @xmath and
reflects the rapid inflow of gas.

Once the wavefront has moved beyond the unstable region ( @xmath for
this case) the disk deflates as the instability is no longer supported
by radiation pressure dominated parts of the disk. However, the expanded
region still moves outward. The temperature and surface density in the
inner parts rapidly drop down. The inner region becomes geometrically
thin, with the temperature and surface density lower than the
corresponding values at @xmath

The outburst is essentially over after the thermal timescale (e.g.,
@xmath ). It is followed by a much slower process (taking place on the
viscous timescale) of refilling and reheating of the inner part of the
disk. Finally, after @xmath , the disk returns to the same state as at
@xmath and the thermal instability triggers again leading to a new
cycle.

The bottom-right panel of Fig. 5.3 presents the bolometric luminosity of
the disk, obtained by integrating the radiated flux per unit area over
the disk at successive times for three complete cycles. The light curve
exhibits a burst with a duration of about @xmath seconds followed by a
quiescent phase corresponding to the disk reformation process. During
the outburst the disk may reach super-Eddington luminosities ( @xmath
for this model).

### 5.5 Results

#### 5.5.1 Parameter space and characteristic quantities

In order to understand the effects of BH spin on the limit-cycle
behavior, it is necessary to investigate the parameter space ( @xmath )
with a series of models. In this section, we describe and discuss
results of twelve runs assuming different sets of the input parameters
span on the grid: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (cf. Table 5.1 ). All of
the cases are thermally unstable and undergo recursive limit-cycle
evolution.

To describe the limit-cycle behavior, we define four characteristic
quantities, which are the Outburst Duration (the full width at half
maximum of light-curve, hereafter OD), Cycle Duration (time interval
between two outbursts, hereafter CD), ratio of OD to CD, and Maximal
Luminosity (the peak value of the light curve during outburst, hereafter
ML; calculated intrinsically, with no ray-tracing), respectively. In
Figure 5.4 , we visualize these definitions on a sketched light-curve.

The computations for each one of those twelve cases were continued until
the CD converged to a constant value. The constancy of CDs implies that
the computations have reached the state uniquely determined by the
crucial parameters ( @xmath ), without any impact of the initial
conditions. In practice, the required level of convergence is achieved
after three or five cycles. We performed computations for each case for
more than seven cycles (some cases reached ten cycles) and we based our
subsequent analysis on the last four cycles only.

In Table 5.1 we list the mean values, standard and relative deviations
of each characteristic quantity for our twelve models. These values were
calculated basing on the retained cycles only. Since the relative
deviations (the percentages in the brackets) are all very low, we do not
show the error bars for the data points in the subsequent figures.

#### 5.5.2 Impact of BH spin

In order to reveal the effects of BH spin on limit-cycle behavior, we
collect our twelve models into four groups to reflect the different
effects of viscosity and mass supply (i.e., mass accretion rate at the
outer boundary). The models with ( @xmath ) and different spins are
represented by empty stars, ( @xmath ) by filled stars, ( @xmath ) by
empty circles, and ( @xmath ) by filled circles in the Figures 5.5 and
5.6 (both are based on the data from Table 5.1 ).

In the four panels of Figure 5.5 we plot OD, CD, OD/CD and ML versus
@xmath . It is clear that there is no distinct and consistent dependence
on @xmath neither for OD nor CD (panels (a) and (b)). The ratio of OD to
CD (panel (c)) is almost independent of @xmath for all sets of input
parameters. On the contrary, ML exhibits a perfect correlation with
@xmath (panel (d)), though this relation is still slightly distorted by
the impact of @xmath and @xmath .

These facts may be easily understood in the framework of the general
relativity. The effects of BH spin are restricted to the innermost parts
of accretion disks. Therefore, the quantity ML, which corresponds mostly
to the radiation emerging from the inner part of an accretion disk, must
display a strong dependence on @xmath . The other quantities (OD, CD and
OD/CD) cannot have such strong dependence on @xmath as they depend on
the disk structure and its evolution at wide range of radii (from the
inner part up to more than @xmath ), where the effects of viscosity and
mass-supply dominates over the effect of BH spin.

#### 5.5.3 Possibility of estimating the black hole spin with
limit-cycle

As has been discussed in the previous section, the effects of BH spin on
the quantities OD, CD and OD/CD are easily disturbed and even obscured
by the complex effects of viscosity and mass-supply. Thus, they cannot
serve as proper probers of BH spin. Even ML, which has monotonic and
positive correlation with @xmath , cannot be used directly to estimate
the BH spin, because the ML dependence on BH spin is significantly
affected by other factors (see panel (d) of Figure 5.5 ).

However, it is reasonable to base both on ML and the OD to CD ratio. In
Figure 5.6 , we show the OD/CD-ML diagram for all the models. The OD/CD
ratio raises with increasing values @xmath and @xmath and is hardly
dependent on @xmath (see panel (c) of Figure 5.5 ). It is remarkable,
that the combined effects of viscosity and mass-supply make ML scale
almost linearly with OD/CD ratio. For a given BH spin there is a single
straight line reflecting the ML dependence on OD/CD ratio. These lines
do not intercept and have similar slopes. The OD/CD-ML diagram may be,
therefore, used for rough BH spin estimation if only the limit cycle
parameters are read from observational data.

We find that the dependence of ML on OD/CD may be approximated by the
following formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the efficiency of accretion for a thin disk and is given
by (Eq. 2.29 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the radius of the marginally stable orbit. In Figure
5.6 we plot with dashed lines the fits obtained with these formulae for
@xmath and @xmath . Knowing the values of ML and OD/CD, one can easily
obtain from Eq. 5.39 the radius of the marginally stable orbit and,
subsequently, the rough estimate of BH spin.

There are, however, at least few limitations for the application of this
method. The first one is related to the fact that the OD/CD-ML relation
is still subject to significant dispersion caused by the combined
effects of @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 5.6 ) as well as to ray-tracing
effects we neglect, related to e.g., the inclination angle and limb
darkening. Another one is the model-dependence of our method. We assume
the limited classical theory to describe the accretion flow. We neglect
mass outflows, magnetic fields and apply the @xmath prescription of
viscosity with @xmath independent of radius. These factors, especially
the viscosity treatment, may have significant impact on the ML vs OD/CD
relation that we have obtained. Nayakshin et al. ( 2000 ) showed that
reproducing the light curves of GRS 1915+105 is possible only if much
more complicated models are considered. Nevertheless, if the limit-cycle
behavior is the actual reason for the observed variability of some
microquasars, and if the extraction of ML and OD/CD parameters from the
light curves is possible, then, under the limitations of the model
presented in this work, the BH spin can be roughly estimated using the
method presented here, before other accurate methods, e.g., fitting
spectral energy distribution, are applied.

#### 5.5.4 Evolution of the temperature-luminosity relation for the
limit-cycle in classical theory

The maximal disk temperature-luminosity ( @xmath - @xmath ) diagrams
have been used to compare the observations with the predictions of the
classical theory of limit-cycles (e.g., Gierliński & Done ( 2004 ) ;
Kubota & Makishima ( 2004 ) ; Kubota et al. ( 2001 ) ). In Figure 5.7 ,
we show the @xmath - @xmath evolution for the last calculated cycle of
each model. The panels present the evolution for a given set of @xmath
and @xmath parameters and different BH spins ( @xmath and @xmath marked
by solid, dashed and dotted lines, respectively). These curves reveal
several common features: (1) All of the cycles begin at the
closely-located triangle points and spend a quarter of CD evolving along
the curve in the anti-clockwise direction before they reach the square
points, and finally spend the other @xmath of CD to return back to the
starting location (triangles); (2) The evolution of all the cycles fits
(with exception to the outbursts of the @xmath case) between two
straight lines corresponding to @xmath relations with different color
correction factors ( @xmath and @xmath , see Gierliński & Done ( 2004 )
); (3) The @xmath - @xmath curves of all the cycles are similar for most
of CD except for the outburst state — the BH spin impact is revealed at
the outburst of limit-cycle only; (4) During the mass restoring process
(prior to the next outburst) the disk obeys @xmath (see the dashed
straight lines in all panels).

### 5.6 Discussion

The theory based on the standard viscosity prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are vertically integrated stress and total
pressure, respectively, predicts that radiation pressure-supported
regions of radiatively-efficient accretion disks are thermally and
viscously unstable. The unstable luminosity range is smaller for an (ad
hoc) alternative viscosity prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. The value @xmath corresponds to the standard
prescription, and @xmath to the often considered “geometrical mean”
prescription. The instability disappears for @xmath . From the recent
important paper of Hirose et al. ( 2009b ) it follows that the standard
Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) viscosity prescription ( @xmath ) fits much
better results of their MHD simulations of accretion disks than the
alternative prescriptions ( 5.42 ) with @xmath . However, Hirose et al.
( 2009a ) also found that the radiation pressure supported MHD disks
were thermally stable in their simulations (it is not known whether they
are viscously stable). This result contradicts the hydrodynamical
stability analysis, and therefore needs an explanation — what are the
MHD effects that stabilize the disk? Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) argue that
although the viscosity prescription has the form ( 5.41 ), it should
nevertheless be modified in a subtle way, because the “viscous heating”
@xmath that occurs in the disk is delayed with respect to the MHD stress
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the delay, found to be about 10 dynamical times, and
@xmath is the angular rotation of matter. It should be obvious that this
modification is irrelevant in the stationary case.

In an exhaustive Newtonian analytic stability analysis ( Ciesielski et
al. , 2011 ) our group confirmed (in general) the suggestion made by
Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) that the delayed heating ( 5.43 ) stabilizes, in
some parameter range, the radiation pressure thermal instability.
However, we also found a variety of different parameter ranges with
interesting, and complex, oscillatory behaviors that need to be further
investigated.

On the observational front, spins of BHs in several galactic BH binaries
have been recently measured by fitting their spectral energy
distribution to the relativistic geometrically thin accretion disk model
(e.g., Shafee et al. ( 2006 ) ; McClintock et al. ( 2006 ) ). From among
these objects, the GRS 1915+105 is the most special one. It is believed
to have a near-extreme Kerr BH with the spin very close the theoretical
maximal value @xmath (see, McClintock et al. ( 2006 ) ). It is also the
only object that exhibits the quasi-regular luminosity variations (
Belloni et al. , 1997 ; Nayakshin et al. , 2000 ; Janiuk et al. , 2002 ;
Watarai & Mineshige , 2003 ; Ohsuga , 2006 ; Kawata et al. , 2006 ;
Janiuk & Czerny , 2011 ) , similar to the limit-cycle predicted by the
standard, Newtonian, hydrodynamical models. There are obvious questions
to investigate here. May one explain the luminosity variations observed
in GRS 1915+105 as the classic “slim disk” limit-cycle behavior? What is
the role of the nearly extreme spin of GRS 1915+105 in the context of
the observed variability? Could the case of GRS 1915+105 help to find
the answer about the proper viscosity prescription?

Our research shows that the shape of light curves is weakly dependent on
BH spin. The only parameter that feels the impact of the BH angular
momentum is the maximal luminosity. Therefore, under the assumptions
adopted in this paper (e.g., constant @xmath in radius), limit cycles
produce light curves only qualitatively similar to those observed in
GRS1915+105, independently of BH spin. To obtain better agreement one
has to construct more complicated models (e.g., Nayakshin et al. ( 2000
) ), but the mechanism of the instability may remain intact. We prove
that the cycle duration weakly depends on the rotation of BH. Thus, the
observed value for GRS1915+105 most probably results from combined
effects of viscosity and accretion rate and is not affected by the spin
of the central BH. The very presence of limit cycle variability only in
this object challenges our understanding of the mechanisms of viscosity.

## Chapter 6 Vertical structure of slim accretion disks

Slim disks, just like Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) model, are based on the
assumption that the dissipation mechanisms operating in accretion flows
may be described by a viscous stress tensor whose leading component is
proportional to the pressure.

Slim disk solutions, again just like the Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) and
Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) solutions, are obtained by solving vertically
averaged (or height-integrated) radial equations of motion. Thus, steady
slim disks neglect the vertical structure of flow, and describe
essentially flat fluid configurations. Although an expression for the
radial dependence of disk thickness is obtained, the slope of the disk
surface is usually neglected in the discussion of emergent spectra,
where a plane-parallel atmosphere is typically considered for the
purposes of computing radiative transfer in the vertical direction.

In the case of slim disks, the radial equations of structure are a set
of ordinary differential equations (Section 4.1 ). The set of equations
is closed by including relations describing vertical hydrostatic
equilibrium and vertical transport of energy. By solving these equations
with appropriate boundary (or regularity) conditions one obtains the
radial profiles of the central temperature, @xmath , surface density,
@xmath , height-integrated pressure, @xmath , half-thickness of the
disk, @xmath , a radial velocity @xmath , emerging flux of radiation,
@xmath , and certain other physical quantities.

In this Chapter we are taking a first step towards constructing truly
three-dimensional slim disk models, by solving a set of differential
equations describing the vertical structure of the disk. The resulting
@xmath -dependence of physical quantities is used to compute certain
coefficients that enter the radial equations, and that up till now have
been estimated with algebraic expressions (Eqs. 4.20 - 4.23 ). We will
refer to the resulting models as “two-dimensional“ (2-D), although it
has to be understood that in contrast to the thin-disk solutions of (
Urpin , 1984 ; Kluźniak & Kita , 2000 ) , the actual meridional flow has
not been computed in this paper—the average radial velocity alone has
been considered in the structure equations. However, the models are now
self-consistent in the sense that the vertical averages of physical
quantities that form the coefficients of the radial ODEs do correspond
to the vertical structure considered in the radiative transfer
calculation — in Chapter 4 the vertical structure of the radiative
atmosphere was considered a posteriori , and it had no influence on the
radial structure of the disk.

### 6.1 Radiative transfer

Accretion disks are not simple rotating fluid configurations which may
be described by the hydrostatic balance only. The turbulent motions,
magnetic fields, mean radial velocity, shear and radiation make the
description of the disk interior very complicated. The simplest
approach, which has been successfully used for a long time, is to
consider disk annuli separately, neglecting the radial gradients, radial
net flux of radiation and accounting only for the mean flow. Under these
conditions, disk layers may be described as plane-parallel and are
subject to the vertical hydrostatic equilibrium and radiative transfer
along that direction only. Thus, the problem is reduced to
one-dimensional and may be relatively easy solved.

The equation of hydrostatic equilibrium reflects the balance between the
gradients of pressure and gravitational potential. For accretion disks
annuli and cylindrical coordinates @xmath it may be put in the form (Eq.
3.12 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The equations describing the radiative part are more complicated. In the
following sections we briefly summarize the theory of radiative transfer
and introduce the Rosseland approximation which will be used in the
model described in this Chapter.

#### 6.1.1 Transfer equation

The general radiative transfer equation ( Rybicki & Lightman , 1979 ) ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

describes the variation of specific intensity @xmath along the distance
@xmath . @xmath and @xmath stand for the absorption and emission
coefficients, respectively. Eq. 6.2 takes a particularly simple form if
another variable, @xmath - the optical depth, is introduced. It is
defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath integrated throughout the medium satisfies the condition
@xmath , we say that medium is optically thick. On the contrary, when
@xmath , the medium is optically thin — the typical photon of frequency
@xmath can traverse an optically thin medium without being absorbed,
while it is not possible in an optically thick medium.

Introducing the optical depth, the radiative transfer equation
simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the source function @xmath , defined as the ratio of the emission
and absorption coefficients,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

, has been introduced.

In general, the intrinsic emission comes from two processes: the
reemission after absorption (thermal emission) and scatterings. If the
former dominates, according to the Kirchoff’s Law for thermal emission (
Rybicki & Lightman , 1979 ) , we have,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Planck function describing the black body radiation
(Eq. 4.47 ). The transfer equation is, then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the medium is dominated by scatterings, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the absorption coefficient of the scattering process
(the scattering coefficient) and @xmath is the mean intensity of
radiation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then straightforward to get the following equality,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the following form of the radiative transfer equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we take into account combined scattering and absorption we have the
following general form of the transfer equation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with the source function given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.1.2 Optical depths

The net absorption coefficient is now equal to @xmath and is called the
total extinction coefficient. Thus, we should define the optical depth
as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mean free path of a photon before scattering or absorption is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the random walk arguments ( Rybicki & Lightman , 1979 ) we
also may obtain an expression for the net displacement between the
points of creation and destruction of a typical photon,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is also called the effective mean path or the thermalization
length .

From Eqs. 6.18 and 6.19 it follows that the mean path of a photon before
scattering or absorption may be significantly shorter than the effective
mean path. This is the case for scattering-dominated media where
absorptions are less likely than scatterings. The regular total optical
depth defined in Eq. 6.17 reflects only the more important process. It
is therefore convenient to introduce, basing on Eq. 6.19 , the effective
optical depth ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath stand for the optical depths for absorption and
scattering, respectively.

The medium is effectively optically thin , @xmath , when the effective
mean path is large compared with the size of the medium — most photons
escape out by random walking before being absorbed. On the other hand,
in effectively thick medium most photons thermally emitted at large
depths will be absorbed before they get out. The medium at large
effective optical depths is close to the thermal equilibrium and we have
both @xmath and @xmath (e.g., Mihalas ( 1982 ) ).

#### 6.1.3 Rosseland approximation

From the previous section we know that deep inside an effectively thick
medium the radiation is in thermal equilibrium. Let us assume that the
properties of the medium depend only on the geometrical depth. Symmetry
requires that the intensity of radiation may depend only on the angle
@xmath between the given direction and the distinguished coordinate.
Introducing @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

we may put the transfer equation (Eq. 6.15 ) in the following form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since at large effective optical depths we have @xmath , we may
approximate this formula with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vertical flux of radiation is given by the following integral,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which may be easily calculated. Since only the angle-dependent part
contributes, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total flux may be obtained by integration over all frequencies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account the following equality,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and introducing the Rosseland mean absorption coefficient @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

we finally have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the Rosseland or diffusive approximation for the energy flux. It
shows that the radiative energy transport deep in effectively thick
media is of the same nature as heat diffusion. It is valid not only in
plane-parallel media but everywhere where the medium properties change
slowly on the scale of the radiation mean free paths. The Rosseland
approximation says that the vector flux of energy is opposite to the
temperature gradient and gives its magnitude through Eq. 6.29 .

Heat in gases may be transported not only through radiative processes,
but also through convection. The latter occurs due to temperature
differences which affect the density, and thus relative buoyancy, of the
fluid. Heavier (more dense) components will fall while lighter (less
dense) components rise, leading to bulk fluid movement and, as a result,
transport of heat. The onset of convection may be determined by
comparing the local values of the thermodynamical radiative and
convective gradients. In the model described in this Chapter we account
for convection by applying the mixing length approximation ( Paczyński ,
1969 ) .

#### 6.1.4 Dissipation

Accretion disk annuli are not conservative in the sense that the flux of
energy changes with the vertical coordinate due to viscous dissipative
processes. Basing on Eq. 3.15 we expect the whole annuli to generate the
following flux of energy at its surface,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are components of the stress and shear tensors,
respectively. Using the @xmath approach and assuming the heat is not
advected, we may write in the non-relativistic limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the vertically integrated pressure. The models based
on vertically averaged quantities (like Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) or
slim disks) are able to provide the total emission but say nothing about
the internal distribution of dissipation. So far, no analytical model
has been established and one has to make ad hoc assumptions or base on
the results of numerical simulations (e.g., Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) ).
However, it has been shown ( Sądowski et al. , 2009 ) that the profile
of the internal dissipation hardly affects the disk observables.

The simplest and physically justified choice for the dissipation profile
is to assume that the @xmath prescription is valid throughout the disk
interior. Thus, we may take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is now the local pressure. In the following section we will
use the relativistic version of this formula.

However, most recent MHD shearing-box simulations show that the
dissipation in accretion disks may not follow the local @xmath
dissipation. Surprisingly, the resulting maximum of the dissipation rate
is not even at the equatorial plane (where both the density and the
total pressure have maxima). Fig. 6.1 shows the dissipation rate in one
of the simulations performed by Hirose et al. ( 2009a ) . The solid
black line presents the dissipation rate giving rise to the radiative
flux. Its integral is equal to the total emitted radiative flux. It is
clear that the dissipation profile has two maxima at @xmath where @xmath
is the disk scale height. As the total (gas, radiation and magnetic)
pressure peaks at the equatorial plane, the regular @xmath prescription
cannot describe such dissipation profile. Nevertheless, as has already
been discussed in Section 2.2.2 , the @xmath formalism works for the
total, vertically integrated, quantities.

### 6.2 Model

#### 6.2.1 Basic assumptions, parameters, and coefficients

We make the same assumptions as for the one-dimensional model (Section
4.1 ), namely: (i) axisymmetry, (ii) stationarity, (iii) Kerr metric,
with fixed values of the BH mass, @xmath , and spin, @xmath ,
parameters, (iv) symmetry under reflection in the equatorial plane, (v)
steady mass supply rate, @xmath , through a boundary “at infinity”, (vi)
zero torque at the BH horizon, and (vii) we neglect the loss of angular
momentum to both wind and radiation, self-irradiation and magnetic
pressure.

A fraction, @xmath , of the entropy generated locally by dissipative
processes is released into the radiation field, while the remainder is
advected by the gas.

A unique solution to the slim disk model can only be found if certain
additional assumptions are made. We make the following arbitrary choice.
We neglect the vertical variation ( @xmath dependence) of the velocity
field, considering only its height-averaged value; thus, the velocity is
always directed radially inwards and is a function of the radial
coordinate alone. Similarly, we assume there is no @xmath variation of
the advection factor @xmath . Dissipation and angular momentum transport
are given by the @xmath prescription ( Shakura & Sunyaev , 1973 ) , with
a constant value of @xmath . We assume that the local dissipation rate
is proportional to the total pressure, @xmath . For a more detailed
statement, see Eq. 6.34 and the comment following it. Calculations are
carried out for the value @xmath .

We are looking for 2-D slim disk solutions at a definite value of mass
accretion rate for a given Kerr metric. Thus, for a fixed value of
@xmath , there are three fundamental parameters describing a given slim
disk solution: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

#### 6.2.2 Vertical structure equations

We describe the vertical structure of an accretion disk in the optically
thick regime by the following equations:

(i) Hydrostatic equilibrium ( Kato et al. , 2008 ) ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. 4.13 . Although other expressions for the
right-hand side of Eq. 6.33 can be found in the literature (e.g.,
Abramowicz et al. ( 1997 ) includes @xmath ), the form above is
appropriate for our scheme, in which the vertical structure is
precalculated before any information about the radial variables becomes
available.

(ii) The energy generation equation. We assume that the vertical flux of
energy inside the disk @xmath is generated according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Strictly speaking, this does not correspond to a constant @xmath
prescription, as the term @xmath , which is derived from Keplerian
strain, departs somewhat from the value that would follow from the
actually computed distribution of angular momentum (Fig. 6.2 ). However,
as the departure for sub-Eddington accretion rates is small, we expect
Eq. ( 6.34 ) to afford a good approximation. Note that @xmath
corresponds to the NT disk (going over into the Shakura-Sunyaev disk in
the nonrelativistic limit of thin disks), @xmath characterizes
advection-dominated disks, while @xmath describes those regions where
the advected heat is being released. The amount of heat advected @xmath
.

(iii) Energy transport. The structure of the disk has to be such that
the actual value of the divergence of the flux corresponds to Eq. ( 6.34
). Radiative transport is computed in the diffusive approximation (Eq.
6.29 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

while convective transport is computed in the mixing-length
approximation. Energy is transported in the vertical direction through
diffusion of radiation or convection according to the value of the
thermodynamical gradient, which can be either radiative or convective.
Accordingly, we take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the adiabatic gradient given by a derivative at constant entropy:
@xmath .

The radiative gradient @xmath is calculated in the diffusive
approximation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Rosseland mean opacity, and @xmath is the
Stefan-Boltzmann constant.

When the temperature gradient exceeds the value of the adiabatic
gradient, we have to consider the convective energy flux. The convective
gradient @xmath is calculated using the mixing length theory introduced
by Paczyński ( 1969 ) . We take the following mixing length,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with pressure scale height @xmath defined as ( Hameury et al. , 1998 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The convective gradient is defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the solution of the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the typical optical depth for convection @xmath , and @xmath given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The thermodynamical quantities @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are calculated
using standard formulae (e.g., Chandrasekhar ( 1967 ) ) assuming solar
abundances ( @xmath , @xmath ) and, when necessary, taking the effect of
partial ionization of gas on the gas mean molecular weight into account.

We use Rosseland mean opacities @xmath (including the processes of
absorption and scattering) taken from Alexander et al. ( 1983 ) and
Seaton et al. ( 1994 ) . Following other authors (e.g., Idan et al. (
2008 ) ), we neglect expansion opacities, in agreement with our neglect
of vertical velocity gradients.

(iv) We set the following boundary conditions. At the equatorial plane (
@xmath ) we set @xmath , in accordance with the assumption of the
reflection symmetry, while at the disk surface, @xmath , we follow the
Eddington approximation ( Mihalas , 1982 ) and require @xmath .

In practice, for a fixed @xmath , and prescribed values of @xmath and
@xmath , a trial value of the central density, @xmath , is assumed and
the equations are integrated in @xmath until @xmath (as a stand-in for
the disk surface, @xmath ). If @xmath and @xmath fail to satisfy the
surface boundary condition, the assumed value of @xmath is adjusted, and
the integration is repeated, until the condition @xmath is met.
Convergence is usually attained in a few iterations. The emergent flux
of radiation at any given @xmath is then @xmath .

#### 6.2.3 Radial structure equations

The radial sector of the model is described by four laws of conservation
(of mass, angular and radial momenta, and energy), and a regularity
condition at the sonic point. These equations have exactly the same form
as in Section 4.1 with exception to the amount of heat advected @xmath
which is now calculated precisely basing on the solutions of the
vertical structure (see the previous section).

### 6.3 Numerical methods

#### 6.3.1 Vertical structure

The set of ordinary differential equations describing the vertical
structure, i.e., Eqs. 6.33 , 6.34 and 6.36 together with appropriate
boundary conditions are solved for a given BH spin on a
three-dimensional grid spanned by the radius @xmath , the central
temperature @xmath , and the advection factor @xmath . For a given set
of these parameters, we start the integration from the equatorial plane
( @xmath ), and the solution satisfying the outer boundary condition is
found as described at the end of Section 6.2.2 . The resulting
quantities describing the vertical structure ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ), together with @xmath
, are printed out to tables for subsequent use in interpolation
routines. As it turns out, the first two of these parameters, @xmath and
@xmath , can be used to uniquely determine all the other quantities
characterizing the vertical structure, including @xmath (see Fig. 6.3 ).

Calculating the full grid of vertical solutions for a single value of BH
spin takes about 5 hours on a 4-CPU workstation.

#### 6.3.2 Radial structure

The radial sector is described by exactly the same differential
equations as given in Section 4.2 . However, the coefficients @xmath to
@xmath and the amount of advected heat @xmath are now taken from the
precise solutions of the vertical structure.

Similarly like for the one-dimensional case, to obtain a solution one
has to solve this system of two ordinary differential equations,
together with the following regularity conditions at the sonic radius
@xmath , defined by the same conditions as before:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with outer boundary conditions given at some large radius @xmath .
The solution between the outer boundary and the sonic point is found
using the relaxation technique ( Press , 2002 ) , with @xmath treated as
the eigenvalue of the problem. The sonic point for @xmath is located at
@xmath for accretion rate @xmath and at @xmath for @xmath . We use 25
mesh points spaced logarithmically in the radius on the section between
the sonic point and @xmath . This particular number of grid points is
enough to resolve all disk features. We have verified that the results
are accurately reproduced with a denser grid.

The parameters linked to the vertical structure ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ) for given @xmath and @xmath are linearly
interpolated from precalculated tables of the vertical structure
solutions (for given value of @xmath , @xmath is determined directly
from the mass conservation). The radial derivatives @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are evaluated numerically from the @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath profiles in the previous iteration step. A relaxed
solution is obtained in a few iteration steps. Once a solution outside
the sonic point is found we numerically estimate the radial derivatives
of @xmath and @xmath at the sonic point using values given at @xmath and
use these derivatives to start direct integration inside the sonic
point.

The solution thus obtained may then be used as a trial solution when
looking for the relaxation solution of another slim disk, i.e., when one
of the three fundamental parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) has a
slightly different value. Each relaxation step takes approximately 5
seconds on a single-CPU workstation.

### 6.4 Disk structure

In the following two subsections we present and discuss both the radial
and vertical structure of the two-dimensional model of slim accretion
disks. All the solutions, if not stated otherwise, were computed
assuming @xmath and @xmath .

#### 6.4.1 Disk radial structure

The radial profiles are very similar to those described in Section 4.3
(detailed comparison is given in Section 6.5 ). However, to make this
section complete, we shortly discuss them again. In addition to figures
presented before, we show disk thickness and surface density dependence
on BH spin (Fig. 6.4 ) as well as profiles of the total and effective
optical depths (Figs. 6.6 and 6.7 ).

##### Angular momentum

The angular momentum profiles for our accretion disk solutions near a
non-rotating BH are presented in Fig. 6.2 . Results for two values of
mass accretion rate are shown, @xmath and @xmath . For the lowest
accretion rates the profiles follow the Keplerian profile and reach its
minimal value ( @xmath in Eq. 4.10 ) at the marginally stable orbit
(ISCO). The higher the accretion rate, the stronger the departure from
the Keplerian profile. For low values of @xmath (e.g., @xmath ) the disk
is sub-Keplerian at large distances and super-Keplerian at moderate
radii. The Keplerian profile is crossed again at a point located inside
the marginally stable orbit, and corresponding to what is usually called
“the cusp” or “the potential spout”. For a detailed study of the physics
of differently defined inner edges of accretion disks see Section 4.4 .

##### S-curves

Figure 6.3 presents slim disk solutions at @xmath on the @xmath - @xmath
plane, for a non-rotating BH. Solutions of the polytropic,
height-averaged models are presented for comparison (for detailed
discussion see Section 6.5 ). The locus of solutions for various values
of the mass accretion rate has the shape of the so-called “S-curve” (
Abramowicz et al. , 1988 ) . The lower, gas-pressure dominated branch
accurately follows the track of radiatively efficient solutions ( @xmath
). The middle, radiation-pressure dominated branch is reached at @xmath
. As advection becomes significant, the slim disk solution leaves the
@xmath track and moves to higher advection rates. Around @xmath , the
solutions enter the upper advection-dominated branch corresponding to
@xmath (more than 50% of heat stored in the accreted gas). At @xmath
this rate increases almost up to 80% ( @xmath ).

##### Surface density

Profiles of the surface density for 2-D slim disk solutions for a
non-rotating BH are presented in the upper panel of Fig. 6.4 . Different
regimes, corresponding to different branches of the “S-curve” on the (
@xmath , @xmath ) plane are visible. For large radii the surface density
increases with increasing accretion rate (the lower gas-pressure
dominated branch), while this relation is opposite for moderate radii
(the middle radiation-pressure dominated branch). For accretion rates
@xmath the upper advection-dominated branch would be reached. The local
maxima in the surface density profiles (discussed in detail in, e.g.,
Sądowski ( 2009 ) ) are visible for moderate accretion rates ( @xmath ).
The bottom panel of Fig. 6.4 presents corresponding profiles of the
radial velocity @xmath as measured by an observer co-rotating with the
fluid.

The surface density dependence on BH rotation is presented in Fig. 6.5 .
The profiles are shifted to lower radii as the inner edge of the disk
moves inward for higher BH spins. The outer parts of the accretion disk
are insensitive to the metric.

##### Optical depth

In the top panel of Fig. 6.6 we plot the total optical depth of the
vertical slim disk solutions for different accretion rates and @xmath .
The total optical depth,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the total opacity coefficient @xmath , which includes the
processes of absorption and scattering, is closely related to the
surface density. Indeed, the radial profiles of the optical depth shown
in Fig. 6.6 follow the corresponding profiles of surface density. Any
differences in the profiles come from the dependence of the opacity
coefficient on local density and temperature. Outside the ISCO the total
optical depth is always large ( @xmath ).

The diffusive approximation for radiative transport may only be used if
photons are absorbed, otherwise LTE cannot be established. In a
scattering-dominated atmosphere, the effective optical depth is then the
relevant quantity to be used in checking for the self-consistency of the
diffusive approximation. The bottom panel of Fig. 6.6 presents
corresponding profiles of the effective optical depth, which is
estimated in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mean opacity for Thomson electron scattering. For
@xmath the inner region of the disk becomes radiation-pressure dominated
(it enters the middle branch on the corresponding S-curve), the surface
density decreases with increasing accretion rate, and electron
scattering begins to dominate absorption. Therefore, the effective
optical depth decreases with increasing accretion rate and reaches
values @xmath in the inner parts of the disk for accretion rates above
@xmath . As a result, for @xmath , the diffusive approximation can no
longer be applied, and our present approach to solving for the disk
structure breaks down. In Fig. 6.7 we exhibit the dependence of the
effective optical depth on the value of @xmath . In general, @xmath is
inversely proportional to @xmath (as is the surface density). At lower
accretion rates ( @xmath ) the effective optical depth remains large
even for high values of @xmath .

##### Flux profiles

Profiles of the flux emitted from the disk surface ( @xmath ) in the
case of a non-rotating BH are presented in Fig. 6.8 . Results
corresponding to accretion rates from @xmath up to @xmath are shown. For
the lowest rates the emission from inside the marginally stable orbit is
negligible as expected in the standard accretion disk models. This is no
longer true for higher accretion rates, and the advection of energy
causes significant emission from smaller radii. For super-Eddington
accretion rates the emitted flux continues to grow with a decreasing
radius even inside the marginally stable orbit. Radiation coming from
the direct vicinity of the BH is suppressed by the gravitational
redshift (the @xmath -factor, see Section 4.5.2 ). Therefore, an
observer at infinity will observe a maximum in the profile of the
effective temperature even for the highest accretion rates.

The increase of the advective flux with increasing accretion rate is
clearly visible in Fig. 6.9 . The ratio of the heat advected to the
amount of energy emitted is presented for different accretion rates. For
very low accretion rates these profiles approach the limit of a
radiatively efficient disk ( @xmath ), and the advection component
becomes significant for higher accretion rates. Some part (up to @xmath
at @xmath for @xmath ) of the energy generated at moderate radii is
advected with gas and radiated away at @xmath . This causes the
significant change in the emitted flux profile at the higher accretion
rates visible in Fig. 6.8 .

In Fig. 6.10 we present the emitted flux profiles for different BH
angular momenta at a constant accretion rate @xmath . These profiles
coincide at large radii where the influence of the BH rotation is
negligible; however, the higher the BH spin, the closer to the horizon
the marginally stable orbit. Therefore, in the case of rotating BHs, the
accreting matter can move much deeper into the gravity well, compared to
non-rotating BHs. This effect leads to an increase in the disk
luminosity and hardening of its spectrum, which can be inferred from
Fig. 6.10 — the higher the spin, the higher the disk luminosity, and the
higher the flux (which corresponds to the effective temperature).

##### Photosphere location

The flux observed at infinity may be obtained by performing ray tracing
of photons emitted from the accretion disk (see Section 6.5 ).
Scattering in the layer above the photosphere must also be taken into
account. An accurate calculation requires detailed knowledge of
atmospheric properties, including the location of the photosphere. This
is particularly important when accretion rates are high and the disk is
no longer geometrically thin ( Sądowski et al. , 2009 ) .

In Fig. 6.11 we plot the profiles for the @xmath -location of the
photosphere, @xmath , obtained in our model at different accretion rates
for a non-rotating BH. Clearly, for high accretion rates, @xmath , the
inner regions become thicker (effects of radiation pressure). For @xmath
, the ratio @xmath reaches values as high as @xmath . Close to the ISCO
the height of the photosphere rapidly decreases because of vigorous
cooling. Although the rapid change in disk thickness violates the
assumption of the hydrostatic equilibrium that we make when solving for
the disk vertical structure, the accelerations connected with the
vertical motions involved are much lower than the vertical component of
gravity. Indeed, the vertical accelerations are close to @xmath . In
deriving this estimate we liberally assumed that @xmath and used the
fact that the rapid decrease in disk height occurs near the sonic point,
while the speed of sound @xmath is approximately @xmath . Thus the
acceleration terms modifying Eq. 6.33 would be smaller than the
gravitational acceleration by a factor of a few percent: @xmath . In
Fig. 6.13 we plot the dynamical and gravitational components of the
vertical equilibrium equation at the photosphere. It is clear that the
former is at least @xmath times smaller than the latter at the sonic
radii for @xmath . Therefore, in all likelihood, our results correctly
describe the disk structure that would be obtained without assuming
strict hydrostatic equilibrium.

In Fig. 6.12 we present radial photosphere profiles, at a fixed
accretion rate and different values of the BH spin. The photospheric
heights coincide for large radii. In the inner regions of the disk, the
height of the photosphere increases with BH spin, reflecting the
increased luminosity and radiation pressure.

#### 6.4.2 Vertical structure

In Fig. 6.14 we present a vertical cross-section of a Schwarzschild slim
disk for @xmath . At this accretion rate the disk is radiatively
efficient and no advection of entropy is expected. The top panel
presents the radial profiles of the photosphere and the disk surface
(defined as a layer with @xmath g/cm @xmath ).

The total optical depth reaches values as high as @xmath on the
equatorial plane and decreases monotonically towards the photosphere at
@xmath (Fig. 6.14 , second panel from the top). Within the marginally
stable orbit, the total optical depth significantly decreases, as shown
in Fig. 6.6 .

The third panel of Fig. 6.14 presents the temperature, which decreases
with height from @xmath at the equatorial plane to @xmath at the
photosphere. The maximum value of the temperature is attained on the
equatorial plane at @xmath .

Density is presented in the fourth panel, and the next panel presents
the vertical flux that is generated inside the disk according to Eq.
6.34 . It is set to zero on the equatorial plane by reflection symmetry,
and then rapidly increases, because in an alpha disk the dissipation is
proportional to the pressure, which reaches its maximum on the @xmath
plane. Close to the disk surface, where pressure is almost negligible,
the flux slowly settles down to the emitted value. At the accretion rate
chosen for the figure the flux rapidly decreases inside the marginally
stable orbit.

The bottom panel of Fig. 6.14 presents the non-monotonic distribution of
the thermodynamical gradient (Eq. 6.36 ), which ranges between @xmath
and @xmath . Therefore, the disk’s vertical structure cannot be
described by a simple polytropic relation. Moreover, in the region of
the highest temperature (close to the equatorial plane at moderate
radii, @xmath ), the heat is transported upward through convection.

The vertical structure of an accretion disk with ten times higher
accretion rate, @xmath , is presented in Fig. 6.15 . The general picture
remains the same, since the advection of heat is still insignificant.
However, as the temperature increases, the inner disk regions become
dominated by radiation pressure. For @xmath the convective region
extends from the marginally stable orbit up to @xmath and covers more
than half of the disk thickness.

The disk structure is significantly different in the case of a high
accretion rate (e.g., @xmath ), with a significant amount of advection.
The vertical cross-sections of the slim disk are presented in Fig. 6.16
. The inner regions are dominated by radiation pressure, so the disk
geometrically thickens and the photosphere is now higher. The total
optical depth mostly follows the surface density (compare Fig. 6.6 ),
and therefore decreases considerably towards the BH in the inner parts
of the disk.

The temperature maximum is again located at the equatorial plane close
to @xmath . The maximum of the effective temperature (corresponding to
the vertical flux shown in the fifth panel (compare also Fig. 6.8 ) is
shifted inwards, down to @xmath .

The fourth panel of Fig. 6.16 presents the density distribution. Despite
the fact that the surface density monotonically increases outward (see
Fig. 6.4 ), @xmath has two maxima in the equatorial plane: at @xmath and
@xmath . Finally, the bottom panel presents the thermodynamical gradient
distribution. For such a high accretion rate, the convective zone
extends nearly to the photosphere for @xmath and is present up to @xmath
.

In Fig. 6.17 we present the density in the meridional plane for three
different accretion rates. The equatorial plane lies in the middle of
each plot. The violet boundaries denote the photosphere. The two maxima
of density at the equatorial plane for @xmath are clearly visible also
in this representation, as are some other features discussed above.

### 6.5 Comparison with height-averaged slim disk solutions

In this section we compare the two-dimensional (2-D) slim disk
solutions, where the radial structure equations are coupled to those for
the vertical structure, with the standard polytropic slim disk model,
introduced in Chapter 4 , in which the slim disk equations and
properties are averaged over the thickness of the disk. The latter may
be extended to mimic the more detailed 2-D solutions by introducing two
additional parameters: @xmath and @xmath .

Under the one-zone approximation and assuming that radiation is
transported in the vertical direction only through diffusion, one
obtains the following formula for the total flux emitted from disk
surface (compare Eq. 4.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where factor @xmath has been introduced to account for inaccuracies
arising from this approximation, as well as from the dominance of the
disk convection in certain regions (as discussed in § 6.4.2 ). Now,
advective cooling takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

One has to remember that disk thickness, @xmath , introduced in Eq. 4.12
, is not the exact location of the photosphere but rather disk pressure
scale. Therefore, we introduce a factor @xmath relating these
quantities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Usually (like in Chapter 4 ), the following values of @xmath (the
polytropic index), @xmath and @xmath are assumed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 6.18 we compare radial profiles of the flux, photospheric height
and surface density of the 2-D slim disk model described in this Chapter
(consistently taking its vertical structure into account) with profiles
obtained for the polytropic, height-averaged, slim disk, as presented in
Chapter 4 . The comparison was carried out for two accretion rates (
@xmath and @xmath ) and @xmath . For the lower accretion rate ( @xmath
), the disk is radiatively efficient (advective cooling is negligible),
and therefore both flux profiles almost coincide and correspond to the
Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) solutions. However, the disk photosphere
location in the polytropic model turns out to be overestimated by more
than 20% in the region corresponding to the maximal emission. The
profiles of the surface density do not coincide either, the 2-D
solutions giving values @xmath lower than the corresponding polytropic
solutions (compare Fig. 6.3 ).

For the higher accretion rate ( @xmath ), the flux profiles remain
similar (up to 1%). However, as advection becomes important, the
emission is shifted inwards with respect to the Novikov & Thorne
profile. The photosphere location in the polytropic model is
overestimated by @xmath and the surface density by @xmath .

A question arises as to whether such differences in the flux,
photosphere, and surface density profiles affect the resulting disk
spectrum. In Fig. 6.19 we present spectral profiles and their ratios
(2-D to polytropic) for two accretion rates. The spectra were calculated
with ray-tracing routines ( Bursa , 2006 ) using the BHSPEC package (
Davis et al. , 2005 ) , assuming the inclination angle @xmath and
distance to the observer @xmath . As BHSPEC gives tabulated solutions of
the full, frequency-dependent, radiative transfer equations for the disk
vertical structure taking the Compton scatterings into account in the
disk atmosphere, the spectra presented in Fig. 6.19 are not those of a
simple multicolor blackbody. However, one should be aware that using
BHSPEC for calculating spectral color correction is not consistent with
the assumed vertical structure (calculated or height-averaged) because
it is based on a stand-alone disk model.

The general shape of the spectra is similar for both types of slim disk
models, because the emission profiles nearly coincide. However, the
spectra are not identical. The bottom panel of Fig. 6.19 presents ratios
of the spectral profiles of the corresponding solutions for each
accretion rate. They all coincide att low energies ( @xmath ), while for
higher energies the discrepancies are as large as @xmath for @xmath at
@xmath . These differences are attributed to (slightly) different
profiles of the flux, the photosphere, and the surface density. We
conclude that the proper treatment of the vertical structure hardly
affects the spectra of slim disks for this range of accretion rates (
@xmath ) and the viscosity parameter ( @xmath ).

We end this section by giving fitting formulae for @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , which approximate the full numerical 2-D solutions described in
this paper with a polytropic slim disk model. An advantage of using
these formulae lies in avoiding the need to perform time-consuming
calculations of the vertical structure and avoiding numerical problems
connected to interpolation in the vertical solutions grid. The formulae
for the polytropic model parameters for @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the spin correction coefficients @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the radius of the marginally stable orbit. For a
non-rotating BH, at the radius @xmath (corresponding to the highest disk
effective temperature at @xmath ), the fitting formulae are accurate to
1% for the emitted flux, the photospheric height and the surface
density.

### 6.6 Discussion

Motivated by a desire to explain and fit the observed spectra of
accreting BHs in binary systems to theoretical models, we have developed
a 2-D model of optically thick slim disks. These should be particularly
relevant to transient binaries. In quiescence, their inner disk regions
are described well by optically thin advection-dominated accretion flows
(ADAFs; see e.g., Lasota et al. ( 1996 ) ; Dubus et al. ( 2001 ) ).
However, a few BH systems (e.g., GRS 1915+105 and LMC X-3) have been
observed in thermal states corresponding to disk luminosities higher
than @xmath ( McClintock & Remillard , 2003 ; Steiner et al. , 2010 ) ,
and modeling these require optically thick models going beyond the
standard thin disks.

In this Chapter we presented a 2-D slim disk model, in which the radial
and vertical structures are coupled. Such an approach eliminates
arbitrary factors that influence solutions of the usual polytropic slim
disk model. The results were obtained under two key assumptions: an
alpha disk was assumed (dissipation proportional to pressure), with a
uniform value of @xmath , and the fraction of the generated entropy that
is advected was computed at every radius under the assumption that this
fraction does not vary with the height above the disk plane (Eq. 6.34 ).
Both of these assumptions seem arbitrary, and we can offer no physical
motivation for the (conventional) choice we made.

Under these assumptions and for the value @xmath of the viscosity
parameter, we computed and presented the detailed structure of 2-D slim
disks, parametrized by the mass accretion rate, and the two Kerr metric
parameters, @xmath and @xmath . Somewhat surprisingly, the spectra
observed at infinity from such disks differ by only a few percent (and
only at high energies) from those obtained from previously considered
slim disk models (in which the equations and structure correspond to a
height average over a polytropic atmosphere). Such differences are
unlikely to introduce any large corrections to spin measurements based
on X-ray continuum fits made with corresponding height-averaged
polytropic models of slim disks. Therefore, applying the spectral
routines based on regular, polytropic slim disk solutions (e.g., slimbb
, described in Section 4.5.2 ) is justified.

One has to be aware that the model of vertical structure presented here
is only an approximation of the real physical processes taking place in
disk interiors. The diffusion approximation and the convection treatment
in the mixing length approach are known to successfully describe media
with large effective optical depths but break down when the disk becomes
optically thin. We have shown that the effective optical depth of slim
accretion disks may drop below unity for super-Eddington luminosities
and sufficiently high values of @xmath . For such conditions, a more
sophisticated model of radiation transfer should be implemented.
However, for @xmath and @xmath the assumptions of this work are
self-consistent. For higher values of @xmath their range of
applicability is limited to lower luminosities (e.g., to @xmath for
@xmath ). Kerr-metric slim disks with low effective optical depth were
discussed by Beloborodov ( 1998 ) , who finds them to be significantly
hotter than the optically thick ones.

Another remark is connected to the fact that one can expect winds to be
blown out of the disk surface at super-Eddington luminosities. Such a
phenomenon may significantly change the disk structure, e.g., its
thickness. This feature of slim disks, not described in our
calculations, has recently been recently cleverly modeled by Dotani &
Shaviv ( 2010 ) .

## Chapter 7 Self-irradiated slim accretion disks

The slim disk models presented and discussed in Chapters 4 , 5 and 6
make a few fundamental assumptions which make the problem of solving the
hydrodynamical equations simpler, e.g., the negligence of the angular
momentum taken away by photons in the angular momentum equation (Eq.
2.16 ) makes its direct integration possible and puts the hydrodynamics
into the form of ordinary differential equations instead of an
integral-differential problem. The same physical process may be
accounted for consistently in the standard model of a relativistic thin
and radiatively efficient disk ( Novikov & Thorne , 1973 ) .

The returning flux of radiation and angular momentum due to the
self-irradiation in a curved spacetime is another factor which has been
so far neglected. Again, only in the case of thin disks one can account
for this effect in a (relatively) simple way. It has been shown ( Li et
al. ( 2005 ) , Kato et al. ( 2008 ) ) that for thin disks with no torque
at their inner edge the returning radiation has little influence on the
inner disk regions and therefore on the emerging flux and high-energy
disk spectrum. However, as was shown in the previous Chapters, accretion
disks with high accretion rates are geometrically thick and the effect
of self-irradiation may be much more significant. Unfortunately,
including the appropriate terms into the disk equations once again leads
to a complicated set of integral-differential equations. Therefore, a
different approach for solving them is necessary.

In this Chapter we present a state-of-art numerical method of solving
slim disk equations including all of the above-mentioned factors. We
limit our discussion to the case of a non-rotating BH. More detailed
study will be included in a separate paper.

### 7.1 Equations

We start with presenting modified forms of the vertically integrated
equations describing an advective accretion disk which include the flux
of angular momentum taken away by photons and the fluxes of radiation
and angular momentum coming back with the returning radiation. Only two
equations need to be modified: the angular momentum conservation and the
energy balance. Deriving them we assume that the disk albedo is zero,
i.e., all the returning radiation is absorbed and thermalized by the
disk. We note that this assumption may not be satisfied in the disk
regions which are effectively optically thin (e.g., deep inside
marginally stable orbit). Our approach gives the upper limit on the
impact of the returning radiation on the disk structure and neglects the
reflected radiation.

#### 7.1.1 Angular momentum conservation

Let us take the angular momentum conservation law in the general form
(Eq. 2.16 ) assuming stationarity ( @xmath ) and leaving the general
form of the @xmath component of the stress-energy tensor,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression neglects the angular momentum fluxes due to the emerging
and returning radiation which are equal,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

respectively. @xmath denotes the emerging flux at given point on the
disk surface, @xmath is the corresponding angular momentum, @xmath is a
ray-tracing function determining if a photon emitted from @xmath along
the direction @xmath returns to the disk at radius @xmath , and which
accounts for the change of the photon energy (expressed by the g-factor,
see Section 4.5.2 or Li et al. ( 2005 ) ).

Including these terms leads to,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and further, after radial integration, to,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Calculating these integrals requires a priori knowledge about the
emission and angular momentum profiles between the horizon and given
radius @xmath . We will solve this problem using the relaxation method
where the integrals are calculated basing on previous relaxation steps.
Details are given in Section 7.2 .

#### 7.1.2 Energy balance

The energy balance equation (Eq. 4.17 ) relates the amount of the
advected heat (left hand side) to the difference between the heating and
cooling (right hand side). Originally, the latter involved the viscous
heating and radiative cooling only. When accounting for the returning
radiation one has to include an additional heating term as the incoming
flux of radiation brings its energy and stores it in the disk heating it
up. The expression for the advected heat takes the following form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the viscous heating,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the radiative cooling, and the returning flux @xmath is given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral will be calculated using the emission profile from the
previous iteration step as described in detail in the next section.

### 7.2 Numerical methods

Including self-irradiation into the slim disk model introduces integrals
which cannot be directly evaluated because they depend, e.g., on the
emission and angular momentum profiles which are not known at the time
of solving the equations. However, the exact solution may be found using
an iteration scheme where these integrals are calculated basing on the
profiles from previous iteration steps. The solution is found when and
if such a scheme converges. Fortunately, this is the case for
self-irradiated slim disks. In this paragraph we give details of the
numerical methods used to solve the problem.

We base on the equations for the radial structure of the polytropic slim
accretion disk described in Chapter 4 . We take without any
modifications the equation of continuity (Eq. 4.7 ), the radial momentum
balance (Eq. 4.8 ), the vertical equilibrium formula (Eq. 4.12 ) and the
expression for the advected heat (Eq. 4.16 ). We modify the formula for
the angular momentum conservation and the heating-cooling balance and
take the forms derived in the previous two paragraphs,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

introducing a dimensionless parameter @xmath satisfying @xmath .

In the beginning we put @xmath and solve the set of regular slim disk
equations. Basing on this solution, we calculate the integrals in Eqs.
7.6 and 7.7 as well as the returning radiation profile @xmath (Eq. 7.11
). We set @xmath to some small number (typically @xmath ) and relax the
equations (in the same way as described in Section 4.2 ) to obtain a
transonic solution. Once the transonic solution is found we slightly
(not to lose convergence) increase value of @xmath making the impact of
the self-irradiation effects stronger. During the relaxation in @xmath
we keep the calculated values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath fixed. This
procedure is repeated until the solution with @xmath is found. Then, new
profiles of the integrals and returning radiation are calculated. Basing
on them, we relax the solution from the one obtained in the previous set
of iterations to a new one, following the most recent estimate of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . This scheme is repeated until a converged solution
is found.

Usually, around @xmath iterations in @xmath are required and the whole
scheme has to be repeated few times. Due to the numerical evaluation of
the self-irradiation, the required computational time increased
significantly (up to 10 minutes on a single-CPU workstation) in
comparison with the regular, non-irradiated disk model.

### 7.3 Results

In this section we discuss the most important features of
self-irradiated solutions of slim disks for a non-rotating BH. More
detailed study, including discussion of the impact of self-irradiation
on accretion disks around highly-spinning BHs, will be put in a
forthcoming paper.

#### 7.3.1 Emission profiles

The profile of emission, corresponding to the rate of radiative cooling,
is the most important factor determining the accretion disk spectrum.
Other factors which are important for the spectrum are: location of the
disk photosphere (the location where the ray-tracing starts) and disk
surface density (related to the intrinsic hardening of the spectrum due
to photon up-scattering by hot electrons, see Section 4.5.1 ). These
additional factors, as our study shows (e.g., Fig 7.1 ), are slightly
affected by self-irradiation, and the changes in the emission profile
dominate. Thus, we put most attention to discussing the impact of
returning radiation on the emergent flux profiles.

In Fig. 7.2 we plot profiles of the emitted and returning fluxes of
radiation for slim disks with three accretion rates: @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (marked with different colors). The dotted lines denote solutions
of the regular, non-self-irradiated model presented in Chapter 4 . The
dashed lines give the profiles of the returning radiation, while the
solid lines show the emission from the new, self-irradiated solutions.

The disk with the lowest accretion rate presented ( @xmath ) is very
thin ( @xmath , see Fig. 7.1 ) and therefore, the returning radiation is
a result of the light bending only — there is hardly any direct
irradiation by the disk itself and curved geodesics are required to
direct photons back to the disk. Thus, the returning radiation for this
accretion rate (blue, dashed line) with good accuracy corresponds to the
profile of returning radiation calculated for the standard thin disk (
Li et al. , 2005 ) . For the case of a non-rotating BH, the profile of
returning radiation is roughly a power law with the same exponent as the
emission at @xmath , i.e., @xmath . At large radii the returning
radiation is equal to roughly @xmath of the radiation emitted. The
relation between the emitted and returning fluxes changes rapidly inside
the marginally stable orbit. Inside this particular radius, there is
little viscous heating, and therefore the standard solutions emit hardly
any radiation. On the other hand, the radiation emitted from outside the
marginally stable orbit is efficiently focused by the BH on the regions
close to the horizon. Therefore, the returning flux increases with
decreasing radius, and dominates over the viscosity-generated emission.

The solid blue line presents the ultimate solution for @xmath , which
takes into account the impact of self-irradiation and the angular
momentum taken away by photons, and which has relaxed following the
numerical procedure described in Section 7.2 . Outside the marginally
stable orbit the disk is heated up by viscosity, while the
self-irradiation dominates inside. One can expect that an accretion disk
at such low accretion rate is radiatively efficient. This is in fact the
case, not only outside the marginally stable orbit, but also inside,
where heating by the returning radiation dominates. As a result, all the
heat generated is released at the same radius, and the outcoming flux is
the sum of the profiles of viscous and returning radiation heating rates
(the blue solid line follows the standard solution outside the
marginally stable orbit, and the returning radiation profile inside this
radius). The maximal disk temperature, which determines the spectral
hardness and is crucial for estimating the BH spin using X-ray continuum
fitting (see Section 8.2 ), does not change — the self-irradiation
affects the emission profile only inside the marginally stable orbit and
the modified emission does not exceed the maximal value reached at
@xmath .

The behavior discussed above changes when the accretion rate becomes
high. For @xmath the disk is no longer thin ( @xmath ), and the profile
of emission of the standard solution slightly shifts inward due to
advection. Furthermore, the disk surface is no longer straight ( @xmath
), but the innermost region is puffed up by the pressure of radiation.
As a result, the inner region of this radiation pressure-related hump
captures back radiation emitted from disk inner regions on the other
side of the central BH. What follows, the radiation from the innermost
disk does not reach the most distant ( @xmath ) regions, being eclipsed
by the inner hump. The increase of the amount of returning radiation due
to the radiation pressure-induced disk thickening around @xmath is
visible in Fig. 7.2 . The orange dashed line presents its profile for
@xmath . At large distances it contributes to @xmath of the viscous
heating, exactly as in the case of a thin disk. In the region inside
@xmath , however, its amount, compared to the standard solution,
increases to @xmath , due to the photon capture by the hump. The profile
of the returning flux further increases towards the BH horizon due to
efficient light bending close to the BH. All the captured radiation, as
will be discussed in one of the following paragraphs is reemitted, and
the profile of emission of the self-irradiated solution is, similarly as
for the @xmath case, the sum of the viscosity and returning fluxes. This
time, however, the maximal effective temperature of the emitted flux is
affected and increases by @xmath when compared to the standard solution.

The impact of the radiation pressure-induced inner hump, and, in
general, increased disk thickness is even more profound for accretion
disks with super-critical accretion rates. The profile of the estimated
location of the disk photosphere for @xmath is presented in Fig. 7.1 .
It is clear that disk inner region irradiates itself, and only small
fraction of radiation is able to escape to the observer at infinity. The
photons emitted from the most energetic, inner regions are not able to
reach the most distant regions, obscured by the thickening. The green
curves in Fig. 7.2 show this behavior in terms of the returning and
emitted radiation. The flux re-captured by the disk in the inner region
( @xmath ) is equal to @xmath of the emerging one — only fifth part of
the emitted radiation escapes to infinity. If the disk was radiatively
efficient, this flux of returning radiation would increase the emitted
one almost by a factor of two. However, at such high accretion rate the
disk is advection dominated, and most of the heat returning with
radiation to the disk is advected towards BH instead of being
instantaneously reemitted. As a result, the flux emitted by the
self-irradiated solution is higher than the flux of the standard one
only by @xmath , what corresponds to the same increase of the effective
temperature as in the case of @xmath .

#### 7.3.2 Returning radiation

In Fig. 7.3 we plot the radial distribution of the radiation returning
back to the disk at two radii: @xmath (solid) and @xmath (dashed lines)
for the same three accretion rates. The blue curves correspond to the
lowest, @xmath . The profiles of the returning flux for both radii
reflect the profile of the emitted radiation with the peak around @xmath
and a minimum slightly inside the marginally stable orbit. The returning
flux, however, does not increase, like the emitted flux does, towards
the horizon, as the photons coming back from the vicinity of BH are
subject to very strong redshift making their contribution to the
returning flux at larger radii negligible. Even for large distances from
the BH (e.g., @xmath , blue dashed line), the photons from the most
energetic, inner regions around @xmath contribute to the majority of the
returning flux.

Once the disk thickens and the inner hump appears, the radial
distribution of the returning radiation changes. Most of the flux
returning to @xmath still comes from the hottest region inside this
radius, the radiation from the vicinity of BH is also strongly
redshifted and does not contribute significantly to the returning flux.
However, the distribution does no longer extend uniformly towards large
radii. The region outside @xmath is obscured by the inner hump and no
single photon from this region is able to return to the disk at @xmath .
This fact is clearly visible also on the profiles of the radiation
returning to @xmath (dashed lines). For @xmath the distribution
terminates at @xmath meaning that the region inside this radius is
hidden for an observer located at the disk photosphere at @xmath . For
@xmath this obscuration takes place starting from @xmath .

#### 7.3.3 Energy balance

At each radius the balance between heating and cooling must be
satisfied. In the standard approach, only three mechanisms were
involved: viscous heating, radiative cooling and advective heating
(decreasing radial advective flux heats the disk at given radius up) or
cooling (some fraction of heat generated by viscosity increases the
advective flux). When the self-irradiation is taken into account, an
additional heating mechanism resulting from the returning radiation must
be considered.

In Fig. 7.4 we compare the heating/cooling profiles of the standard
(dashed) and self-irradiated (solid lines) slim disk solutions for three
accretion rates: @xmath (top), @xmath (middle) and @xmath (bottom
panel). Advection for the lowest accretion rates (top panel),
corresponding to radiatively efficient disks, is negligible. Therefore,
in the standard model the heat generated by viscosity is completely
balanced by the radiative cooling. When the returning radiation is
considered, another heating mechanism occurs. The excess of heating at
@xmath must be balanced by the radiative emission. This is in fact the
case — the rate of heating by the returning radiation (brown solid line)
is equal to the absolute value of the radiative cooling rate in this
region (blue solid line).

Advection becomes an important factor in the energy balance when the
accretion rate is large. The middle panel of Fig. 7.4 presents the
heating and cooling rates for both models for @xmath . In the standard
approach, viscosity is the only heating mechanism at @xmath . Small
fraction (compare Fig. 4.10 ) of the heat generated in this region is
stored in the advective flux and is released, contributing to the total
heating rate, inside this radius. At @xmath the advective heating
dominates over the viscosity-induced mechanism, leading to slight inward
shift of the emission.

This characteristic changes, mostly in the innermost region, when the
returning radiation is considered (solid lines). The heating caused by
this process is most efficient near the BH, where it dominates over the
other mechanisms. For the whole region inside @xmath , the advection
contributes to heating only, and all the heat coming with the returning
radiation must be balanced by the increase of radiative cooling. As a
result, the amount of the emitted flux increases by the rate of the
captured radiation, leading to the modified emission profile presented
in Fig. 7.2 .

The solutions for the highest accretion rates (e.g., @xmath , bottom
panel) are significantly different, as the advective cooling is
prominent at most radii. For the standard model, the advection
contributes to cooling at @xmath and may be twice as efficient as the
radiative mechanism at moderate ( @xmath ) radii. This leads to an
inefficient emission (blue line) equal to only a small fraction of the
heating rate (orange). Disks at such high accretion rates are very thick
and capture significant part of the emitted radiation. However, most of
this radiation is not radiated away at the same radius due to the
efficient advective cooling mechanism. Instead, the captured heat is
advected towards the BH. As a result, the emission profile does not
change significantly. Only the rate of advective cooling significantly
increases.

### 7.4 Discussion

We have introduced a model of an advective, optically thick accretion
disk which properly accounts for the heating impact of the returning
radiation, as well as the angular momentum taken away and brought in by
photons. In the previous section we described in detail solutions for
disks around non-rotating BHs and compared them with the solutions of
the standard model presented in Chapter 4 . This analysis leads to the
following conclusions:

(i) The impact of self-irradiation onto disks with sub-Eddington
accretion rates is negligible, as the returning radiation is comparable
with the viscous heating only inside the marginally stable orbit.
Despite the fact that the emission profile is significantly modified in
this region, the resulting spectrum will be hardly affected, as the
radiation coming from the vicinity of BH is strongly redshifted and
hardly contributes to the total emission.

(ii) For disks with accretion rates close to the Eddington value, the
relative amount of the captured radiation in the innermost region
increases due to radiation pressure-induced disk thickening. For the
Eddington accretion rate, the returning radiation around @xmath may be
equal up to @xmath of the flux emitted there. At these accretion rates,
all the returning radiation contributes to the emission, increasing the
amount of the emerging flux. As a result, the maximal effective
temperature increases by a few percent, leading to a spectrum slightly
harder than the predicted by the standard model.

(iii) The relative amount of the captured radiation is much larger for
super-critical accretion rates. For @xmath , the returning flux may
reach as much as @xmath of the emitted one. However, at this regime of
luminosities accretion disks are efficiently cooled by advection, and
most of this returning heat is advected onto the BH. Only small fraction
( @xmath for @xmath ) contributes to the radiative emission. The
emerging spectrum is slightly hardened in comparison with the standard
model.

The study presented in this Chapter was limited to the case of a
non-rotating BH. In a forthcoming paper we will extend this approach to
study the impact of returning radiation on accretion disks around
rotating BHs. It has been shown by Li et al. ( 2005 ) that its impact on
disk spectra may be more significant for rapidly rotating BHs ¹ ¹ 1 They
prove, that for the thin disk case, the impact of self-irradiation on
the spectrum may be simulated to quite high accuracy by a slight
increase of the accretion rate. . Our results show, that for slowly
rotating central objects, only solutions with low accretion rates are
unaffected by the returning radiation, and the standard models may be
applied to model spectra. For higher accretion rates, however, they have
to be used with care, as they underestimate the amount of emitted
radiation and the spectrum hardness. This discrepancy may be more
profound for rotating BHs. Nevertheless, the uncertainty related to the
model inadequacy is most likely negligible when compared to other
unknown factors, e.g., the value of the viscosity parameter @xmath at
different luminosities (see Section 8.2 ).

## Chapter 8 Applications

### 8.1 Spinning-up black holes with super-critical accretion flows

Astrophysical BHs are very simple objects – they can be described by
just two parameters: mass and angular momentum. In isolation, BHs
conserve the birth values of these parameters but often, e.g., in close
binaries or in active nuclei, they are surrounded by accretion disks and
their mass and angular momentum change. Accretion of matter always
increases BH’s irreducible mass and may change its angular momentum,
usually described by the dimensionless spin parameter @xmath . The sign
of this change and its value depend on the (relative) sign of accreted
angular momentum and the balance between accretion of matter and various
processes extracting BH’s rotational energy and angular momentum.

The question about the maximal possible spin of an object represented by
the Kerr solution of the Einstein equation is of fundamental and
practical (observational) interest. First, a spin @xmath corresponds to
a naked singularity and not to a BH. According to the Penrose cosmic
censorship conjecture, naked singularities cannot form through actual
physical processes, i.e. singularities in the Universe (except for the
initial one in the Big Bang) are always surrounded by event horizons (
Wald , 1984 ) . This hypothesis has yet to be proven.

In any case, the “third law” of BH thermodynamics ( Bardeen et al. ,
1973 ) asserts that a BH cannot be spun-up in a finite time to the
extreme spin value @xmath . Determining the maximum value of BH spin is
also of practical interest because the efficiency of accretion through a
disk depends on the BH’s spin value. For example, for the “canonical”
value @xmath (see below) it is about @xmath , while for @xmath one has
@xmath (Section 2.3 ). Recently, Bañados et al. ( 2009 ) showed that the
energy @xmath of the center-of-mass collision of two particles colliding
arbitrary close to the BH horizon, grows to infinity ( @xmath ) when
@xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Of more fundamental interest is the fact that the proper
geodesic distances @xmath between the ISCO and several other special
Keplerian orbits relevant to accretion disk structure tend to infinity
@xmath when @xmath ( Bardeen et al. , 1972 ) . .

A definitive study of the BH spin evolution will only be possible when
reliable, non-stationary models of accretion disks and jet emission
mechanisms are established. For now, one has to use simplified
analytical or numerical models.

Thorne ( 1974 ) used the model of a radiatively efficient, geometrically
thin accretion disk ( Novikov & Thorne , 1973 ) to evaluate BH spin
evolution taking into account the decelerating impact of disk-emitted
photons. The maximum value so obtained, @xmath , has been regarded as
the canonical value for the maximal BH spin. In this Chapter we
generalize Thorne’s approach, using models of advective, optically thick
accretion disks (slim disks, Chapter 4 ) to calculate maximum BH spin
values for a large range of accretion rates. We show that for
sufficiently large accretion rates they differ from the canonical value.

We start with a short discussion of previous works devoted to the BH
spin evolution. In Section 8.1.2 we give formulae for a general tetrad
of an observer comoving with the accreting gas along the arbitrary
photosphere surface. In Section 8.1.3 we give basic equations describing
the BH spin evolution. In Section 8.1.4 we present and discuss the
terminal spin values for all the models we consider. Finally, in Section
8.1.5 we summarize our results.

#### 8.1.1 Previous studies

A number of authors have studied the evolution of the BH spin resulting
from disk accretion. Bardeen ( 1970 ) initiated this field of research
by stating the problem and solving equations describing the BH spin
evolution for accretion from the marginally stable orbit. Neglecting the
effects of radiation he proved that such a process may spin-up the BH up
to @xmath . Once the classical models of accretion disks were formulated
( Shakura & Sunyaev , 1973 ; Novikov & Thorne , 1973 ) , it was possible
to account properly for the decelerating impact of radiation (frame
dragging makes counter-rotating photons more likely to be captured by
the BH). As mentioned above, Thorne ( 1974 ) performed this study and
obtained the terminal spin value for an isotropically emitting thin disk
of @xmath , independently of the accretion rate. The original study by
Thorne was followed by many papers, some of which are briefly mentioned
below.

The first to challenge the universality of Thorne’s limit were
Abramowicz & Lasota ( 1980 ) who showed that geometrically thick
accretion disks may spin up BHs to terminal spin values much closer to
unity than the presumably canonical @xmath . Their simple argument was
based on models by Kozłowski et al. ( 1978 ) who showed that for high
accretion rates the inner edge of a disk may be located inside the
marginally stable orbit; with increasing accretion rate, arbitrarily
close to the marginally bound orbit. However, this conclusion assumed
implicitly a low viscosity parameter @xmath , whereas for high
viscosities the situation is more complicated (see Abramowicz et al. (
2010 ) and references therein).

Moderski et al. ( 1998 ) assessed the impact of possible interaction
between the disk magnetic field and the BH through the Blandford-Znajek
process. They showed that the terminal spin value may be decreased to
any, arbitrarily small value, if only the disk magnetic field is strong
enough. Given the current lack of knowledge about the strength of
magnetic fields (or the magnetic transport of angular momentum in the
disk, see Ghosh & Abramowicz ( 1997 ) ) and processes leading to jet
emission, a more detailed study cannot be performed. The situation may
further be complicated by energy extraction from the inner parts of
accretion disks ( Livio et al. , 1999 ) .

Popham & Gammie ( 1998 ) studied the spinning-up of BHs by optically
thin advection dominated accretion flows (ADAFs). They neglected the
contribution of radiation to BH spin as such disks are radiatively
inefficient. They found that the terminal value of BH spin is very
sensitive to the assumed value of the viscosity parameter @xmath and may
vary between @xmath and @xmath . Gammie et al. ( 2004 ) , besides making
a comprehensive summary of different ways of spinning up supermassive
BHs, presented results based on a single run of a general relativistic
magnetohydrodynamical (GRMHD) simulation (with no radiation included)
obtaining terminal spin @xmath .

Cosmological evolution of spins of supermassive BHs due to hierarchical
mergers and thin-disk accretion episodes has been recently intensively
studied. Although Volonteri et al. ( 2005 ) arrived to the conclusion
that accretion tend to spin-up BHs close to unity, as opposed to mergers
which, on the average, do not influence the spin evolution, the
following studies by e.g., Volonteri et al. ( 2007 ) ; King et al. (
2008 ) ; Berti & Volonteri ( 2008 ) showed that the situation is more
complex, the final spin values depending on the details of the history
of the accretion events (see also Fanidakis et al. ( 2011 ) ).

Li et al. ( 2005 ) included the returning radiation into the thin-disk
model of Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) and calculated the spin-up limit for
the BH assuming the radiation crossing the equatorial plane inside the
marginally stable orbit to be advected onto the BH. Their result (
@xmath ) slightly differs from Thorne’s result, thus showing that
returning radiation has only a slight impact on the process of
spinning-up BHs. In our study we use advective, optically thick
solutions of accretion disks and account for photons captured by the BH
in detail. However, we neglect the impact of the radiation returning to
the disk on its structure.

#### 8.1.2 Tetrad

We base this work on slim accretion disks, which are not razor-thin and
have angular momentum profile that is not Keplerian (for details on the
assumptions made and the disk appearance see Chapter 4 ). Therefore,
photons are not emitted from matter in Keplerian orbits in the
equatorial plane and the classical expressions for photon momenta (e.g.,
Misner et al. ( 1973 ) ) cannot be applied. Instead, to properly
describe the momentum components of emitted photons, we need a tetrad
for the comoving observer instantaneously located at the disk
photosphere. Below we give the explicit expression for the components of
such a tetrad assuming time and axis symmetries. A detailed derivation
is given in Appendix C .

Let us choose the following comoving tetrad,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the four-velocity of matter (living in @xmath ),

@xmath is a unit vector orthogonal to the photosphere ( @xmath ),

@xmath is a unit vector orthogonal to @xmath ( @xmath ),

@xmath is a unit vector orthogonal to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (
@xmath ).

The tetrad components are given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath defines the location of the photosphere, @xmath and @xmath
are the Killing vectors, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the frequency of
frame-dragging and the expressions for @xmath and @xmath are given in
Eqs. C.5 and C.11 , respectively.

#### 8.1.3 Spin evolution

##### Basic equations

The equations describing the evolution of BH dimensionless spin
parameter @xmath with respect to the BH energy @xmath and the accreted
rest-mass @xmath are ( Thorne , 1974 ) ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.7)
  -- -- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The energy and angular momentum of BH increases due to the capture of
photons according to the following formulae,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Killing vectors connected with time and
axial symmetries, respectively, @xmath is the stress-energy tensor of
photons, which is non-zero only for photons crossing the BH horizon and
@xmath , the “volume element” in the hypersurface orthogonal to @xmath ,
is given by Eq. D.8 .

From Eqs. 8.9 and 8.10 it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Stress energy tensor in the comoving frame

Let us choose the tetrad given in Eq. 8.1 :

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (8.14)
     @xmath      @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The disk properties, e.g., the emitted flux, are usually given in the
comoving frame defined by Eq. 8.14 . The stress tensor components in the
two frames (Boyer-Lindquist and comoving) are related in the following
way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stress tensor in the comoving frame is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the intensity of the emitted radiation, @xmath and
@xmath are the angles between the emission vector and the @xmath and
@xmath vectors, respectively, @xmath is the capture function defined in
Section 8.1.3 , the factor @xmath comes from the fact that the disk
emission comes from both sides of the disk and @xmath are the normalized
components of the photon four-momentum in the comoving frame. The latter
are given by the following simple relations ( Thorne , 1974 ) ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eqs. 8.11 and 8.12 take the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is our local frame tetrad given by Eq. ( 8.14 ). Taking the
following relations into account,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, Eqs. 8.18 and 8.19 may be finally expressed as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Emission

The intensity of local radiation may be identified with the flux
emerging from the disk surface @xmath (presented and discussed for the
case of slim disks in Section 4.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angular emission factor @xmath is given by ( Thorne , 1974 ) ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for isotropic and limb-darkened cases, respectively. In this work we
assume that the radiation is emitted isotropically.

##### Capture function

The BH energy and angular momentum are affected only by photons crossing
the BH horizon. Following Thorne ( 1974 ) , we define the capture
function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Herein, we calculate @xmath in two ways. First, we use the original
Thorne ( 1974 ) algorithm modified to account for emission out of the
equatorial plane. For this purpose we calculate the constants of motion,
@xmath and @xmath , for a geodesic orbit of a photon in the following
way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which replaces Thorne’s Eqs. A10. This approach does not take into
account possible returning radiation, i.e., a photon hitting the disk
surface is assumed to continue its motion. Such a treatment is not
appropriate for optically thick disks - returning photons are most
likely absorbed or advected towards the BH.

To assess the importance of this inconsistency we adopt two additional
algorithms for calculating @xmath . Using photon equations of motion we
determine if the photon hits the disk surface ( Bursa , 2006 ) . Then we
make two assumptions, either the angular momentum and energy of all
returning photons are advected onto the BH ( @xmath ), or all are
reemitted carrying away their original angular momentum and energy, and
never hit the BH ( @xmath ). In this way we establish two limiting cases
allowing us to assess the impact of the returning radiation.

We note here that for fully consistent treatment of the returning
radiation (as in Li et al. ( 2005 ) for geometrically thin disks) it is
not enough to modify the capture function — solving for the whole
structure of a self-irradiated accretion disk (like in Chapter 7 ) is
necessary. The impact of self-irradiation onto the BH spin evolution
will be studied in detail in the future.

#### 8.1.4 Results for BH spin evolution

Using the slim disk solutions described in Chapter 4 we solve Eqs. 8.7
and 8.8 using regular Runge-Kutta method of the 4th order. To calculate
the integrals (Eqs. 8.11 and 8.12 ) we use the alternative extended
Simpson’s rule ( Press , 2002 ) basing on 100 grid points in @xmath ,
@xmath and radius @xmath . We have made convergence tests proving this
number is sufficient.

In Figs. 8.1 and 8.2 we present the BH spin evolution for @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The red lines show the results for different
accretion rates while the black line shows the classical Thorne ( 1974 )
solution based on the Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) model of thin accretion
disk. The accretion rates are given in the units of the critical
accretion rate defined in Eq. 4.35 . Our low accretion rate limit does
not perfectly agree with the black line as the slim disk model does not
account for the angular momentum carried away by radiation. As a result,
the low-luminosity slim disk solutions slightly overestimate (by no more
than few percent) the emitted flux leading to stronger deceleration of
the BH by radiation — the Thorne ( 1974 ) result is the proper limit for
the lowest accretion rates. When the accretion rate is high enough
(e.g., @xmath ), the impact of the omitted angular momentum flux is
overwhelmed by the modification of the disk structure introduced by
advection.

It is clear the spin evolution is quantitatively different for different
values of the viscosity parameter. For the lower value ( @xmath ) the BH
spin can reach values significantly higher than @xmath for the highest
accretion rates ( @xmath for @xmath ), while for the higher viscosity (
@xmath ) the terminal spin value decreases with increasing accretion
rate down to @xmath for @xmath . This behavior is connected with the
impact of viscosity on the angular momentum profile. Generally speaking,
the higher the value of @xmath , the lower the angular momentum of the
flow at BH horizon for a given accretion rate (see Fig. 4.8 in Section
4.3 ), leading to a slower acceleration of the BH rotation.

To study this fact in detail we calculated the rate of BH spin-up for
”pure” accretion of matter (without accounting for the impact of
radiation). For that case the BH spin evolution is given by (compare Eq.
8.7 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Figs. 8.3 and 8.4 we plot with black lines the first term on the
right hand side of the above equation for different accretion rates and
values of @xmath . The red lines on these plots show the absolute value
of the second term. The intersections of the black and red lines denote
the equilibrium states i.e., the limiting values of BH spin for pure
accretion. These values differ significantly from the previously
discussed results only for low accretion rates. In contrast, for high
accretion rates radiation has little impact on the spin evolution and
the value of terminal spin is mostly determined by the properties of the
flow. In Fig. 8.5 we plot the radiation impact parameter @xmath ,
defined as the ratio of the disk-driven terms on the right hand sides of
Eqs. 8.7 and 8.34 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the captured radiation significantly decelerates BH spin-up, this
ratio drops below unity. On the other hand, it is close to unity for BH
spin evolution which is not affected by the radiation. According to Fig.
8.5 the latter is in fact the case for the highest accretion rates
independently of @xmath .

In Table 8.1 we list the resulting values of the terminal BH spin for
all the models considered. The first column gives results for our
fiducial model ( @xmath ) including Thorne’s capture function, emission
from the photosphere at the appropriate radial velocity.

The second column presents results obtained assuming the same (Thorne’s)
capture function and profiles of emission, angular momentum and radial
velocity as in the model A, but assuming the emission takes place from
the equatorial plane instead of the photosphere. The resulting terminal
spin values are equal, up to 4 decimal digits, to the values obtained
with the fiducial model. This result is expected for the lowest
accretion rates, where the photosphere is located very close to the
equatorial plane. For the highest accretion rates the location of the
emission has no impact on the BH spin-up, as the spin evolution is
driven by the flow itself and the effects of radiation are negligible.
However, for moderate accretion rates one could have expected
significant change of the terminal spin. We find that the location of
the photosphere has little impact on the resulting BH spin regardless of
the accretion rate.

Our third model ( @xmath ) neglects the flow radial velocity when the
radiative terms are evaluated. Similar arguments to those given in the
previous paragraph apply. For the lowest accretion rates, the radial
velocity is negligible and therefore it should have no impact on the
resulting spin. For the highest accretion rates, the spin-up process
depends only on the properties of the flow. Once again, however, the
impact of this assumption on moderate accretion rates is not obvious.
The radial velocity turns out to be of little importance for the
calculation of the terminal spin (only for @xmath and moderate accretion
rates the difference between models @xmath and @xmath is higher than
@xmath ).

In the fourth and fifth columns of Table 8.1 , results for models with
the same assumptions as the fiducial model, but with different capture
functions are presented. The first alternative capture function ( @xmath
) assumes that the angular momentum and energy of all photons returning
to the disk are added to that of the BH. This assumption has a strong
impact on the spin evolution — the terminal spin values are higher,
sometimes approaching @xmath . This may seem surprising because in the
classical approach the captured photons are responsible for decelerating
the spin-up. This effect comes from the fact that the cross-section
(with respect to the BH) of photons going “against“ the frame dragging
is larger than of photons following the BH sense of rotation. As frame
dragging is involved, this effect is significant only in the vicinity of
the BH horizon. For our model @xmath , however, the probability of
photons returning to the disk does not appreciably differ for co- and
counter-rotating photons, as they both hit the disk surface mostly at
large radii.

The other capture function ( @xmath ) assumes, on the contrary, that all
returning photons are re-emitted from the disk with their original
angular momentum and energy (and never fall onto the BH). This
assumption cuts off the photons which would hit the BH in the fiducial
model after crossing the disk surface. Thus, we may expect decreased
radiative deceleration and increased values of the terminal spin
parameter. However, these changes are not significant, reflecting the
fact that most of the photons hit the BH directly, along slightly curved
trajectories. Only for @xmath and moderate accretion rates do the
terminal spin values differ in the @xmath decimal digit.

Neither of the models with a modified capture functions is
self-consistent. To account properly for the returning radiation one has
to modify the disk equations by introducing appropriate terms for the
outgoing and incoming fluxes of angular momentum and additional
radiative heating. No such model for advective, optically thick
accretion disk has been constructed. The emission profile should be
significantly affected (especially inside the marginally stable orbit)
by the returning radiation leading to different rates of deceleration by
photons. In view of our results for models @xmath and @xmath , as well
as the results of Li et al. ( 2005 ) , one may expect the final spin
values for super-critical accretion flows to be slightly higher than the
ones obtained in this work.

The last column of Table 8.1 gives terminal spin values for ”pure”
accretion (radiation neglected). Under such assumptions the BH spin
could reach @xmath for sub-Eddington accretion rates as there are no
photons which could decelerate and stop the spin-up process. As
discussed above, for the highest accretion rates the resulting BH spin
values agree with the values obtained for the fiducial model as
radiation has little impact on spin evolution in this regime.

#### 8.1.5 Summary

We have studied BH spin evolution due to disk accretion assuming that
the angular momentum and energy carried by the flow and the emitted
photons is the only process affecting the BH rotation. We generalized
the original study of Thorne ( 1974 ) to high accretion rates by
applying a relativistic, advective, optically thick slim accretion disk
model. Assuming isotropic emission (no limb darkening) we have shown
that

(i) the terminal value of BH spin depends on the accretion rate for
@xmath ,

(ii) the terminal spin value is very sensitive to the assumed value of
the viscosity parameter @xmath — for @xmath the BH is spun up to @xmath
for high accretion rates, while for @xmath to @xmath ,

(iii) with a low value of @xmath and high accretion rates, the BH may be
spun up to spins significantly higher than the canonical value @xmath
(e.g., to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath ) but, under reasonable
assumptions, BH cannot be spun up arbitrarily close to @xmath ,

(iv) BH spin evolution is hardly affected by the emitted radiation for
high ( @xmath ) accretion rates (the terminal spin value is determined
by the flow properties only),

(v) for all accretion rates, neither the photosphere profile nor the
profile of radial velocity significantly affects the spin evolution.

We point out that the inner edge of an accretion disk cannot be uniquely
defined for a super-critical accretion (Section 4.4 ), as opposed to
geometrically thin disks where the inner edge is uniquely located at the
marginally stable orbit ( @xmath ). In the thin disk case the BH spin
evolution is determined by the flow properties at this particular radius
(as there is no torque between the marginally stable orbit and BH
horizon) and the profile of emission (terminating at @xmath ). For
super-critical accretion rates, however, one cannot distinguish a
particular inner edge which is relevant to studying BH spin evolution.
On the one hand, the values of the specific energy ( @xmath ) and the
angular momentum ( @xmath ) remain constant within the stress inner edge
. On the other, the radiation is emitted outside the radiation inner
edge . These inner edges do not coincide as they are related to
different physical processes.

Our study was based on a semi-analytical, hydrodynamical model of an
accretion disk which makes a number of simplifying assumptions like
stationarity, no returning radiation, @xmath prescription and no wind
outflows. Thus, the results obtained in this work should be considered
only qualitative, as the precise values of the terminal spin parameter
are very sensitive (e.g., through viscosity) to the flow and emission
properties. Moreover, we neglected the impact of magnetic fields and jet
ejection mechanisms. Nevertheless, our study shows that Thorne’s
canonical value for BH spin ( @xmath ) may be exceeded under certain
conditions.

### 8.2 Spin determination via X-ray continuum fitting

Astrophysical BHs may be uniquely characterized by two parameters: mass
and angular momentum. From among those two, the latter is much more
difficult to measure, as it has no impact onto the orbital motion of the
compact binary. Currently, three methods of estimating BH spin are in
use: based on the shape of emission lines (e.g., Reynolds & Fabian (
2008 ) ), on the continuum fitting (e.g., Steiner et al. ( 2010 ) ), and
on studying the resonances leading to quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs,
Török et al. ( 2007 ) ). First two give consistent results for those few
objects that can be studied using both approaches.

The continuum-fitting method is usually based on the Novikov & Thorne (
1973 ) thin disk model and is used for X-ray binaries which exhibit
clear high/soft spectra dominated by the disk thermal component (Section
1.4 ). It has been successfully applied for a number of objects.
However, its range of applicability seems to be limited to
low-luminosity spectra only. As has been shown (e.g., Steiner et al. (
2010 ) ), the spin estimates for high luminosity spectra are not
consistent. The characteristic tail of dropping spin estimates in this
regime (Fig. 8.6 ) is common for all objects.

This inconsistency emerges for luminosities which are close to or
outside the limit of applicability of radiatively efficient disks. We
have shown that advective significantly modifies the disk structure for
@xmath (Section 4.4 ). Therefore, thin disk models should not be applied
in this regime, as they cannot produce consistent disk flux profiles
which are used for continuum fitting purposes.

In this section we briefly discuss the application of the spectral model
slimbb (Section 4.5.2 ) to high/soft state observations of LMC X-3. We
report results described in Straub et al. ( 2011 ) .

The data which has been analyzed, consisting of 712 PCU-2 X-ray spectra,
was obtained using the large-area Proportional Counter Array (PCA)
aboard the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE). The most important
selection criteria for those set of spectra were: (i) disk component
exceeding @xmath of the total emission, (ii) small variability, (iii) no
high-frequency QPOs ² ² 2 QPOs are observed only in the low/hard state
or during state transitions, so the data containing QPOs is most likely
not disk-dominated. . The X-ray spectral fitting software, XSPEC (
Arnaud , 1996 ) was used with the following model combination TBabs *
simpl * slimbb , where TBabs stands for the Galactic neutral hydrogen
absorption with @xmath cm @xmath ( Page et al. , 2003 ) and simpl for a
power-law component ( Steiner et al. , 2009 ) . The mass @xmath , the
average distance to the LMC, @xmath kpc ( Orosz et al. , 2009 ) and the
inclination, @xmath ( Kuiper et al. , 1988 ) were assumed. The proper
shape of the Compton-hardened spectrum was taken from the BHSPEC
atmospheric models ( Davis et al. , 2005 ) .

In Fig. 8.6 we present a comparison of the fittings obtained with slimbb
with analogous study conducted with k errbb2 — the BHSPEC enhanced
version of kerrbb (with switched off returning radiation, to match the
slim disk assumptions). The top panel presents results for @xmath . Both
approaches give the same results producing the characteristic,
artificial spin-luminosity dependence — the results are in fact
indistinguishable. Only for low luminosities ( @xmath ) one gets roughly
constant value of BH spin @xmath . For higher luminosities the spin
estimates drop down — as far as to @xmath for @xmath .

The bottom panel presents the corresponding comparison of slimbb and
kerrbb2 models for lower value of the viscosity parameter @xmath . The
fittings behave qualitatively in the same way. However, the
spin-luminosity relation is much flatter — the spin estimates drop down
only to @xmath for @xmath . Similarly as in the @xmath case, the results
provided by these models are indistinguishable.

In comparison to the standard (based on thin disk models) kerrbb2 , the
model based on slim disk solutions ( slimbb ) accounts additionally for
the advective cooling. In this way it is able to consistently describe
accretion flows with moderate and high luminosities. As the comparison
of BH spin estimates for LMC X-3 shows, this single improvement is not
able to solve the high-luminosity inconsistency. Despite the fact that
advection modifies the emission (however, as discussed in Section 4.3 ,
its impact is hardly visible for sub-Eddington luminosities), the
spectra produced by combined disk and atmospheric models are too hard,
when compared to the observed data (the harder the spectrum, the lower
the spin estimate). One may conclude that the reason for this
discrepancy lies in a different process than advection.

There are at least few shortcomings of the hydrodynamical models in use,
which may be responsible for this fact. To start with, these models
neglect mass outflows assuming constant (in radius) accretion rate.
However, it has been recently shown that radiation driven outflows,
while hardly modify the effective temperature, lead to significant
decrease of the local surface density which, in turn, would lead to
further spectrum hardening ( Takeuchi et al. , 2009 ) . Another possible
source of this discrepancy may be connected to the treatment of
comptonization in the disk atmosphere. Currently, the disk atmosphere
model BHSPEC, based on radiative transfer code TLUSTY , is the only
available. Its approach to comptonization is sophisticated, but still
involves some approximations. It would be beneficial, if spectra
produced by BHSPEC may be compared to another similar, stand-alone
radiative transfer code. It is, most probably, the question of time.

The viscosity in accretion disks most likely results from
magnetorotational instability (Section 2.2.2 ). Magnetic fields are not
explicitly taken into account in hydrodynamical models (e.g., thin or
slim disks). One has to include the viscosity in an artificial way. It
is usually done by assuming that the stress is proportional to pressure
(Section 2.2.1 ). Recent MHD shearing-box studies tend to support this
assumption for mean accretion flows. These local simulations, however,
say little about the dependence of the @xmath parameter on radius or
luminosity. Only recently, shearing boxes with different values of
radiation to gas pressure ratio have been studied ( Hirose et al. ,
2009b ) proving that the value of @xmath , defined as the ratio of
stress to local pressure, may slightly depend on the luminosity (Fig.
8.7 ).

One may infer about the @xmath dependence on luminosity not only from
numerical simulations of MRI, but also from observations of accretion
disks at high luminosities. As Fig. 8.6 shows, the spin estimates are
@xmath -degenerate at low luminosities ( @xmath ). At higher accretion
rates, however, they strongly depend on @xmath — the higher the value of
@xmath , the lower the spin value. This behavior results from the fact
that lower @xmath corresponds to higher surface density at given radius,
which, in turn, decreases the efficiency of spectrum hardening through
comptonization. If one sets the BH spin to a constant value
corresponding to the results of the low-luminosity data analysis, then
fitting for the value of @xmath which produces a consistent spin
estimate, is possible.

In Fig. 8.8 we present results of such a study for LMC X-3 assuming BH
spin @xmath (the mean value for fittings based on the @xmath data). The
large error bars for low-luminosity data reflect the fact that spin
estimates are @xmath -degenerate in this regime. For @xmath , however,
the magnitude of viscosity may be determined. This study shows that high
( @xmath ) values of @xmath are forbidden when the disk luminosity is
not small. Therefore, either the effective @xmath in LMC X-3 is
independent of luminosity and small ( @xmath ), or its value is larger
for low-luminosity states and decreases with increasing luminosity down
to the allowed values in the high luminosity regime. It is worth noting,
that MHD shearing-box simulations of radiation dominated disks (Fig. 8.7
) suggest weak decrease of @xmath with luminosity (from @xmath down to
@xmath ) what is both in qualitative and quantitative agreement with the
results previously discussed.

### 8.3 Normalization of global MHD disk simulations

The general relativistic MHD models that are currently in use (e.g.,
Penna et al. ( 2010 ) ) often make use of dimensionless quantities and
do not include detailed radiation transfer. Hence, there is no direct
way of estimating the physical mass accretion rate ( @xmath ) or the
true radiative luminosity ( @xmath ) of these models. To estimate these
quantities one may use an indirect method, in which the vertical
thicknesses of the simulated disks is compared against physical disk
models that include radiation transfer and radiation pressure and solve
for the vertical disk structure, e.g., two-dimensional slim disks
introduced in Chapter 6 .

Our solutions of the two-dimensional slim disk model (Chapter 6 ) were
recently used, together with a non-LTE, radiatively efficient model of
Davis et al. ( 2005 ) , to estimate the luminosities that the set of
global MHD simulations presented in Kulkarni et al. ( 2010 ) corresponds
to. In this section we briefly compare their profiles of the disk
thickness with the predictions of our two-dimensional slim disk model.

In Fig. 8.9 we plot the density-weighted disk thickness, defined as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

as predicted by the slim disk model (red solid lines, corresponding to
@xmath , bottom to top) for a non-rotating BH. These curves should be
compared with the disk thickness in the GRMHD simulations (deep blue
lines). Results for two different configurations of the initial magnetic
filed, purely-toroidal and loop, are shown with solid and dotted lines,
respectively. The slim disk photosphere profiles are also presented
(light blue, broken lines).

At radii close to the ISCO, the slim disk and BHSPEC models indicate
that the disk thickness plunges to small values whereas the GRMHD
simulation shows a much smaller decrease. We believe there are at least
three reasons for this discrepancy: (i) the GRMHD simulations cool the
gas by forcing it towards a constant entropy, which may not be justified
in the plunging region; (ii) the simulated GRMHD disk includes magnetic
fields whose pressure provides additional support in the vertical
direction whereas the other two models do not; and (iii) the simulated
disc begins to deviate from hydrostatic equilibrium as the radial
velocity becomes large near the ISCO and the gas has less time to reach
equilibrium, whereas the other models hardwire the condition of
hydrostatic equilibrium at all radii. We estimate that the last two are
only important well inside the ISCO (compare Fig. 6.13 ). These are
interesting issues which we hope to explore in the future.

For the purpose of comparing the disk thickness profiles, the region of
the simulation near the ISCO is simply ignored. The comparison is based
on radii @xmath , which are well outside the ISCO and determines the
luminosities at which the slim disk model gives the same disk thickness
as obtained in the simulated GRMHD disk. We see from Fig. 8.9 that the
thickness measure @xmath in the simulated GRMHD disk corresponds to
@xmath according to the slim disk model. Similar analysis for @xmath
shows that @xmath respectively.

Performing such comparison Kulkarni et al. ( 2010 ) were able to draw
the following conclusion: the observational errors in current
measurements of BH spin by the continuum-fitting method dominate over
the errors incurred by using the idealized NT model for @xmath .
Comparison of the results of GRMHD simulations of accretion disks with
the slim disk model was a crucial point in justifying this result.

## Chapter 9 Conclusions

Accretion of matter onto compact objects is one of the most efficient
ways of extracting gravitational energy. Most luminous objects in the
Universe: Active Galactic Nuclei, quasars, X-ray binaries are fed by
accretion. Physics of accretion has, therefore, been one of the primary
interests of astrophysicists for many years.

Currently, two approaches to modeling accretion disks are in use:
(semi-)analytical and numerical. The former was pioneered by the seminal
work of Shakura & Sunyaev ( 1973 ) . In this approach, the most general
equations of magnetohydrodynamics are reduced, thanks to a number of
simplifying assumptions, to a set of ordinary differential or algebraic
equations. The most obvious advantage of such treatment is the
simplicity of the final equations and, what follows, small computational
complexity. The slim disk models described in this thesis are based on
such an approach.

The other way of modeling accretion disks is based on solving the
equations describing them in the full, unreduced form, using
sophisticated numerical methods. In this way one is able to follow the
magnetorotational instability in detail, as well as to discard all of
the simplifying, but only approximate, assumptions. Unfortunately, such
an approach is extremely computational time-consuming and therefore, its
applicability is limited. A global (3D), relativistic MHD simulation of
a thin disk with simplified treatment of cooling, similar to the one
described in Section 8.3 , takes currently months to reach the
quasi-equilibrium state. As a result, it is not possible to obtain a
full grid (spanned on BH mass, BH spin, and accretion rate) of disk
solutions which might be applied for fitting to particular X-ray
sources. Nevertheless, numerical modeling, either global or
shearing-box, gives the insight into the real turbulent behavior of disk
interior.

The analytical, standard model of relativistic thin accretion disks (
Novikov & Thorne , 1973 ) has been in use for almost forty years. It
successfully describes the disk component of the high/soft state spectra
of AGN and microquasars. BH spins of a number of objects were estimated
applying the Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) model to their X-ray continuum
spectra. Most recent global MHD simulations ( Kulkarni et al. , 2010 )
prove that, in the limit of thin disks, the emission and angular
momentum profiles produced by MRI-generated viscosity are in good
agreement with the predictions of the analytical, based on the @xmath
prescription, model of Novikov & Thorne ( 1973 ) .

However, as we have proven in the introduction to Chapter 4 , some of
the assumptions behind the standard models of thin disks break down for
accretion rates close to the Eddington value. Most importantly, the
advective cooling triggers in and starts to affect disk observables.

The model of slim accretion disks successfully generalizes standard thin
disks to the regime of high luminosities. It accounts for the advective
transport of heat and radial gradient of pressure which affects the
profile of angular momentum.

In this thesis we have presented the slim disk model in detail. We
started from introducing the stationary, relativistic, height-averaged
model (Chapter 4 ). We widely discussed the solutions, putting most
attention to the locations of various disk inner edges. Basing on these
solutions, a spectral model slimbb was constructed and described in
Section 4.5.2 .

The initial model was generalized to the non-stationary case in Chapter
5 . The equations describing time-evolution of a relativistic slim disk
(Appendix B ) have not yet been presented in the literature. We solved
them using spectral methods and presented the limit cycle behavior of
accretion disks around rotating BHs. We put most attention to the impact
of BH spin on the disk observables. We showed that the only one
significantly affected by BH spin was the maximal luminosity. We
suggested a rapid, but very rough, method of estimating BH spin basing
on the limit-cycle light curves.

We developed a two-dimensional slim disk model including, in a
self-consistent way, detailed treatment of the vertical radiative
transfer in the disk interior (Chapter 6 ). We presented and discussed
the vertical structure of disks and proved that the regular,
one-dimensional models produce spectra which are very similar to the
spectra obtained using the more precise, two-dimensional model.

We also constructed a state-of-art model of self-irradiated slim disks
(Chapter 7 ). The brief discussion included in the dissertation will be
followed by a more detailed study to be published in a separate paper.

In Chapter 8 we presented three possible applications of the slim disk
models presented in the thesis. First, we studied the spin evolution of
BHs accreting at super-critical accretion rates. We proved that, under
reasonable assumptions and for a reasonable set of disk parameters, the
canonical spin value @xmath ( Thorne , 1974 ) , may be exceeded. We also
showed that for very high ( @xmath ) accretion rates, the evolution of
BH spin is not influenced by the angular momentum and energy of photons
captured by the BH.

We applied the slim disk-based spectral model slimbb to high/soft
spectra of LMC X-3. We suggested that the inconsistency in BH spin
estimates for high luminosity data may be resolved if the viscosity
parameter @xmath decreases with luminosity.

Finally, we also presented the way of normalizing global MHD simulations
of accretion disks using the disk thickness profiles of slim disks.

Slim disks are a powerful tool for modeling high/soft states of
accretion disks at high luminosities. They can be further developed by
including additional effects which may affect the real sources, and
which are currently neglected or treated in a simplified way, e.g.,
outflows or modified viscosity prescriptions. As long as global,
radiative MHD simulations of disks remain limited by the amount of
computational power, slim disks will remain the reference model for
luminous disks in AGN and X-ray binaries.

## Appendix A Kerr metric

The specific angular momentum @xmath of a BH with mass @xmath and
angular momentum @xmath is given by ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Often a dimensionless parameter @xmath is introduced to express the
magnitude of the spin,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It ranges between @xmath (maximally counter-rotating BH), through @xmath
(Schwarzschild BH), to @xmath (maximally rotating BH).

The space-time metric near rotating BHs was described by Kerr ( 1963 ) .
The general formula for the line element @xmath is given in the
Boyer-Lindquist coordinates @xmath by,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The metric is stationary and symmetric with respect to the polar axis of
@xmath and the equatorial plane @xmath . The signature of the metric is
@xmath .

For the purpose of studying accretion disks it is convenient to write
the Kerr metric in the approximate form valid close to the equatorial
plane ( @xmath ) and introduce the vertical cylindrical coordinate
@xmath . The non-zero metric components are:

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

where @xmath .

### a.1 Killing vectors

A vector field @xmath is a Killing field if the Lie derivative with
respect to @xmath of the metric @xmath vanishes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the metric coefficients @xmath in some coordinate basis @xmath are
independent of @xmath , then @xmath is automatically a Killing vector,
where @xmath is the Kronecker delta ( Misner et al. , 1973 ) .

In the Kerr metric there are two obvious Killing vectors:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

connected with time and axial symmetries of the metric, respectively.
Their contravariant components ( @xmath ) are,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the covariant take the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Products of the Killing vectors yield,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.2 Christoffel symbols

The Christoffel symbols can be derived from the vanishing of the
covariant derivative of the metric tensor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By permuting the indices, and resumming, one can solve explicitly for
the Christoffel symbols as a function of the metric tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Below we give the exact formulae for all the non-zero Christoffel
symbols calculated for the general Kerr metric close to the equatorial
plane (i.e., @xmath ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### a.3 Characteristic radii

The following characteristic radii, important for the accretion disk
physics, may be distinguished ( Bardeen et al. , 1972 ; Kato et al. ,
2008 ) :

(i) The event horizon:

The horizon is a boundary in spacetime beyond which events cannot affect
an outside observer. Even light emitted from beyond the horizon can
never cross it and leave the BH. The radius of the horizon is given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

(ii) Innermost stable circular orbit (marginally stable orbit):

Defines the radius of the innermost stable circular geodesic orbit. It
is located at,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

(iii) Marginally bound orbit

Defines the innermost unstable circular orbit. Its radius is given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

(iii) Photon orbit

At the photon orbit photons follow circular, unstable, trajectories
around BH. The radius of such an orbit is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. A.1 presents locations of these characteristic radii versus
dimensionless BH spin parameter @xmath .

## Appendix B Relativistic, non-stationary equations for slim disks

### b.1 Metric and four-velocity components

The Kerr metric coefficients close to the equatorial plane are given in
Appendix A .

The following form of the stress-energy tensor of the matter in the disk
is assumed:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the rest mass density, @xmath is the viscous stress
tensor and @xmath is the radiative energy flux. In the further part of
the text we will also use the ”vertically integrated” pressure @xmath .

The general form of the four-velocity is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are velocities as measured in the Local Non-Rotating Frame
(LNRF) and @xmath are LNRF basis vectors. Near the equatorial plane they
take the following forms ( Bardeen et al. , 1972 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

According to Eq. B.2 the contravariant components of the four-velocity
are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We introduce the following velocity variables describing the flow:

-   the radial velocity of the fluid measured in the co-rotating frame
    (CRF) @xmath (compare Eq. 4.4 ):

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   the angular momentum per unit mass @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   the vertical velocity @xmath in the form:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

By simple calculations we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lorentz factor @xmath at the equatorial plane is defined as
following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking into account Eqs. B.5 and B.8 we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume that the Lorentz factor @xmath at the disk surface is given by
the same expression, as we expect the vertical velocities to be small
compared to the radial and orbital motion.

Now the contravariant components of the four-velocity take following
forms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The covariant four-velocity components are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### b.2 Momentum conservation

Let us consider the r-component of the general equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

From among all components of the vertically integrated viscous stress
tensor @xmath we leave only @xmath . Neglecting the terms proportional
to @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

What is equivalent to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined
as in Abramowicz et al. ( 1996 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.24)
  -- -- -- --------

The viscous stress tensor component @xmath is given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the kinematic viscosity coefficient and @xmath is the
surface density. The shear tensor components @xmath are given in general
by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

### b.3 Angular momentum conservation

Let us write the angular momentum conservation law in the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . After vertical integration we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is vertically integrated @xmath component of the viscous
stress tensor. Let us follow Lasota ( 1994 ) and assume that the only
nonvanishing component of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the angular velocity with respect to the stationary observer.
Introducing @xmath and @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.4 Disk stability criterion

Let us consider the vertical acceleration of the disk surface in the
Zero Angular Momentum Observer (ZAMO) system of coordinates. The disk
surface is defined in cylindrical coordinates as following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the infinitesimal shift in the vertical direction can be
expressed in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dividing both sides by @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing @xmath and @xmath and substituting @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.5 Vertical equilibrium

Let us assume the following form of pressure ( Abramowicz et al. , 1997
) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will derive the vertical equilibrium equation taking @xmath component
of the general equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Simple manipulations give (after vertical integration):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

we finally obtain (for @xmath and @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving for @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the right hand side of the Eq. B.44 .

### b.6 Equation of continuity

The general form of the continuity equation is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

what can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

After the vertical integration it takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The time derivative @xmath can be eliminated using the following
relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing the physical quantities we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.7 Energy conservation

From the general form of the energy conservation equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain, using the most general form of @xmath (Eq. 2.4 ), in the
non-relativistic fluid approximation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is gas internal energy. Similarly like in Landau & Lifshitz
( 1959 ) (their Eq. 49.4), after vertical integration, it could be put
into the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath is entropy per unit mass, @xmath is surface density of the
disk, @xmath is the local viscous heat generation rate and @xmath is the
radiative cooling rate Abramowicz et al. ( 1996 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thermodynamical relations give (for @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The appropriate sum of the derivatives of @xmath can be substituted
using the continuity equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking all together we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ultimately:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

## Appendix C Derivation of an arbitrary tetrad in the Kerr spacetime

Our aim is to derive the tetrad of an observer moving along the
photosphere that would depend only on the quantities which are
calculated in accretion disk models, i.e., on the radial and azimuthal
velocities of gas and the location of disk photosphere.

The metric considered here is the Kerr geometry @xmath in the
Boyer-Lindquist coordinates @xmath (Appendix A ). Similarly as in
Carter’s Les Houches lectures (Carter, 1972 ) , we will consider two
fundamental planes; the symmetry plane @xmath and the meridional plane
@xmath . (Four)-vectors that belong to the plane @xmath , will be
denoted by the subscript @xmath , and vectors that belong to the plane
@xmath , will be denoted by the subscript @xmath . For example, the two
Killings vectors are @xmath , @xmath . Note, that for any pair @xmath
one has,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

### c.1 Stationary and axially symmetric photosphere

#### c.1.1 Photosphere

Numerical solutions of slim accretion disks provide the location of the
photosphere given by @xmath . This may be put into @xmath . The normal
vector to the photosphere surface has the following @xmath components,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the derivative of the angle defining the location of the photosphere
at a given radial coordinate [ @xmath ]. Its non-zero components after
normalization [ @xmath ] are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are two unique vectors @xmath confined in the @xmath plane which
are orthogonal to @xmath (and therefore are tangent to the surface).
From @xmath and @xmath one obtains the non-zero components of one of
them:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### c.1.2 Tetrad

The four-velocity @xmath of an observer with azimuthal motion only is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normalization constant @xmath comes from @xmath and equals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is useful to construct a spacelike vector ( @xmath ) confined in the
@xmath plane, that is perpendicular to @xmath . From @xmath and @xmath
we have,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the specific angular momentum and @xmath is the
frequency of frame dragging. The set of vectors @xmath already forms the
desired tetrad valid for the pure rotation ( @xmath ) case.

Similarly, the four-velocity @xmath of gas moving along the photosphere
with non-zero radial velocity may be decomposed into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normalization condition @xmath gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is related to the radial component of the gas four-velocity
@xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account that @xmath and @xmath are the only non-zero
components of vector @xmath , it is obvious that @xmath is orthogonal to
@xmath .

The vectors we have just calculated ( @xmath , @xmath ) are both
orthogonal to @xmath since @xmath . To complete the tetrad we need one
more spacelike vector ( @xmath ) that is orthogonal to these three. Let
us decompose it into,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The orthogonality conditions @xmath and @xmath give immediately @xmath .
The only non-trivial condition is @xmath . Together with @xmath it leads
to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vectors @xmath form an orthonormal tetrad in the Kerr spacetime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This tetrad is known directly from the slim disk solutions, as it
depends on the calculated quantities ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ) only. Any spacetime vector @xmath , could be uniquely
decomposed into this tetrad with, @xmath .

### c.2 General case

In this section we will assume nothing about the four-velocity of matter
@xmath and the location of photosphere. Both may be non-stationary and
non-axially symmetric. Following the same framework as in the previous
subsection, we will describe how to obtain the tetrad of an observer
instantaneously located at the photosphere that depends only on the
quantities calculated by accretion disk models.

#### c.2.1 Photosphere

In the most general case of a non-stationary and non-axially symmetric
photosphere, the location of the photosphere may be described by the
following condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector @xmath normal to the photosphere has the components,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which may be calculated from slim disk solutions.

Let us project @xmath into the instantaneous 3-space of the comoving
observer ( C.22 ) and normalize to a unit vector after the projection,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the tetrad C.24 , such constructed vector @xmath has the
following decomposition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The components @xmath are known.

#### c.2.2 Tetrad

Similarly as in Section C.1.2 , we may always uniquely decompose @xmath
, a general timelike unit vector, into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a timelike unit vector, and @xmath is a spacelike unit
vector. Formula C.19 uniquely defines the two vectors @xmath and the two
scalars @xmath . The vectors and scalars

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be calculated from known quantities given by slim disk model
solutions.

The four-velocity (Eq. C.19 ) defines also the instantaneous 3-space of
the comoving observer with the metric @xmath and the projection tensor
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We define two unit vectors @xmath and @xmath by the unique condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, the four vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which form an orthonormal tetrad of an observer with the four-velocity
@xmath can calculated from the solutions of the slim disk equations.

Let us now write decompositions of the four vectors: the first two we
have derived, the next two guessed (but the guess should be obvious):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The four unknown components, @xmath one calculates from the four
non-trivial orthogonality conditions ( @xmath by construction, cf. Eqs.
C.25 and C.27 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the two unknown factors @xmath , from the two normalization
conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions C.29 , C.30 are given by linear equations.

Equations C.25 - C.30 define the tetrad @xmath of an observer comoving
with matter, and instantaneously located at the photosphere:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both the matter and the photosphere move in a general manner. The
zenithal direction in the local observer’s sky is given by @xmath .

## Appendix D Integration over the world-tube of the photosphere

For stationary and axially symmetric models we have so far (Appendix C
): @xmath unit vector orthogonal to the photosphere. It is in the @xmath
plane,

@xmath unit vector orthogonal to @xmath that lives in the @xmath plane,

@xmath four-velocity of matter. It lives in the @xmath space-time,

@xmath unit vector orthogonal to @xmath that lives in the @xmath plane,

@xmath unit vector orthogonal to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It lives
in the @xmath space-time,

@xmath @xmath the tetrad comoving with an observer located in the
photosphere.

The integration of a vector @xmath over the 3-D hypersurface @xmath
orthogonal to @xmath (i.e. the 3-D world-tube of the photosphere) may be
symbolically written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the “volume element” in @xmath .

Obviously, the hypersurface @xmath is spanned by the three vectors
@xmath . Each of them is a linear combination of @xmath , and each of
the three vectors from @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath .

Therefore, one may say that the hypersurface @xmath is spanned by @xmath
. It will be convenient to write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the line element along the vector @xmath , i.e. along
the photosphere in the @xmath plane, with @xmath defining the location
of the photosphere, and @xmath is the surface element on the @xmath
plane.

In order to calculate @xmath , imagine an infinitesimal parallelogram
with sides that are located along the @xmath const and @xmath const
lines. The proper lengths of the sides are @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and therefore @xmath , which is just the area of the
parallelogram, is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the angle between the two sides. Obviously, the cosine
of this angle is given by the scalar product of the two unit vectors
@xmath and @xmath pointing in the @xmath plane into @xmath and @xmath
directions respectively. These vectors are given by (note that @xmath
ZAMO),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because @xmath and @xmath , one may write,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting this into the formula for @xmath we get @xmath . The final
formula for @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------