##### Contents

-    Foreword
-    1 From the standard model to @xmath
    -    1.1 The standard model chiral structure
    -    1.2 The Georgi-Glashow route
        -    1.2.1 Charge quantization and anomaly cancellation
        -    1.2.2 Gauge coupling unification
        -    1.2.3 Symmetry breaking
        -    1.2.4 Doublet-Triplet splitting
        -    1.2.5 Proton decay
        -    1.2.6 Yukawa sector and neutrino masses
    -    1.3 The Pati-Salam route
        -    1.3.1 Left-Right symmetry
        -    1.3.2 Lepton number as a fourth color
        -    1.3.3 One family unified
    -    1.4 @xmath group theory
        -    1.4.1 Tensor representations
        -    1.4.2 Spinor representations
        -    1.4.3 Anomaly cancellation
        -    1.4.4 The standard model embedding
        -    1.4.5 The Higgs sector
    -    1.5 Yukawa sector in renormalizable @xmath
        -    1.5.1 @xmath with supersymmetry
        -    1.5.2 @xmath without supersymmetry
        -    1.5.3 Type-I vs type-II seesaw
    -    1.6 Proton decay
        -    1.6.1 @xmath (gauge)
        -    1.6.2 @xmath (scalar)
        -    1.6.3 @xmath
        -    1.6.4 @xmath
-    2 Intermediate scales in nonsupersymmetric @xmath unification
    -    2.1 Three-step @xmath breaking chains
        -    2.1.1 The extended survival hypothesis
    -    2.2 Two-loop gauge renormalization group equations
        -    2.2.1 The non-abelian sector
        -    2.2.2 The abelian couplings and @xmath mixing
        -    2.2.3 Some notation
        -    2.2.4 One-loop matching
    -    2.3 Numerical results
        -    2.3.1 @xmath mixing
        -    2.3.2 Two-loop results (purely gauge)
        -    2.3.3 The @xmath Higgs multiplets
        -    2.3.4 Yukawa terms
        -    2.3.5 The privilege of being minimal
-    3 The quantum vacuum of the minimal @xmath GUT
    -    3.1 The minimal SO(10) Higgs sector
        -    3.1.1 The tree-level Higgs potential
        -    3.1.2 The symmetry breaking patterns
    -    3.2 The classical vacuum
        -    3.2.1 The stationarity conditions
        -    3.2.2 The tree-level spectrum
        -    3.2.3 Constraints on the potential parameters
    -    3.3 Understanding the scalar spectrum
        -    3.3.1 45 only with @xmath
        -    3.3.2 16 only with @xmath
        -    3.3.3 A trivial 45-16 potential @xmath
        -    3.3.4 A trivial 45-16 interaction @xmath
        -    3.3.5 A tree-level accident
        -    3.3.6 The @xmath limit
    -    3.4 The quantum vacuum
        -    3.4.1 The one-loop effective potential
        -    3.4.2 The one-loop stationary equations
        -    3.4.3 The one-loop scalar mass
        -    3.4.4 One-loop PGB masses
        -    3.4.5 The one-loop vacuum structure
-    4 SUSY- @xmath breaking with small representations
    -    4.1 What do neutrinos tell us?
    -    4.2 SUSY alignment: a case for flipped @xmath
    -    4.3 The GUT-scale little hierarchy
        -    4.3.1 GUT-scale thresholds and proton decay
        -    4.3.2 GUT-scale thresholds and one-step unification
        -    4.3.3 GUT-scale thresholds and neutrino masses
    -    4.4 Minimal flipped @xmath Higgs model
        -    4.4.1 Introducing the model
        -    4.4.2 Supersymmetric vacuum
        -    4.4.3 Doublet-Triplet splitting in flipped models
    -    4.5 Minimal @xmath embedding
        -    4.5.1 @xmath and @xmath into @xmath
        -    4.5.2 The @xmath vacuum manifold
        -    4.5.3 Breaking the residual @xmath via effective
            interactions
        -    4.5.4 A unified @xmath scenario
    -    4.6 Towards a realistic flavor
        -    4.6.1 Yukawa sector of the flipped @xmath model
-    Outlook: the quest for the minimal nonsupersymmetric @xmath theory
-    A One- and Two-loop beta coefficients
    -    A.1 Beta-functions with @xmath mixing
    -    A.2 Yukawa contributions
-    B @xmath algebra representations
    -    B.1 Tensorial representations
    -    B.2 Spinorial representations
    -    B.3 The charge conjugation @xmath
    -    B.4 The Cartan generators
-    C Vacuum stability
-    D Tree level mass spectra
    -    D.1 Gauge bosons
        -    D.1.1 Gauge bosons masses from 45
        -    D.1.2 Gauge bosons masses from 16
    -    D.2 Anatomy of the scalar spectrum
        -    D.2.1 45 only
        -    D.2.2 16 only
        -    D.2.3 Mixed 45-16 spectrum ( @xmath )
        -    D.2.4 A trivial 45-16 potential ( @xmath )
        -    D.2.5 A trivial 45-16 interaction ( @xmath )
        -    D.2.6 The 45-16 scalar spectrum for @xmath
-    E One-loop mass spectra
    -    E.1 Gauge contributions to the PGB mass
    -    E.2 Scalar contributions to the PGB mass
-    F Flipped @xmath vacuum
    -    F.1 Flipped @xmath notation
    -    F.2 Supersymmetric vacuum manifold
    -    F.3 Gauge boson spectrum
        -    F.3.1 Spinorial contribution
        -    F.3.2 Adjoint contribution
        -    F.3.3 Vacuum little group
-    G @xmath vacuum
    -    G.1 The @xmath formalism
    -    G.2 @xmath vacuum manifold
    -    G.3 Vacuum little group

## Foreword

This thesis deals with the physics of the 80’s. Almost all of the
results obtained here could have been achieved by the end of that
decade. This also means that the field of grand unification is becoming
quite old. It dates back in 1974 with the seminal papers of
Georgi-Glashow [ 1 ] and Pati-Salam [ 2 ] . Those were the years just
after the foundation of the standard model (SM) of
Glashow-Weinberg-Salam [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] when simple ideas (at least simple
from our future perspective) seemed to receive an immediate confirmation
from the experimental data.

Grand unified theories (GUTs) assume that all the fundamental
interactions of the SM (strong and electroweak) have a common origin.
The current wisdom is that we live in a broken phase in which the world
looks @xmath invariant to us and the low-energy phenomena are governed
by strong interactions and electrodynamics. Growing with the energy we
start to see the degrees of freedom of a new dynamics which can be
interpreted as a renormalizable @xmath gauge theory spontaneously broken
into @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 At the time of writing this thesis one of the main
ingredients of this theory, the Higgs boson, is still missing
experimentally. On the other hand a lot of indirect tests suggest that
the SM works amazingly well and it is exciting that the mechanism of
electroweak symmetry breaking is being tested right now at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC). . Thus, in analogy to the @xmath case, one can
imagine that at higher energies the SM gauge group @xmath is embedded in
a simple group @xmath .

The first implication of the grand unification ansatz is that at some
mass scale @xmath the relevant symmetry is @xmath and the @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath coupling constants of @xmath merge into a single gauge
coupling @xmath . The rather different values for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath at low-energy are then due to renormalization effects. Actually
one of the most solid hints in favor of grand unification is the fact
that the running within the SM shows an approximate convergence of the
gauge couplings around @xmath (see e.g. Fig. 1 ).

This simple idea, though a bit speculative, may have a deep impact on
the understanding of our low-energy world. Consider for instance some
unexplained features of the SM like e.g. charge quantization or anomaly
cancellation ² ² 2 In the SM anomaly cancellation implies charge
quantization, after taking into account the gauge invariance of the
Yukawa couplings [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] . This feature is lost as soon as one
adds a right-handed neutrino @xmath , unless @xmath is a Majorana
particle [ 10 ] . . They appear just as the natural consequence of
starting with an anomaly-free simple group such as @xmath .

Most importantly grand unification is not just a mere interpretation of
our low-energy world, but it predicts new phenomena which are correlated
with the existing ones. The most prominent of these is the instability
of matter. The current lower bound on the proton lifetime is something
like 23 orders of magnitude bigger than the age of the Universe, namely
@xmath depending on the decay channel [ 11 ] . This number is so huge
that people started to consider baryon number as an exact symmetry of
Nature [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] . Nowadays we interpret it as an accidental
global symmetry of the standard model ³ ³ 3 In the SM the baryonic
current is anomalous and baryon number violation can arise from
instanton transitions between degenerate @xmath vacua which lead to
@xmath interactions for three flavor families [ 15 , 16 ] . The rate is
estimated to be proportional to @xmath and thus phenomenologically
irrelevant. . This also means that as soon as we extend the SM there is
the chance to introduce baryon violating interactions. Gravity itself
could be responsible for the breaking of baryon number [ 17 ] . However
among all the possible frameworks there is only one of them which
predicts a proton lifetime close to its experimental limit and this
theory is grand unification. Indeed we can roughly estimate it by
dimensional arguments. The exchange of a baryon-number-violating vector
boson of mass @xmath yields something like

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

and by putting in numbers (we take @xmath , cf. Fig. 1 ) one discovers
that @xmath corresponds to @xmath , which is consistent with the picture
emerging in Fig. 1 . Notice that the gauge running is sensitive to the
log of the scale. This means that a @xmath variation on the gauge
couplings at the electroweak scale induces a @xmath one on @xmath . Were
the apparent unification of gauge couplings in the window @xmath just an
accident, then Nature would have played a bad trick on us.

Another firm prediction of GUTs are magnetic monopoles [ 18 , 19 ] .
Each time a simple gauge group @xmath is broken to a subgroup with a
@xmath factor there are topologically nontrivial configurations of the
Higgs field which leads to stable monopole solutions of the gauge
potential. For instance the breaking of @xmath generates a monopole with
magnetic charge @xmath and mass @xmath [ 20 ] . The central core of a
GUT monopole contains the fields of the superheavy gauge bosons which
mediate proton decay, so one expects that baryon number can be violated
in baryon-monopole scattering. Quite surprisingly it was found [ 21 , 22
, 23 ] that these processes are not suppressed by powers of the
unification mass, but have a cross section typical of the strong
interactions.

Though GUT monopoles are too massive to be produced at accelerators,
they could have been produced in the early universe as topological
defects arising via the Kibble mechanism [ 24 ] during a symmetry
breaking phase transition. Experimentally one tries to measure their
interactions as they pass through matter. The strongest bounds on the
flux of monopoles come from their interactions with the galactic
magnetic field ( @xmath ) and the catalysis of proton decay in compact
astrophysical objects ( @xmath ) [ 11 ] .

Summarizing the model independent predictions of grand unification are
proton decay, magnetic monopoles and charge quantization (and their deep
connection). However once we have a specific model we can do even more.
For instance the huge ratio between the unification and the electroweak
scale, @xmath , reminds us about the well established hierarchy among
the masses of charged fermions and those of neutrinos, @xmath . This
analogy hints to a possible connection between GUTs and neutrino masses.

The issue of neutrino masses caught the attention of particle physicists
since a long time ago. The model independent way to parametrize them is
to consider the SM as an effective field theory by writing all the
possible operators compatible with gauge invariance. Remarkably at the
@xmath level there is only one operator [ 25 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

After electroweak symmetry breaking @xmath and neutrinos pick up a
Majorana mass term

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

The lower bound on the highest neutrino eigenvalue inferred from @xmath
tells us that the scale at which the lepton number is violated is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

Actually there are only three renormalizable ultra-violet (UV)
completion of the SM which can give rise to the operator in Eq. ( 2 ).
They go under the name of type-I [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] , type-II [
31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] and type-III [ 35 ] seesaw and are respectively
obtained by introducing a fermionic singlet @xmath , a scalar triplet
@xmath and a fermionic triplet @xmath . These vector-like fields, whose
mass can be identified with @xmath , couple at the renormalizable level
with @xmath and @xmath so that the operator in Eq. ( 2 ) is generated
after integrating them out. Since their mass is not protected by the
chiral symmetry it can be super-heavy, thus providing a rationale for
the smallness of neutrino masses.

Notice that this is still an effective field theory language and we
cannot tell at this level if neutrinos are light because @xmath is small
or because @xmath is large. It is clear that without a theory that fixes
the structure of @xmath we don’t have much to say about @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 The
other possibility is that we may probe experimentally the new degrees of
freedom at the scale @xmath in such a way to reconstruct the theory of
neutrino masses. This could be the case for left-right symmetric
theories [ 30 , 34 ] where @xmath is the scale of the @xmath
interactions. For a recent study of the interplay between LHC signals
and neutrinoless double beta decay in the context of left-right
scenarios see e.g. [ 36 ] . .

As an example of a predictive theory which can fix both @xmath and
@xmath we can mention @xmath unification. The most prominent feature of
@xmath is that a SM fermion family plus a right-handed neutrino fit into
a single 16-dimensional spinorial representation. In turn this readily
implies that @xmath is correlated to the charged fermion Yukawas. At the
same time @xmath can be identified with the @xmath generator of @xmath ,
and its breaking scale, @xmath , is subject to the constraints of gauge
coupling unification.

Hence we can say that @xmath is also a theory of neutrinos, whose
self-consistency can be tested against complementary observables such as
the proton lifetime and neutrino masses.

The subject of this thesis will be mainly @xmath unification. In the
arduous attempt of describing the state of the art it is crucial to
understand what has been done so far. In this respect we are facilitated
by Fig. 2 , which shows the number of @xmath papers per year from @xmath
to @xmath .

By looking at this plot it is possible to reconstruct the following
historical phases:

-   @xmath : Golden age of grand unification. These are the years of the
    foundation in which the fundamental aspects of the theory are worked
    out. The first estimate of the proton lifetime yields @xmath [ 37 ]
    , amazingly close to the experimental bound @xmath [ 38 ] . Hence
    the great hope that proton decay is behind the corner.

-   @xmath : Great depression. Neither proton decay nor magnetic
    monopoles are observed so far. Emblematically the last workshop on
    grand unification is held in @xmath [ 39 ] .

-   @xmath : SUSY-GUTs. The new data of the Large Electron-Positron
    collider (LEP) seem to favor low-energy supersymmetry as a candidate
    for gauge coupling unification. From now on almost all the attention
    is caught by supersymmetry.

-   @xmath : Neutrino revolution. Starting from @xmath experiments begin
    to show that atmospheric [ 40 ] and solar [ 41 ] neutrinos change
    flavor. @xmath comes back with a rationale for the origin of the
    sub-eV neutrino mass scale.

-   @xmath : LHC era. Has supersymmetry something to do with the
    electroweak scale? The lack of evidence for supersymmetry at the LHC
    would undermine SUSY-GUT scenarios. Back to nonsupersymmetric GUTs?

-   @xmath : Next generation of proton decay experiments sensitive to
    @xmath yr [ 42 ] . The future of grand unification relies heavily on
    that.

Despite the huge amount of work done so far, the situation does not seem
very clear at the moment. Especially from a theoretical point of view no
model of grand unification emerged as "the" theory. The reason can be
clearly attributed to the lack of experimental evidence on proton decay.

In such a situation a good guiding principle in order to discriminate
among models and eventually falsify them is given by minimality, where
minimality deals interchangeably with simplicity, tractability and
predictivity. It goes without saying that minimality could have nothing
to do with our world, but it is anyway the best we can do at the moment.
It is enough to say that if one wants to have under control all the
aspects of the theory the degree of complexity of some minimal GUT is
already at the edge of the tractability.

Quite surprisingly after 37 years there is still no consensus on which
is the minimal theory. Maybe the reason is also that minimality is not a
universal and uniquely defined concept, admitting a number of
interpretations. For instance it can be understood as a mere simplicity
related to the minimum rank of the gauge group. This was indeed the
remarkable observation of Georgi and Glashow: @xmath is the unique
rank-4 simple group which contains the SM and has complex
representations. However nowadays we can say for sure that the
Georgi-Glashow model in its original formulation is ruled out because it
does not unify and neutrinos are massive ⁵ ⁵ 5 Moved by this double
issue of the Georgi-Glashow model, two minimal extensions which can cure
at the same time both unification and neutrino masses have been recently
proposed [ 43 , 44 ] . .

From a more pragmatic point of view one could instead use predictivity
as a measure of minimality. This singles out @xmath as the best
candidate. At variance with @xmath , the fact that all the SM fermions
of one family fit into the same representation makes the Yukawa sector
of @xmath much more constrained ⁶ ⁶ 6 Notice that here we do not have in
mind flavor symmetries, indeed the GUT symmetry itself already
constrains the flavor structure just because some particles live
together in the same multiplet. Certainly one could improve the
predictivity by adding additional ingredients like
local/global/continuous/discrete symmetries on top of the GUT symmetry.
However, though there is nothing wrong with that, we feel that it would
be a no-ending process based on assumptions which are difficult to
disentangle from the unification idea. That is why we prefer to stick as
much as possible to the gauge principle without further ingredients. .

Actually, if we stick to the @xmath case, minimality is closely related
to the complexity of the symmetry breaking sector. Usually this is the
most challenging and arbitrary aspect of grand unified models. While the
SM matter nicely fit in three @xmath spinorial families, this synthetic
feature has no counterpart in the Higgs sector where higher-dimensional
representations are usually needed in order to spontaneously break the
enhanced gauge symmetry down to the SM.

Establishing the minimal Higgs content needed for the GUT breaking is a
basic question which has been addressed since the early days of the GUT
program ⁷ ⁷ 7 Remarkably the general patterns of symmetry breaking in
gauge theories with orthogonal and unitary groups were already analyzed
in 1973/1974 by Li [ 45 ] , contemporarily with the work of Georgi and
Glashow. . Let us stress that the quest for the simplest Higgs sector is
driven not only by aesthetic criteria but it is also a
phenomenologically relevant issue related to the tractability and the
predictivity of the models. Indeed, the details of the symmetry breaking
pattern, sometimes overlooked in the phenomenological analysis, give
further constraints on the low-energy observables such as the proton
decay and the effective SM flavor structure. For instance in order to
assess quantitatively the constraints imposed by gauge coupling
unification on the mass of the lepto-quarks resposible for proton decay
it is crucial to have the scalar spectrum under control. Even in that
case some degree of arbitrariness can still persist due to the fact that
the spectrum can never be fixed completely but lives on a manifold
defined by the vacuum conditions. This also means that if we aim to a
falsifiable (predictive) GUT scenario, better we start by considering a
minimal Higgs sector ⁸ ⁸ 8 As an example of the importance of taking
into account the vacuum dynamics we can mention the minimal
supersymmetric model based on @xmath [ 46 , 47 , 48 ] . In that case the
precise calculation of the mass spectrum [ 49 , 50 , 51 ] was crucial in
order to obtain a detailed fitting of fermion mass parameters and show a
tension between unification constraints and neutrino masses [ 52 , 53 ]
. .

The work done in this thesis can be understood as a general reappraisal
of the issue of symmetry breaking in @xmath GUTs, both in their ordinary
and supersymmetric realizations.

We can already anticipate that, before considering any symmetry breaking
dynamics, at least two Higgs representations are required ⁹ ⁹ 9 It
should be mentioned that a one-step @xmath breaking can be achieved via
only one @xmath irreducible Higgs representation [ 54 ] . However, such
a setting requires an extended matter sector, including @xmath and
@xmath multiplets, in order to accommodate realistic fermion masses [ 55
] . by the group theory in order to achieve a full breaking of @xmath to
the SM:

-   @xmath or @xmath : they reduce the rank but leave an @xmath little
    group unbroken.

-   @xmath or @xmath or @xmath : they admit for little groups different
    from @xmath , yielding the SM when intersected with @xmath .

While the choice between @xmath or @xmath is a model dependent issue
related to the details of the Yukawa sector, the simplest option among
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is given by the adjoint @xmath .

However, since the early 80’s, it has been observed that the vacuum
dynamics aligns the adjoint along an @xmath direction, making the choice
of @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath alone not phenomenologically viable.
In the nonsupersymmetric case the alignment is only approximate [ 56 ,
57 , 58 , 59 ] , but it is such to clash with unification constraints
which do not allow for any @xmath -like intermediate stage, while in the
supersymmetric limit the alignment is exact due to F-flatness [ 60 , 61
, 62 ] , thus never landing to a supersymmetric SM vacuum. The focus of
the thesis consists in the critical reexamination of these two
longstanding no-go for the settings with a @xmath driving the GUT
breaking.

Let us first consider the nonsupersymmetric case. We start by
reconsidering the issue of gauge coupling unification in ordinary @xmath
scenarios with up to two intermediate mass scales, a needed preliminary
step before entering the details of a specific model.

After complementing the existing studies in several aspects, as the
inclusion of the @xmath gauge mixing renormalization at the one- and
two-loop level and the reassessment of the two-loop beta coefficients, a
peculiar symmetry breaking pattern with just the adjoint representation
governing the first stage of the GUT breaking emerges as a potentially
viable scenario [ 63 ] , contrary to what claimed in the literature [ 64
] .

This brings us to reexamine the vacuum of the minimal conceivable Higgs
potential responsible for the @xmath breaking to the SM, containing an
adjoint @xmath plus a spinor @xmath . As already remarked, a series of
studies in the early 80’s [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] of the @xmath model
indicated that the only intermediate stages allowed by the scalar sector
dynamics were @xmath for leading @xmath or @xmath for dominant @xmath .
Since an intermediate @xmath -symmetric stage is phenomenologically not
allowed, this observation excluded the simplest @xmath Higgs sector from
realistic consideration.

One of the main results of this thesis is the observation that this
no-go "theorem" is actually an artifact of the tree-level potential and,
as we have shown in Ref. [ 65 ] (see also Ref. [ 66 ] for a brief
overview), the minimization of the one-loop effective potential opens in
a natural way also the intermediate stages @xmath and @xmath , which are
the options favoured by gauge unification. This result is quite general,
since it applies whenever the @xmath breaking is triggered by the @xmath
(while other Higgs representations control the intermediate and weak
scale stages) and brings back from oblivion the simplest scenario of
nonsupersymmetric @xmath unification.

It is then natural to consider the Higgs system @xmath (where the @xmath
is needed to give mass to the SM fermions at the renormalizable level)
as the potentially minimal @xmath theory, as advocated long ago by
Witten [ 67 ] . However, apart from issues related to fermion mixings,
the main obstacle with such a model is given by neutrino masses. They
can be generated radiatively at the two-loop level, but turn out to be
too heavy. The reason being that the @xmath breaking is communicated to
right-handed neutrinos at the effective level @xmath and since @xmath by
unification constraints, @xmath undershoots by several orders of
magnitude the value @xmath naturally suggested by the type-I seesaw.

At these point one can consider two possible routes. Sticking to the
request of Higgs representations with dimensions up to the adjoint one
can invoke TeV scale supersymmetry, or we can relax this requirement and
exchange the @xmath with the @xmath in the nonsupersymmetric case.

In the former case the gauge running within the minimal supersymmetric
SM (MSSM) prefers @xmath in the proximity of @xmath so that one can
naturally reproduce the desired range for @xmath , emerging from the
effective operator @xmath .

Motivated by this argument, we investigate under which conditions an
Higgs sector containing only representations up to the adjoint allows
supersymmetric @xmath GUTs to break spontaneously to the SM. Actually it
is well known [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] that the relevant superpotential does not
support, at the renormalizable level, a supersymmetric breaking of the
@xmath gauge group to the SM. Though the issue can be addressed by
giving up renormalizability [ 61 , 62 ] , this option may be rather
problematic due to the active role of Planck induced operators in the
breaking of the gauge symmetry. They introduce an hierarchy in the mass
spectrum at the GUT scale which may be an issue for gauge unification,
proton decay and neutrino masses.

In this respect we pointed out [ 68 ] that the minimal Higgs scenario
that allows for a renormalizable breaking to the SM is obtained
considering flipped @xmath with one adjoint @xmath and two @xmath Higgs
representations.

Within the extended @xmath gauge algebra one finds in general three
inequivalent embeddings of the SM hypercharge. In addition to the two
solutions with the hypercharge stretching over the @xmath or the @xmath
subgroups of @xmath (respectively dubbed as the “standard” and “flipped”
@xmath embeddings [ 69 , 70 ] ), there is a third, “flipped” @xmath [ 71
, 72 , 73 ] , solution inherent to the @xmath case, with a non-trivial
projection of the SM hypercharge onto the @xmath factor.

Whilst the difference between the standard and the flipped @xmath
embedding is semantical from the @xmath point of view, the flipped
@xmath case is qualitatively different. In particular, the
symmetry-breaking “power” of the @xmath spinor and adjoint
representations is boosted with respect to the standard @xmath case,
increasing the number of SM singlet fields that may acquire
non-vanishing vacuum expectation values (VEVs). This is at the root of
the possibility of implementing the gauge symmetry breaking by means of
a simple renormalizable Higgs sector.

The model is rather peculiar in the flavor sector and can be naturally
embedded in a perturbative @xmath grand unified scenario above the
flipped @xmath partial-unification scale.

On the other hand, sticking to the nonsupersymmetric case with a @xmath
in place of a @xmath , neutrino masses are generated at the
renormalizable level. This lifts the problematic @xmath suppression
factor inherent to the @xmath effective mass and yields @xmath , that
might be, at least in principle, acceptable. As a matter of fact a
nonsupersymmetric @xmath model including @xmath in the Higgs sector has
all the ingredients to be the minimal realistic version of the theory.

This option at the time of writing the thesis is subject of ongoing
research [ 74 ] . Some preliminary results are reported in the last part
of the thesis. We have performed the minimization of the @xmath
potential and checked that the vacuum constraints allow for threshold
corrections leading to phenomenologically reasonable values of @xmath .
If the model turned out to lead to a realistic fermionic spectrum it
would be important then to perform an accurate estimate of the proton
decay branching ratios.

The outline of the thesis is the following: the first Chapter is an
introduction to the field of grand unification. The emphasis is put on
the construction of @xmath starting from the SM and passing through
@xmath and the left-right symmetric groups. The second Chapter is
devoted to the issue of gauge couplings unification in nonsupersymmetric
@xmath . A set of tools for a general two-loop analysis of gauge
coupling unification, like for instance the systematization of the
@xmath mixing running and matching, is also collected. Then in the third
Chapter we consider the simplest and paradigmatic @xmath Higgs sector
made by @xmath . After reviewing the old tree level no-go argument we
show, by means of an explicit calculation, that the effective potential
allows for those patterns which were accidentally excluded at tree
level. In the fourth Chapter we undertake the analysis of the similar
no-go present in supersymmetry with @xmath in the Higgs sector. The
flipped @xmath embedding of the hypercharge is proposed as a way out in
order to obtain a renormalizable breaking with only representations up
to the adjoint. We conclude with an Outlook in which we suggest the
possible lines of development of the ideas proposed in this thesis. The
case is made for the hunting of the minimal realistic nonsupersymmetric
@xmath unification. Much of the technical details are deferred in a set
of Appendices.

## Chapter 1 From the standard model to @xmath

In this chapter we give the physical foundations of @xmath as a grand
unified group, starting from the SM and browsing in a constructive way
through the Georgi-Glashow @xmath [ 1 ] and the left-right symmetric
groups such as the Pati-Salam one [ 2 ] . This will offer us the
opportunity to introduce the fundamental concepts of GUTs, as charge
quantization, gauge unification, proton decay and the connection with
neutrino masses in a simplified and pedagogical way.

The @xmath gauge group as a candidate for the unification of the
elementary interactions was proposed long ago by Georgi [ 75 ] and
Fritzsch and Minkowski [ 76 ] . The main advantage of @xmath with
respect to @xmath grand unification is that all the known SM fermions
plus three right handed neutrinos fit into three copies of the @xmath
-dimensional spinorial representation of @xmath . In recent years the
field received an extra boost due to the discovery of non-zero neutrino
masses in the sub-eV region. Indeed, while in the SM (and similarly in
@xmath ) there is no rationale for the origin of the extremely small
neutrino mass scale, the appeal of @xmath consists in the predictive
connection between the local @xmath breaking scale (constrained by gauge
coupling unification somewhat below @xmath GeV) and neutrino masses
around @xmath orders of magnitude below. Through the implementation of
some variant of the seesaw mechanism [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32
, 33 , 34 ] the inner structure of @xmath and its breaking makes very
natural the appearance of such a small neutrino mass scale. This
striking connection with neutrino masses is one of the strongest
motivations behind @xmath and it can be traced back to the left-right
symmetric theories [ 2 , 77 , 78 ] which provide a direct connection of
the smallness of neutrino masses with the non-observation of the @xmath
interactions [ 30 , 34 ] .

### 1.1 The standard model chiral structure

The representations of the unbroken gauge symmetry of the world, namely
@xmath , are real. In other words, for each colored fermion field of a
given electric charge we have a fermion field of opposite color and
charge ¹ ¹ 1 As is usual in grand unification we use the Weyl notation
in which all fermion fields @xmath are left-handed (LH) four-component
spinors. Given a @xmath field transforming as @xmath under the Lorentz
group ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) an invariant mass term is given by
@xmath where @xmath is such that @xmath or (up to a sign) @xmath . Using
the following representation for the @xmath matrices

@xmath (1.1)

where @xmath are the Pauli matrices, an expression for @xmath reads
@xmath , with @xmath . Notice that the mass term is not invariant under
the @xmath transformation @xmath and in order to avoid the breaking of
any abelian quantum number carried by @xmath (such as lepton number or
electric charge) we can construct @xmath where for every additive
quantum number @xmath and @xmath have opposite charges. This just means
that if @xmath is associated with a certain fundamental particle, @xmath
is associated with its antiparticle. In order to recast a more familiar
notation let us define a field @xmath by the equation @xmath . In therms
of the right-handed (RH) spinor @xmath , the mass term can be rewritten
as @xmath . . If not so we would observe for instance a massless charged
fermion field and this is not the case.

More formally, being @xmath an element of a group @xmath , a
representation @xmath is said to be real (pseudo-real) if it is equal to
its conjugate representation @xmath up to a similarity transformation,
namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

whit @xmath symmetric (antisymmetric). A complex representation is
neither real nor pseudo-real.

It’s easy to prove that @xmath must be either symmetric or
antisymmetric. Suppose @xmath generates a real (pseudo-real) irreducible
unitary representation of @xmath , @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because the @xmath are hermitian, we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

But if a matrix commutes with all the generators of an irreducible
representation, Schur’s Lemma tells us that it is a multiple of the
identity, and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

By transposing twice we get back to where we started and thus we must
have @xmath and so @xmath , i.e. @xmath must be either symmetric or
antisymmetric.

The relevance of this fact for the SM is encoded in the following
observation: given a left-handed fermion field @xmath transforming under
some representation, reducible or irreducible, @xmath , one can
construct a gauge invariant mass term only if the representation is
real. Indeed, it is easy to verify (by using Eq. ( 1.2 ) and the
unitarity of @xmath ) that the mass term @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the Dirac charge conjugation matrix, is invariant. Notice that if the
representation were pseudo-real (e.g. a doublet of @xmath ) the mass
term vanishes because of the antisymmetry of @xmath ² ² 2 The relation
@xmath and the anticommuting property of the fermion fields must be also
taken into account. .

The SM is built in such a way that there are no bare mass terms and all
the masses stem from the Higgs mechanism. Its representations are said
to be chiral because they are charged under the @xmath chiral symmetry
in such a way that fermions are massless as long as the chiral symmetry
is preserved. A complex representation of a group @xmath may of course
become real when restricted to a subgroup of @xmath . This is exactly
what happens in the @xmath case.

When looking for a unified UV completion of the SM we would like to keep
this feature. Otherwise we should also explain why, according to the
Georgi’s survival hypothesis [ 79 ] , all the fermions do not acquire a
super-heavy bare mass of the order of the scale at which the unified
gauge symmetry is broken.

### 1.2 The Georgi-Glashow route

The bottom line of the last section was that a realistic grand unified
theory is such that the LH fermions are embedded in a complex
representation of the unified group (in particular complex under @xmath
). If we further require minimality (i.e. rank 4 as in the SM) one
reaches the remarkable conclusion [ 1 ] that the only simple group with
complex representations (which contains @xmath as a subgroup) is @xmath
.

Let us consider the fundamental representation of @xmath and denote it
as a @xmath -dimensional vector @xmath ( @xmath ). It is usual to embed
@xmath in such a way that the first three components of @xmath transform
as a triplet of @xmath and the last two components as a doublet of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the SM we have @xmath Weyl fermions per family with quantum numbers

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

How to embed these into @xmath ? One would be tempted to try with a
@xmath of @xmath . Actually from the tensor product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the fact that @xmath one concludes that some of the known quarks
should belong to color sextects, which is not the case. So the next step
is to try with @xmath or better with @xmath since there is no @xmath in
the set of fields in Eq. ( 1.9 ). The decomposition of @xmath under
@xmath is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have exploited the fact that the hypercharge is a traceless
generator of @xmath , which implies the condition @xmath . So, up to a
normalization factor, one may choose @xmath and @xmath . Then from
Eqs. ( 1.10 )–( 1.11 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the embedding of a SM fermion family into @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have expressed the @xmath doublets as @xmath and @xmath .
Notice in particular that the doublet embedded in @xmath is @xmath ³ ³ 3
Here @xmath is the second Pauli matrix and the symbol " @xmath " stands
for the fact that @xmath and @xmath transform in the same way under
@xmath . .

It may be useful to know how the @xmath generators act of @xmath and
@xmath . From the transformation properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , we deduce that the action of the generators is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Already at this elementary level we can list a set of important features
of @xmath which are typical of any GUT.

#### 1.2.1 Charge quantization and anomaly cancellation

The charges of quarks and leptons are related. Let us write the most
general electric charge generator compatible with the @xmath invariance
and the @xmath embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Then by applying Eq. ( 1.15 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that apart for a global normalization factor the charges do depend
just on one parameter, which must be fixed by some extra assumption.
Let’s say we require @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 That is needed in order to give mass
to the SM fermions with the Higgs mechanism. The simplest possibility is
given by using an @xmath doublet @xmath (cf. Sect. 1.2.6 ) and in order
to preserve @xmath it must be @xmath . , that readily implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the electric charge of the SM fermions is a multiple of @xmath .

Let us consider now the issue of anomalies. We already know that in the
SM all the gauge anomalies vanish. This property is preserved in @xmath
since @xmath and @xmath have equal and opposite anomalies, so that the
theory is still anomaly free. In order to see this explicitly let us
decompose @xmath and @xmath under the branching chain @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath charges are given up to a normalization factor. The
anomaly @xmath relative to a representation @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a completely symmetric tensor. Then, given the
properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is enough to compute the anomaly of the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.24)
  -- -- -- --------

in order to conclude that @xmath .

We close this section by noticing that anomaly cancellation and charge
quantization are closely related. Actually it is not a chance that in
the SM anomaly cancellation implies charge quantization, after taking
into account the gauge invariance of the Yukawa couplings [ 6 , 7 , 8 ,
9 , 10 ] .

#### 1.2.2 Gauge coupling unification

At some grand unification mass scale @xmath the relevant symmetry is
@xmath and the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath coupling constants of @xmath
merge into one single gauge coupling @xmath . The rather different
values for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath at low-energy are then due to
renormalization effects.

Before considering the running of the gauge couplings we need to fix the
relative normalization between @xmath and @xmath , which enter the weak
interactions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath is normalized as @xmath . In a unified theory based on a
simple group, the coupling which unifies is then ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating the normalization over a @xmath of @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus one obtains the tree level matching condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

At energies @xmath the running of the fine-structure constants ( @xmath
) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the one-loop beta-coefficient for the SM reads @xmath .
Starting from the experimental input values for the (consistently
normalized) SM gauge couplings at the scale @xmath GeV [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

it is then a simple exercise to perform the one-loop evolution of the
gauge couplings assuming just the SM as the low-energy effective theory.
The result is depicted in Fig. 1.1

As we can see, the gauge couplings do not unify in the minimal
framework, although a small perturbation may suffice to restore
unification. In particular, thresholds effects at the @xmath scale (or
below) may do the job, however depending on the details of the UV
completion ⁵ ⁵ 5 It turns out that threshold corrections are not enough
in order to restore unification in the minimal Georgi-Glashow @xmath
(see e.g. Ref. [ 81 ] ). .

By now Fig. 1.1 remains one of the most solid hints in favor of the
grand unification idea. Indeed, being the gauge coupling evolution
sensitive to the @xmath of the scale, it is intriguing that they almost
unify in a relatively narrow window, @xmath , which is still allowed by
the experimental lower bound on the proton lifetime and a consistent
effective quantum field theory description without gravity.

#### 1.2.3 Symmetry breaking

The Higgs sector of the Georgi-Glashow model spans over the reducible
@xmath representation. These two fields are minimally needed in order to
break the @xmath gauge symmetry down to @xmath and further to @xmath .
Let us concentrate on the first stage of the breaking which is
controlled by the rank-conserving VEV @xmath . The fact that the adjoint
preserves the rank is easily seen by considering the action of the
Cartan generators on the adjoint vacuum

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.32)
  -- -- -- --------

derived from the transformation properties of the adjoint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath can be diagonalized by an @xmath transformation and the
Cartan generators are diagonal by definition, one concludes that the
adjoint preserves the Cartan subalgebra. The scalar potential is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where just for simplicity we have imposed the discrete symmetry @xmath .
The minimization of the potential goes as follows. First of all @xmath
is transformed into a real diagonal traceless matrix by means of an
@xmath transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . With @xmath in the diagonal form, the scalar potential
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the @xmath ’s are not all independent, we need to use the
lagrangian multiplier @xmath in order to account for the constraint
@xmath . The minimization of the potential @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus at the minimum all the @xmath ’s satisfy the same cubic equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that the @xmath ’s can take at most three different values,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which are the three roots of the cubic
equation. Note that the absence of the @xmath term in the cubic equation
implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the number of times @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath appear in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath is invariant under @xmath transformations. This implies that
the most general form of symmetry breaking is @xmath as well as possible
@xmath factors (total rank is 4) which leave @xmath invariant. To find
the absolute minimum we have to use the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

to compare different choices of @xmath in order to get the one with the
smallest @xmath . It turns out (see e.g. Ref. [ 45 ] ) that for the case
of interest there are two possible patterns for the symmetry breaking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

depending on the relative magnitudes of the parameters @xmath and @xmath
. In particular for @xmath and @xmath the absolute minimum is given by
the SM vacuum [ 45 ] and the adjoint VEV reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the stability of the vacuum requires

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the minimum condition

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.45)
  -- -- -- --------

yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now write the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath traceless hermitian matrices. Then
from the canonical kinetic term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the shape of the vacuum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where repeated indices are not summed, we can easily extract the gauge
bosons mass matrix from the expression

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.50)
  -- -- -- --------

The gauge boson fields @xmath having @xmath and @xmath are massive,
@xmath , while @xmath and @xmath are still massless. Notice that the
hypercharge generator commutes with the vacuum in @xmath and hence the
associated gauge boson is massless as well. The number of massive gauge
bosons is then @xmath and their quantum numbers correspond to the coset
@xmath . Their mass @xmath is usually identified with the grand
unification scale, @xmath .

#### 1.2.4 Doublet-Triplet splitting

The second breaking step, @xmath , is driven by a @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

decomposes into a color triplet @xmath and an @xmath doublet @xmath .
The latter plays the same role of the Higgs doublet of the SM. The most
general potential containing both @xmath and @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 1.34 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again we have imposed for simplicity the discrete symmetry @xmath . It
is instructive to compute the mass of the doublet @xmath and the triplet
@xmath in the SM vacuum just after the first stage of the breaking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gauge hierarchy @xmath requires that the doublet @xmath , containing
the would-be Goldstone bosons eaten by the @xmath and the @xmath and the
physical Higgs boson, live at the @xmath scale. This is unnatural and
can be achieved at the prize of a fine-tuning of one part in @xmath in
the expression for @xmath . If we follow the principle that only the
minimal fine-tuning needed for the gauge hierarchy is allowed then
@xmath is automatically kept heavy ⁶ ⁶ 6 In some way this is an
extension of the Georgi’s survival hypothesis for fermions [ 79 ] ,
according to which the particles do not survive to low energies unless a
symmetry forbids their large mass terms. This hypothesis is obviously
wrong for scalars and must be extended. The extended survival hypothesis
(ESH) reads: Higgs scalars (unless protected by some symmetry) acquire
the maximum mass compatible with the pattern of symmetry breaking [ 82 ]
. In practice this corresponds to the requirement of the minimal number
of fine-tunings to be imposed onto the scalar potential [ 83 ] . . This
goes under the name of doublet-triplet (DT) splitting. Usually, but not
always [ 84 , 85 ] , a light triplet is very dangerous for the proton
stability since it can couple to the SM fermions in such a way that
baryon number is not anymore an accidental global symmetry of the
low-energy lagrangian ⁷ ⁷ 7 Let us consider for instance the invariants
@xmath and @xmath . There’s no way to assign a baryon charge to @xmath
in such a way that @xmath is preserved. .

A final comment about the radiative stability of the fine-tuning is in
order. While supersymmetry helps in stabilizing the hierarchy between
@xmath and @xmath against radiative corrections, it does not say much
about the origin of this hierarchy. Other mechanisms have to be devised
to render the hierarchy natural (for a short discussion of the solutions
proposed so far cf. Sect. 4.4.3 ). In a nonsupersymmetric scenario one
needs to compute the mass of the doublet in Eq. ( 1.55 ) within a @xmath
-loop accuracy in order to stabilize the hierarchy.

#### 1.2.5 Proton decay

The theory predicts that protons eventually decay. The most emblematic
contribution to proton decay is due to the exchange of super-heavy gauge
bosons which belong to the coset @xmath . Let us denote the matter
representations of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the greek and latin indices run respectively from @xmath to @xmath
( @xmath space) and @xmath to @xmath ( @xmath space). Analogously the
adjoint @xmath can be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we can readily recognize the gauge bosons associated to the
SM unbroken generators ( @xmath ) and the two super-heavy leptoquark
gauge bosons ( @xmath ). Let us consider now the gauge action of @xmath
on the matter fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus diagrams involving the exchange of a @xmath boson generate
processes like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose amplitude is proportional to the gauge boson propagator. After
dressing the operator with a spectator quark u, we can have for instance
the low-energy process @xmath , whose decay rate can be estimated by
simple dimensional analysis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath years [ 11 ] we extract (for @xmath ) the naive lower bound
on the super-heavy gauge boson mass

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

which points directly to the grand unification scale extrapolated by the
gauge running (see e.g. Fig. 1.1 ).

Notice that @xmath is conserved in the process @xmath . This selection
rule is a general feature of the gauge induced proton decay and can be
traced back to the presence of a global @xmath accidental symmetry in
the transitions of Eq. ( 1.58 ) after assigning @xmath .

#### 1.2.6 Yukawa sector and neutrino masses

The @xmath Yukawa lagrangian can be written schematically ⁸ ⁸ 8 More
precisely @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
respectively @xmath , family and Lorentz indices. as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 5-index Levi-Civita tensor. After denoting the
@xmath representations synthetically as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 3-index Levi-Civita tensor and @xmath , we project
Eq. ( 1.62 ) over the SM components. This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.65)
  -- -- -- --------

After rearranging the order of the @xmath doublet and singlet fields in
the second term of Eq. ( 1.64 ), i.e. @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows a deep connection between flavor and the GUT symmetry (which
is not related to a flavor symmetry). The first relation in Eq. ( 1.66 )
predicts @xmath , @xmath and @xmath at the GUT scale. So in order to
test this relation one has to run the SM fermion masses starting from
their low-energy values. While @xmath is obtained in the MSSM with a
typical @xmath uncertainty [ 86 ] , the other two relations are
evidently wrong. By exploiting the fact that the ratio between @xmath
and @xmath is essentially independent of renormalization effects [ 87 ]
, we get the scale free relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is off by one order of magnitude.

Notice that @xmath comes from the fact that the fundamental @xmath
breaks @xmath down to @xmath which remains an accidental symmetry of the
Yukawa sector. So one expects that considering higher dimensional
representations makes it possible to further break the remnant @xmath .
This is indeed what happens by introducing a @xmath which couples to the
fermions in the following way [ 88 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first operator leads to @xmath , so that if both @xmath and @xmath
are present more freedom is available to fit all fermion masses.
Alternatively one can built an effective coupling [ 89 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

which mimics the behavior of the @xmath . If we take the cut-off to be
the planck scale @xmath , this nicely keeps @xmath unification while
corrects the relations among the first two families. However in both
cases we loose predictivity since we are just fitting @xmath and @xmath
in the extended Yukawa structure.

Finally what about neutrinos? It turns out [ 90 ] that the
Georgi-Glashow model has an accidental global @xmath symmetry with the
charge assignment @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The VEV @xmath breaks
this global symmetry but leaves invariant a linear combination of @xmath
and a Cartan generator of @xmath . It easy to see that any linear
combination of @xmath , Q, and any color generators is left invariant.
The extra conserved charge @xmath when acting on the fermion fields is
just @xmath . Thus neutrinos cannot acquire neither a Dirac (because of
the field content) nor a Majorana (because of the global @xmath
symmetry) mass term and they remain exactly massless even at the quantum
level.

Going at the non-renormalizable level we can break the accidental @xmath
symmetry. For instance global charges are expected to be violated by
gravity and the simplest effective operator one can think of is [ 91 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

However its contribution to neutrino masses is too much suppressed (
@xmath @xmath ). Thus we have to extend the field content of the theory
in order to generate phenomenologically viable neutrino masses.
Actually, the possibilities are many.

Minimally one may add an @xmath singlet fermion field @xmath . Then,
through its renormalizable coupling @xmath , one integrates @xmath out
and generates an operator similar to that in Eq. ( 1.70 ), but
suppressed by the @xmath -singlet mass term which can be taken well
below @xmath .

A slightly different approach could be breaking the accidental @xmath
symmetry by adding additional scalar representations. Let us take for
instance a @xmath and consider then the new couplings [ 90 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath there’s no way to assign a @xmath -charge to
@xmath in order to preserve @xmath . Thus we expect that loops
containing the @xmath breaking sources @xmath and @xmath can generate
neutrino masses.

So what is wrong with the two approaches above? In principle nothing.
But maybe we should try to do more than getting out what we put in.
Indeed we are just solving the issue of neutrino masses "ad hoc",
without correlations to other phenomena. In addition we do not improve
unification of minimal @xmath ⁹ ⁹ 9 An analysis of the thresholds
corrections in the Georgi-Glashow model with the addition of the @xmath
indicates that unification cannot be restored. .

Guided by this double issue of the Georgi-Glashow model, two minimal
extensions which can cure at the same time both neutrino masses and
unification have been recently proposed

-   Add a @xmath [ 43 ] . Here @xmath is an Higgs triplet responsible
    for type-II seesaw. The model predicts generically light leptoquarks
    @xmath and fast proton decay [ 92 ] .

-   Add a @xmath [ 44 ] . Here @xmath and @xmath are fields responsible
    respectively for type-I and type-III seesaw. The model predicts a
    light fermion triplet @xmath and fast proton decay [ 93 ] .

Another well motivated and studied extension of the Georgi-Glashow model
is given by supersymmetric @xmath [ 94 ] . In this case the
supersymmetrization of the spectrum is enough in order to fix both
unification and neutrino masses. Indeed, if we do not impose by hand
@xmath -parity conservation Majorana neutrino masses are automatically
generated by lepton number violating interactions [ 95 ] .

### 1.3 The Pati-Salam route

In the SM there is an intrinsic lack of left-right symmetry without any
explanation of the phenomenological facts that neutrino masses are very
small and the weak interactions are predominantly @xmath . The situation
can be schematically depicted in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath under @xmath .

Considering the SM as an effective theory, neutrino masses can be
generated by a @xmath operator [ 25 ] of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the charge-conjugation matrix. After
electroweak symmetry breaking, @xmath , neutrinos pick up a Majorana
mass term @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lower bound on the highest neutrino eigenvalue inferred from @xmath
tells us that the scale at which the lepton number is violated is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that without a theory which fixes the structure of @xmath we
don’t have much to say about @xmath .

Actually, by exploiting the Fierz identity @xmath , one finds that the
operator in Eq. ( 1.73 ) can be equivalently written in three different
ways

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each operator in Eq. ( 1.76 ) hints to a different renormalizable UV
completion of the SM. Indeed one can think those effective operators as
the result of the integration of an heavy state with a renormalizable
coupling of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are a fermionic singlet ( @xmath ), a
scalar triplet ( @xmath ) and a fermionic triplet ( @xmath ). Notice
that being @xmath , @xmath and @xmath vector-like states their mass is
not protected by the electroweak symmetry and it can be identified with
the scale @xmath , thus providing a rationale for the smallness of
neutrino masses. This goes under the name of seesaw mechanism and the
three options in Eq. ( 1.77 ) are classified respectively as type-I [ 26
, 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] , type-II [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] and type-III [ 35
] seesaw.

#### 1.3.1 Left-Right symmetry

Guided by the previous discussion on the renormalizable origin of
neutrino masses, it is then very natural to to fill the gap in the SM by
introducing a SM-singlet fermion field @xmath . In such a way the
spectrum looks more "symmetric" and one can imagine that at higher
energies the left-right symmetry is restored, in the sense that left and
right chirality fermions ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 As already stressed we work in a
formalism in which all the fermions are left-handed four components Weyl
spinors. The right chirality components are obtained by means of charge
conjugation, namely @xmath or equivalently @xmath . are assumed to play
an identical role prior to some kind of spontaneous symmetry breaking.

The smallest gauge group that implement this idea is @xmath [ 2 , 77 ,
78 ] , where @xmath is a discrete symmetry which exchange @xmath . The
field content of the theory can be schematically depicted as

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.78)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , under @xmath . Given this
embedding of the fermion fields one readily verifies that the electric
charge formula takes the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we have to state the Higgs sector. In the early days of the
development of left-right theories the breaking to the SM was minimally
achieved by employing the following set of representations: @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath [ 2 , 77 , 78 ] . However, as pointed out in [ 30 , 34
] , in order to understand the smallness of neutrino masses it is better
to consider @xmath and @xmath in place of @xmath and @xmath .

Choosing the matrix representation @xmath for the @xmath adjoint and
defining the conjugate doublet @xmath , the transformation properties
for the Higgs fields under @xmath and @xmath read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and consequently we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, given the expression for the electric charge operator in Eq. (
1.79 ), we can decompose these fields in the charge eigenstates

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.82)
  -- -- -- --------

In order to fix completely the theory one has to specify the action of
the @xmath symmetry on the field content. There are two
phenomenologically viable left-right discrete symmetries: @xmath and
@xmath . They are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The implications of this two cases differ by the tiny amount of @xmath
violation. Indeed when restricted to the fermion fields we can identify
@xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath and @xmath . In the former
case the Yukawa matrices are hermitian while in the latter they are
symmetric. So if @xmath is conserved (real couplings) @xmath and @xmath
lead to the same predictions.

Notice that @xmath involves an exchange between spinors with the same
chirality. In principle this would allow the embedding of @xmath into a
gauge symmetry which commutes with the Lorentz group. The gauging is
conceptually important since it protects the symmetry from unknown UV
effects.

Remarkably it turns out that @xmath can be identified with a finite
gauge transformation of @xmath which, historically, goes under the name
of D-parity [ 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 , 100 ] . The connection with @xmath
motivates our notation in terms of left-handed fermion fields which fits
better for the @xmath case.

Let us consider now the symmetry breaking sector. From Eq. ( 1.82 ) we
deduce that the SM-preserving vacuum directions are

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.84)
  -- -- -- --------

The minimization of the scalar potential (see e.g. Appendix B of Ref. [
34 ] ) shows that beside the expected left-right symmetric minimum
@xmath , we have also the asymmetric one

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a combination of parameters of the Higgs potential.
Since the discrete left-right symmetry is defined to transform @xmath (
@xmath ) in the case of @xmath ( @xmath ), the VEVs in Eq. ( 1.85 )
breaks it spontaneously. Phenomenologically we have to require @xmath
which leads to the following breaking pattern

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the gauge hierarchy is set by the gauge boson masses @xmath . Let
us verify this by computing @xmath and @xmath . We start from the
covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the canonically normalized kinetic term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the relation @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 This relation comes directly from
@xmath (cf. Eq. ( 1.79 )). For a formal proof see Sect. 2.2.4 . and the
@xmath symmetry in Eq. ( 1.83 ) which implies @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the next stage of symmetry breaking ( @xmath and @xmath ) an
analogous calculation yields (in the approximation @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that in order to preserve @xmath at tree level, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

one has to require @xmath .

On the other hand at energy scales between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is
still preserved and Eq. ( 1.79 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is an @xmath triplet @xmath and we get a violation of
@xmath by two units. Then two classes of @xmath and @xmath violating
processes can arise:

-   @xmath and @xmath which imply Majorana neutrinos.

-   @xmath and @xmath which lead to neutron-antineutron oscillations.

Let us describe the origin of neutrino masses while postponing the
discussion of neutron-antineutron oscillations to the next section.

The piece of lagrangian relevant for neutrinos is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

The invariance of Eq. ( 1.96 ) under the @xmath might not be obvious. So
let us recall that, on top of the transformation properties in Eq. (
1.80 ), @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . After projecting Eq. ( 1.96 ) on
the SM vacuum directions and taking only the pieces relevant to
neutrinos we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us take for simplicity @xmath and consider real parameters. Then the
neutrino mass matrix in the symmetric basis @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, given the hierarchy @xmath , the matrix in Eq. ( 1.98 ) is
block-diagonalized by a similarity transformation involving the
orthogonal matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The diagonalization is valid up to @xmath and yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The two contributions go under the name of type-II and type-I seesaw
respectively. From the minimization of the potential ¹² ¹² 12 Even
without performing the complete minimization we can estimate the induced
VEV @xmath by looking at the following piece of potential

@xmath (1.101)

On the SM-vacuum Eq. ( 1.101 ) reads

@xmath (1.102)

and from the extremizing condition with respect to @xmath we get

@xmath (1.103)

(see Eq. ( 1.85 )) one gets @xmath and hence the effective neutrino mass
matrix reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation is crucial since it shows a deep connection between the
smallness of neutrino masses and the non-observation of @xmath currents
[ 30 , 34 ] . Indeed in the limit @xmath we recover the @xmath structure
and @xmath vanish.

Nowadays we know that neutrino are massive, but this information is not
enough in order to fix the scale @xmath because the detailed Yukawa
structures are unknown. In this respect one can adopt two complementary
approaches. From a pure phenomenological point of view one can hope that
the @xmath interactions are just behind the corner and experiments such
us the LHC are probing right now the TeV region ¹³ ¹³ 13 It has been
pointed out recently [ 36 ] that a low @xmath left-right symmetry scale
could be welcome in view of a possible tension between neutrinoless
double beta decay signals and the upper limit on the sum of neutrino
masses coming from cosmology. . Depending on the choice of the discrete
left-right symmetry which can be either @xmath or @xmath , the strongest
bounds on @xmath are given by the @xmath mass difference which yields
@xmath in the case of @xmath and @xmath in the case of @xmath [ 101 ,
102 ] .

Alternatively one can imagine some well motivated UV completion in which
the Yukawa structure of the neutrino mass matrix is correlated to that
of the charged fermions. For instance in @xmath GUTs it usually not easy
to disentangle the highest eigenvalue in Eq. ( 1.104 ) from the top
mass. This implies that the scale @xmath must be very heavy, somewhere
close to @xmath . As we will see in Chapter 2 this is compatible with
unification constraints and strengthen the connection between @xmath and
neutrino masses.

#### 1.3.2 Lepton number as a fourth color

One can go a little step further and imagine a partial unification
scenario in which quarks and leptons belong to the same representations.
The simplest implementation is obtained by collapsing the multiplets in
Eq. ( 1.78 ) in the following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that @xmath and the fermion multiplets transform as @xmath and @xmath
under @xmath , which is known as the Pati-Salam group [ 2 ] . Even in
this case one can attach an extra discrete symmetry which exchange
@xmath .

The Higgs sector of the model is essentially an extension of that of the
left-right symmetric model presented in Sect. 1.3.1 . Indeed we have
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . From the decomposition @xmath under @xmath
and the expression for the electric charge operator in Eq. ( 1.79 ), we
can readily see that @xmath contains a SM-single direction and so the
first stage of the breaking is given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.106)
  -- -- -- ---------

while the final breaking to @xmath is obtained by means of the
bi-doublet VEV @xmath . Analogously to the left-right symmetric case an
electroweak triplet VEV @xmath is induced by the Higgs potential and the
conclusions about neutrino masses are the same.

A peculiar feature of the Pati-Salam model is that the proton is stable
in spite of the quark-lepton transitions due to the @xmath interactions.
Let us consider first gauge interactions. The adjoint of @xmath
decomposes as @xmath under @xmath . In particular the transitions
between quark and leptons due to @xmath and @xmath come from the current
interactions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It turns out that Eq. ( 1.107 ) has an accidental global symmetry @xmath
, where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is
nothing but @xmath when evaluated on the standard fermions. Thus, given
that @xmath is also a (gauge) symmetry, we conclude that both @xmath and
@xmath are conserved by the gauge interactions.

The situation regarding the scalar interactions is more subtle. Actually
in the minimal model there is an hidden discrete symmetry which forbids
all the @xmath transitions, like for instance @xmath (see e.g. Ref. [
103 ] ) ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Notice that this is just the reverse of the situation
with the minimal @xmath model where @xmath transitions are forbidden. .
A simple way to see it is that any operator of the type @xmath and the
@xmath term must be contracted with an @xmath tensor in order to form an
@xmath singlet. However, since the Higgs fields in the minimal model are
either singlets or completely symmetric in the @xmath space, they cannot
mediate @xmath operators.

On the other hand @xmath transitions like neutron-antineutron
oscillations are allowed and they proceed through @xmath operators of
the type [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which are generated by the Pati-Salam breaking VEV @xmath . The fact
that @xmath can be pushed down relatively close to the TeV scale without
making the proton to decay is phenomenologically interesting, since one
can hope in testable neutron-antineutron oscillations (for a recent
review see Ref. [ 104 ] ). Present bounds on nuclear instability give
@xmath yr, which translates into a bound on the neutron oscillation time
@xmath sec. Analogous limits come from direct reactor oscillations
experiments. This sets a lower bound on the scale of @xmath
nonsupersymmetric ( @xmath ) operators that varies from 10 to 300 TeV
depending on model couplings. Thus neutron-antineutron oscillations
probe scales far below the unification scale.

#### 1.3.3 One family unified

The embedding of the left-right symmetric models of the previous
sections into a grand unified structure requires the presence of a
rank-5 group. Actually there are only two candidates which have complex
representations and can contain the SM as a subgroup. These are @xmath
and @xmath . The former group even though smaller it is somehow
redundant ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 @xmath as a grand unified group deserves anyway
attention especially in its supersymmetric version. The reason is that
it has an in-built mechanism in which the doublet-triplet splitting can
be achieved in a very natural way [ 105 , 106 ] . The mechanism is based
on the fact that the light Higgs doublets arise as pseudo-Goldstone
modes of a spontaneously broken accidental global @xmath symmetry of the
Higgs superpotential. since the SM fermions would be minimally embedded
into @xmath which under @xmath decompose as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

yielding an exotic @xmath on top of the SM fermions.

Thus we are left with @xmath . There are essentially two ways of looking
at this unified theory, according to the two maximal subalgebras which
contain the SM: @xmath and @xmath . The latter is locally isomorphic to
@xmath . The group theory of @xmath will be the subject of the next
section, but let us already anticipate that the spinorial 16-dimensional
representation of @xmath decomposes in the following way @xmath under
@xmath and @xmath under @xmath , thus providing a synthesis of both the
ideas of Georgi-Glashow and the Pati-Salam.

### 1.4 @xmath group theory

@xmath is the special orthogonal group of rotations in a 10-dimensional
vector space. Its defining representation is given by the group of
matrices @xmath which leave invariant the norm of a 10-dimentional real
vector @xmath . Under @xmath , @xmath and since @xmath is invariant
@xmath must be orthogonal, @xmath . Here special means @xmath which
selects the group of transformations continuously connected with the
identity. The matrices @xmath may be written in terms of @xmath
imaginary generators @xmath , for @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the parameters of the transformation. A convenient
basis for the generators is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the square bracket stands for anti-symmetrization. They
satisfy the @xmath commutation relations ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 These are an higher
dimensional generalization of the well known @xmath commutation
relations @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then the right
hand side of Eq. ( 1.112 ) takes just into account the antisymmetric
nature of @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In oder to study the group theory of @xmath it is crucial to identify
the invariant tensors. The conditions @xmath and @xmath give rise to two
of them. The first one is simply the Kronecker tensor @xmath which is
easily proven to be invariant because of @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the second one is the 10-index Levi-Civita tensor @xmath . Indeed,
from the definition of determinant

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the fact that @xmath , we conclude that @xmath is also invariant.

The irreducible representations of @xmath can be classified into two
categories, single-valued and double-valued representations. The single
valued representations have the same transformations properties as the
ordinary vectors in the real @xmath -dimensional space and their
symmetrized or antisymmetrized tensor products. The doube-valued
representations, called also spinor representations, trasform like
spinors in a 10-dimentional coordinate space.

#### 1.4.1 Tensor representations

The general @xmath -index irreducible representations of @xmath are
built by means of the antisymmetrization or symmetrization (including
trace subtraction) of the tensor product of @xmath -fundamental vectors.
Starting from the 10-dimentional fundamental vector @xmath , whose
transformation rule is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can decompose the tensor product of two of them in the following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the symmetry properties of tensors under permutation of the
indices are not changed by the group transformations, the antisymmetric
tensor @xmath and the symmetric tensor @xmath clearly do not transform
into each other. In general one can also separate a tensor in a
traceless part and a trace. Because @xmath is orthogonal also the
traceless property is preserved by the group transformations. So we
conclude that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath form irreducible
representations whose dimensions are respectively @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . One can continue in this way by considering higher order
representations and separating each time the symmetric/antisymmetric
pieces and subtracting traces.

However something special happens for @xmath -index tensors and the
reason has to do with the existence of the invariant @xmath which
induces the following duality map when applied to a @xmath -index
completely antisymmetric tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This allows us to define the self-dual and the antiself-dual components
of @xmath in the following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.118)
     @xmath      (1.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One verifies that @xmath (self-dual) and @xmath (antiself-dual). Since
the duality property is not changed by the group transformations @xmath
and @xmath do form irreducible representations whose dimension is @xmath
.

#### 1.4.2 Spinor representations

We have defined the @xmath group by those linear transformations on the
coordinates @xmath , such that the quadratic form @xmath is left
invariant. If we write this quadratic form as the square of a linear
form of @xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we have to require

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Eq. ( 1.121 ) goes under the name of Clifford algebra and the @xmath ’s
have to be matrices in order to anticommute with each other ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 In
particular it can be shown that the dimension of the @xmath matrices
must be even. Indeed from Eq. ( 1.121 ) we obtain

@xmath (1.122)

with no sum over @xmath . Taking the trace we get

@xmath (1.123)

But for the case @xmath this implies

@xmath (1.124)

and hence, putting together Eqs. ( 1.123 )–( 1.124 ), we have @xmath .
On the other hand, @xmath implies that the eigenvalues of @xmath are
either @xmath or @xmath . This means that to get @xmath , the number of
@xmath and @xmath eigenvalues must be the same, i.e. @xmath must be even
dimensional. .

For definiteness let us build an explicit representation of the @xmath
’s which is valid for @xmath groups [ 107 ] ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 For an alternative
approach to the construction of spinor representations by means of
creation and annihilation operators see e.g. Ref. [ 108 ] . . We start
with @xmath . Since the Pauli matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the case @xmath is constructed by recursion. The iteration from
@xmath to @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.128)
  -- -- -- ---------

Given the fact that the @xmath matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra let
us check explicitly that the @xmath ones satisfy it as well,

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 (1.129)
     @xmath      (1.130)
     @xmath      (1.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Analogously one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now consider a rotation in the coordinate space, @xmath , where @xmath
is an orthogonal matrix. This rotation induces a transformation on the
@xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that the anticommutation relations remain unchanged, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because the original set of @xmath matrices form a complete matrix
algebra, the new set of @xmath matrices must be related to the original
set by a similarity transformation,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The correspondence @xmath serves as a @xmath -dimensional representation
of the rotation group which is called spinor representation. The
quantities @xmath , which transform like

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are called spinors. For an infinitesimal rotation we can parametrize
@xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Then Eq. ( 1.135 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used @xmath . One can verify that a solution for @xmath in
Eq. ( 1.138 ) is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By expressing the parameter @xmath in terms of rotations angle, one can
see that @xmath ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This is easily seen for @xmath . In this case
the Clifford algebra is simply given by the three Pauli matrices and a
finite transformation looks like

@xmath (1.140)

where we have defined @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . , i.e.
@xmath is a double-valued representation.

However for @xmath groups the representation @xmath is not irreducible.
To see this we construct the chiral projector @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath anticommutes with @xmath since @xmath is even ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Notice
that this would not be the case for @xmath groups. and consequently we
get @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 1.139 )). Thus if @xmath transforms as @xmath ,
the positive and negative chiral components

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

transform separately. In other words @xmath and @xmath form two
irreducible spinor representations of dimension @xmath .

Which is the relation between @xmath and @xmath ? In order to address
this issue it is necessary to introduce the concept of conjugation. Let
us consider a spinor @xmath of @xmath . The combination @xmath is an
@xmath invariant provided that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The conjugation matrix @xmath can be constructed iteratively. We start
from @xmath for @xmath and define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can verify that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By transposing Eq. ( 1.145 ) and substituting back @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the Shur’s Lemma implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which yields @xmath . In order to choose between @xmath and @xmath one
has to apply Eq. ( 1.144 ), obtaining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand Eq. ( 1.141 ) and Eq. ( 1.145 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which by exploiting @xmath (cf. again Eq. ( 1.141 )) yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This allows us to write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have also exploited the hermicity of the @xmath matrices. Eq. (
1.151 ) can be interpreted in the following way: for @xmath with @xmath
even @xmath and @xmath are self-conjugate i.e. real or pseudo-real
depending on whether @xmath is symmetric or antisymmetric (cf. Eq. (
1.148 )), while for @xmath with @xmath odd @xmath is the conjugate of
@xmath . Thus only @xmath can have complex representations and
remarkably @xmath belong to this class.

##### Spinors will be spinors

We close this section by pointing out a distinctive feature of spinorial
representations: spinors of @xmath decompose into the direct sum of
spinors of @xmath [ 107 ] . Indeed, since the construction of @xmath
in Eq. ( 1.141 ) is such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the positive-chirality spinor @xmath of @xmath contains @xmath
positive-chirality spinors and @xmath negative-chirality spinors of
@xmath . More explicitly

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us exemplify this important concept in the case of the
16-dimensional positive-chirality spinor of @xmath . By taking
respectively @xmath and @xmath we obtain

-   @xmath under @xmath ,

-   @xmath under @xmath ,

where @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ) are respectively the
positive (negative) chiral components of the @xmath and @xmath reducible
spinors. Thus under @xmath the @xmath decomposes as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we will show in Sect. 1.4.4 the Lie algebras @xmath and @xmath are
locally isomorphic to @xmath and @xmath . This allows us to make the
following identifications between the @xmath and @xmath representations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the @xmath and @xmath ones

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which justify the decomposition of the @xmath spinor under the
Pati-Salam algebra @xmath as anticipated in Sect. 1.3.3 , namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This striking group-theoretic feature of spinors, which under the
natural restriction to an orthogonal subgroup decompose into several
copies of identical spinors of the subgroup, hints to a suggestive
connection with the repetitive structure of the SM families [ 107 ] and
motivates the study of unification in higher orthogonal groups than
@xmath [ 27 , 107 , 109 , 110 ] . To accommodate at least the three
observed matter families we must use either @xmath or @xmath . Following
the decomposition in Eq. ( 1.153 ) we get

-   @xmath : @xmath ,

-   @xmath : @xmath .

However there is a fundamental difference between the two cases above.
According to the discussion below Eq. ( 1.151 ) only @xmath groups have
complex spinor representations. This means that one can write a
super-heavy bare mass term for @xmath and it is difficult to explain why
it should be light. On the other hand no bare mass term can be written
for @xmath , making the last group a more natural choice.

The obvious difficulty one encounters in this class of models is the
overabundance of sequential or mirror families. If we decide to embed
the SM fermions into three copies of @xmath , the remaining families in
@xmath are called sequential, while those in @xmath are mirror ²¹ ²¹ 21
Mirror fermions have the identical quantum numbers of ordinary fermions
under the SM gauge group, except that they have opposite handedness.
They imply parity restoration at high-energies as proposed long ago by
Lee and Yang [ 111 ] . families.

It has been pointed out recently [ 112 ] that the existence of three
(mirror or sequential) families is still in accord with the SM, as long
as an additional Higgs doublet is also present. This however is not
enough to allow large orthogonal unification scenarios based on @xmath
or @xmath .

#### 1.4.3 Anomaly cancellation

@xmath is an anomaly-free group. This important property can be
understood from a simple group theoretical argument [ 113 ] . Let us
consider the @xmath generators @xmath in a given arbitrary
representation. @xmath transforms like an antisymmetric tensor in the
indices @xmath and @xmath . Then the anomaly, which is proportional to
the invariant tensor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

must be a linear combination of a product of Kronecker @xmath ’s.
Furthermore it must be antisymmetric under the exchanges @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and symmetric under the exchange of pairs @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . However the most general form consistent with the antisymmetry
in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is antisymmetric in @xmath as well and so it must vanish. The proof
fails for @xmath where the anomaly can be proportional to the invariant
tensor @xmath . Actually this is consistent with the fact that @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath which is clearly an anomalous group. On the other
hand @xmath is safe for @xmath .

#### 1.4.4 The standard model embedding

From the @xmath commutation relations in Eq. ( 1.112 ) we find that a
complete set of simultaneously commuting generators can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is also known as the Cartan subalgebra and can be spanned over the
left-right group Cartan generators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us consider the @xmath maximal subalgebra of @xmath . We can span
the @xmath generators over @xmath with @xmath and the @xmath generators
over @xmath with @xmath . From the @xmath commutation relations in Eq. (
1.112 ) one can verify that these two sets commute (hence the direct
product @xmath ).

The next information we need is the notion of local isomorphism for the
algebras @xmath and @xmath . In the @xmath case we define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and check by an explicit calculation that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus @xmath and @xmath @xmath span respectively the @xmath and the
@xmath algebra. On the other hand for the @xmath sector we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and verify after a tedious calculation that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants of @xmath (see e.g. [ 114 ] ).
Thus @xmath @xmath spans the @xmath algebra and, in particular, the
@xmath subalgebra is spanned by @xmath @xmath while @xmath can be
identified with the (normalized) @xmath generator. Then the hypercharge
and electric charge operators read respectively

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 1.4.5 The Higgs sector

As we have seen in the previous sections @xmath offers a powerful
organizing principle for the SM matter content whose quantum numbers
nicely fit in a 16-dimensional spinorial representation. However there
is an obvious prize to pay: the more one unifies the more one has to
work in order to break the enhanced symmetry.

The symmetry breaking sector can be regarded as the most arbitrary and
challenging aspect of GUT models. The standard approach is based on the
spontaneous symmetry breaking through elementary scalars. Though other
ways to face the problem may be conceived ²² ²² 22 For an early attempt
of dynamical symmetry breaking in @xmath see e.g. [ 115 ] . the Higgs
mechanism remains the most solid one in terms of computability and
predictivity.

The breaking chart in Fig. 1.2 shows the possible symmetry stages
between @xmath and @xmath with the corresponding scalar representations
responsible for the breaking. That gives an idea of the complexity of
the Higgs sector in @xmath GUTs.

In view of such a degree of complexity, better we start by considering a
minimal Higgs sector. Let us stress that the quest for the simplest
Higgs sector is driven not only by aesthetic criteria but it is also a
phenomenologically relevant issue related to tractability and
predictivity of the models. Indeed, the details of the symmetry breaking
pattern, sometimes overlooked in the phenomenological analysis, give
further constraints on the low-energy observables such as the proton
decay and the effective SM flavor structure. For instance in order to
assess quantitatively the constraints imposed by gauge coupling
unification on the mass of the lepto-quarks resposible for proton decay
it is crucial to have the scalar spectrum under control ²³ ²³ 23 Even in
that case some degree of arbitrariness can still persist due to the fact
that the spectrum can never be fixed completely but lives on a manifold
defined by the vacuum conditions. .

From the breaking chart in Fig. 1.2 we conclude that, before before
considering any symmetry breaking dynamics, the following
representations are required by the group theory in order to achieve a
full breaking of @xmath down to the SM:

-   @xmath or @xmath : they reduce the rank by one unit but leave an
    @xmath little group unbroken.

-   @xmath or @xmath or @xmath : they admit for little groups different
    from @xmath , yielding the SM when intersected with @xmath .

It should be also mentioned that a one-step @xmath breaking can be
achieved via only one @xmath irreducible Higgs representation [ 54 ] .
However, such a setting requires an extended matter sector, including
@xmath and @xmath multiplets, in order to accommodate realistic fermion
masses [ 55 ] .

As we will see in the next Chapters the dynamics of the spontaneous
symmetry breaking imposes further constraints on the viability of the
options showed in Fig. 1.2 . On top of that one has to take into account
also other phenomenological constraints due to the unification pattern,
the proton decay and the SM fermion spectrum.

We can already anticipate at this level that while the choice between
@xmath or @xmath is a model dependent issue related to the details of
the Yukawa sector (see e.g. Sect. 1.5 ), the simplest option among
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is certainly given by the adjoint @xmath .
However, since the early 80’s, it has been observed that the vacuum
dynamics aligns the adjoint along an @xmath direction, making the choice
of @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath alone not phenomenologically viable.
In the nonsupersymmetric case the alignment is only approximate [ 56 ,
57 , 58 , 59 ] , but it is such to clash with unification constraints
(cf. Chapter 2 ) which do not allow for any @xmath -like intermediate
stage, while in the supersymmetric limit the alignment is exact due to
F-flatness [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] , thus never landing to a supersymmetric SM
vacuum.

The critical reexamination of these two longstanding no-go for the
setting with the @xmath driving the GUT breaking will be the subject of
Chapters 3 and 4 .

### 1.5 Yukawa sector in renormalizable @xmath

In order to study the @xmath Yukawa sector, we decompose the spinor
bilinear

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the symmetric (S) and antisymmetric (A)
nature of the bilinear couplings in the family space. At the
renormalizable level we have only three possibilities: @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Thus the most general @xmath Yukawa lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are complex symmetric matrices while @xmath is
complex antisymmetric ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 For completeness we report a concise
proof of these statements based of the formalism used in Sect. 1.4.2 and
borrowed from Ref. [ 107 ] . In a schematic notation we can write a
Yukawa invariant term such as those in Eq. ( 1.167 ) as

@xmath (1.168)

where @xmath is both a Lorentz and an @xmath spinor (hence the need for
@xmath and @xmath which are respectively the Dirac and the @xmath
conjugation matrix). Then @xmath denotes an antisymmetric product of
@xmath @xmath matrices and @xmath is a scalar field transforming like an
antisymmetric tensor with @xmath indices under @xmath . Using the facts
that @xmath is an eigenstate of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (cf. Eq. (
1.150 )) and @xmath , we deduce that @xmath must be odd (otherwise Eq. (
1.168 ) is zero). This singles out the antisymmetric tensors @xmath with
@xmath , corresponding respectively to dimensions @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (actually the duality map defined in Eq. ( 1.117 ) is such that
only half of these 252 components couples to the spinor bilinear). Next
we consider the constraints imposed by the symmetry properties of the
conjugation matrices, namely @xmath and @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 1.148 )).
These yields

@xmath (1.169)

where in the second step we have used the anti-commutation properties of
the fermion fields. Then, by exploiting the relation @xmath (cf. Eq. (
1.145 )), we obtain

@xmath (1.170)

which plugged into Eq. ( 1.169 ) implies

@xmath (1.171)

Hence for @xmath the invariant in Eq. ( 1.168 ) is symmetric in the
flavor space of @xmath , while for @xmath is antisymmetric. .

It should be mentioned that @xmath and @xmath are real representation
from the @xmath point of view ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 This can be easily seen from the
fact that the @xmath generators in the fundamental representation are
both imaginary and antisymmetric (cf. Eq. ( 1.111 )). This implies
@xmath which corresponds to the definition of real representation in
Eq. ( 1.3 ) with @xmath . . In spite of that the components of @xmath
and @xmath can be chosen either real or complex. In the latter case we
have @xmath and @xmath , which means that the complex conjugate fields
differ from the original ones by some extra charge. Actually both the
components are allowed in the Yukawa lagrangian, since they transform in
the same way under @xmath ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Alternatively one can imagine a
complex @xmath as the linear combination of two real @xmath ’s, i.e.
@xmath . This should make clearer the origin of the new structures in
Eq. ( 1.172 ). , and thus we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For instance complex scalars are a must in supersymmetry where the
fundamental objects are chiral superfields made of Weyl fermions and
complex scalars. However in supersymmetry we never see the couplings
@xmath and @xmath because of the holomorphic properties of the
superpotential. Even without supersymmetry there could be the
phenomenological need, as we are going to see soon, of having either a
complex @xmath or a complex @xmath . In this case the new structures in
Eq. ( 1.172 ) are still there, unless an extra symmetry which forbids
them is imposed.

In order to understand the implications of having a complex @xmath , let
us decompose it under the subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular the bi-doublet can be further decomposed under @xmath ,
yielding @xmath . Now if @xmath we have @xmath as in the SM, while if
@xmath then @xmath as much as in the MSSM or in the two-higgs doublet
model (2HDM).

To simplify a bit the discussion let us assume that we are either in the
supersymmetric case or in the nonsupersymmetric one with an extra
symmetry which forbids @xmath and @xmath , so that Eq. ( 1.167 ) applies
with complex bi-doublets ( @xmath ). The remaining representations in
Eq. ( 1.167 ) decompose as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.174)
     @xmath      (1.175)
     @xmath      (1.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

under the Pati-Salam group and thus the fields which can develop a
SM-invariant VEV are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . With the
exception of the last one we already encountered these representations
in the context of the Pati-Salam model (cf. Sect. 1.3.2 ). Let us also
fix the following notation for the SM-invariant VEVs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.177)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.178)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.179)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Given the embedding of a SM fermion family into @xmath (c.f. Eq. ( 1.105
)) one finds the following fermion mass sum rule after the electroweak
symmetry breaking

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.180)
     @xmath      (1.181)
     @xmath      (1.182)
     @xmath      (1.183)
     @xmath      (1.184)
     @xmath      (1.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath enter the neutrino mass matrix defined
on the symmetric basis @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Eqs. ( 1.180 )–( 1.185 ) follow from the SM decomposition ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 For a
formal proof see e.g. [ 108 ] . , but it is maybe worth of a comment the
@xmath factor in front of @xmath for the leptonic components @xmath and
@xmath . That is understood by looking at the Pati-Salam invariant

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The adjoint of @xmath is a traceless hermitian matrix, so the
requirement of an @xmath preserving vacuum implies the following shape
for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which leads to an extra @xmath factor for leptons with respect to
quarks. Conversely @xmath preserves the symmetry between quarks and
leptons.

In order to understand the implications of the sum-rule in Eqs. ( 1.180
)–( 1.185 ) it is useful to estimate the magnitude of the VEVs appearing
there: @xmath is responsible for the rank reduction of @xmath and gauge
unification constrains its value to be around (or just below) the
unification scale @xmath , then all the bi-doublets can develop a VEV
(collectively denoted as @xmath ) which is at most of the order of the
electroweak scale, while @xmath is a small @xmath VEV induced by the
scalar potential ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 In the contest of @xmath this was pointed out
for the first time in Ref. [ 33 ] . in analogy to what happens in the
left-right symmetric models (cf. Sect. 1.3.1 ).

Thus, given the hierarchy @xmath , Eq. ( 1.186 ) can be
block-diagonalized (cf. Eq. ( 1.99 )) and the light neutrino mass matrix
is very well approximated by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the first and the second term are the type-II and type-I seesaw
contributions already encountered in Sect. 1.3.1 .

Which is the minimum number of Higgs representations needed in the
Yukawa sector in order to have a realistic theory? With only one Higgs
representation at play there is no fermion mixing, since one Yukawa
matrix can be always diagonalized by rotating the @xmath fields, so at
least two of them must be present. Out of the six combinations (see e.g.
[ 116 ] ):

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

the last three can be readily discarded since they predict wrong mass
relations, namely @xmath (case 4), @xmath (case 6), while in case 5 the
antisymmetry of @xmath implies @xmath (first generation) and @xmath
(second and third generation). Notice that in absence of @xmath (case 3)
neutrinos are Dirac and their mass is related to that of charged leptons
which is clearly wrong. In order to cure this one has to introduce the
bilinear @xmath which plays effectively the role of @xmath (cf. Sect.
4.1 for a discussion of this case in the context of the Witten mechanism
[ 67 , 117 , 118 ] ). Though all the cases 1, 2 and 3 give rise to well
defined Yukawa sectors, for definiteness we are going to analyze in more
detail just the first one.

#### 1.5.1 @xmath with supersymmetry

This case has been the most studied especially in the context of the
minimal supersymmetric version, featuring @xmath in the Higgs sector [
46 , 47 , 48 ] . The effective mass sum-rule in Eqs. ( 1.180 )–( 1.185 )
can be rewritten in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.190)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and, exploiting the symmetry of @xmath and @xmath , the neutrino mass
matrix reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the recent years this model received a lot of attention ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 For
a set of references on the subject see [ 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 ,
124 , 125 , 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 ] . due to the
observation [ 134 ] that the dominance of type-II seesaw leads to a nice
correlation between the large atmospheric mixing in the leptonic sector
and the convergence of the bottom-quark and tau-lepton masses at the
unification scale ( @xmath unification) which is a phenomenon occurring
in the MSSM up to @xmath corrections [ 86 ] .

Another interesting prediction of the model is @xmath [ 120 ] , in
agreement with the recent data released by the T2K collaboration [ 135 ]
.

The correlation between @xmath unification and large atmospheric mixing
can be understood with a simple two generations argument. Let us assume
@xmath in Eq. ( 1.191 ), then we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.192)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the the basis in which charged leptons are diagonal and for small
down quark mixing @xmath , Eq. ( 1.192 ) is approximated by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, being the @xmath entry the largest one, maximal atmospheric mixing
requires a cancellation between @xmath and @xmath .

For a more accurate analysis [ 53 ] it is convenient to express the
@xmath and @xmath Yukawa matrices in terms of @xmath and @xmath , and
substitute them in the expressions for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.194)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.195)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The neutrino mass matrix is obtained as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In what follows we denote diagonal mass matrices by @xmath , @xmath ,
with eigenvalues corresponding to the particle masses, i.e. being real
and positive. We choose a basis where the down-quark matrix is diagonal:
@xmath . In this basis @xmath is a general complex symmetric matrix,
that can be written as @xmath , where @xmath is a general unitary
matrix. Without loss of generality @xmath and @xmath can be taken to be
real and positive. Hence, the independent parameters are given by 3
down-quark masses, 3 charged lepton masses, 3 angles and 6 phases in
@xmath , @xmath , together with two complex parameters @xmath and @xmath
: 21 real parameters in total, among which 8 phases. Using Eqs. ( 1.194
), ( 1.195 ), and ( 1.197 ) all observables (6 quark masses, 3 CKM
angles, 1 CKM phase, 3 charged lepton masses, 2 neutrino mass-squared
differences, the mass of the lightest neutrino, and 3 PMNS angles, 19
quantities altogether) can be calculated in terms of these input
parameters.

Since we work in a basis where the down-quark mass matrix is diagonal
the CKM matrix is given by the unitary matrix diagonalizing the up-quark
mass matrix up to diagonal phase matrices:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are unobservable phases at low energy. The neutrino mass
matrix given in Eq. ( 1.197 ) is diagonalized by @xmath , and the PMNS
matrix is determined by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are diagonal
phase matrices similar to those in Eq. ( 1.200 ).

Allowing an arbitrary Higgs sector it is possible to obtain a good fit
of the SM flavor structure [ 53 ] . However, after including the
constraints of the vacuum in the minimal supersymmetric version of the
theory [ 49 , 50 , 51 ] , one finds [ 52 , 53 ] an irreducible
incompatibility between the fermion mass spectrum and the unification
constraints. The reason can be traced back in the proximity between the
unification scale and the seesaw scale, at odds with the lower bound on
the neutrino mass scale implied by the oscillation phenomena.

The proposed ways out consist in invoking a split supersymmetry spectrum
[ 136 ] or resorting to a non-minimal Higgs sector [ 137 , 138 , 139 ,
140 ] , but they hardly pair the appeal of the minimal setting. In this
respect it is interesting to notice that without supersymmetry gauge
unification exhibits naturally the required splitting between the seesaw
and the GUT scales. This is one of the motivations behind the study of
the @xmath system in the absence of supersymmetry.

#### 1.5.2 @xmath without supersymmetry

In the nonsupersymmetric case it would be natural to start with a real
@xmath . However, as pointed out in Ref. [ 141 ] (see also [ 142 ] for
an earlier reference), this option is not phenomenologically viable. The
reason is that one predicts @xmath , at list when working in the two
heaviest generations limit with real parameter and in the sensible
approximation @xmath . It is instructive to reproduce this statement
with the help of the parametrization given in Sect. 1.5.1 .

Let us start from Eq. ( 1.194 ) and apply @xmath (from the left) and
@xmath (from the right). Then, taking into account Eq. ( 1.199 ) and the
choice of basis @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next we make the following approximations:

-   @xmath (real approximation)

-   @xmath (real approximation)

-   @xmath (for the 2nd and 3th generation and in the limit @xmath )

-   @xmath (for the self-consistency of Eq. ( 1.201 ) in the limits
    above)

which lead to the system

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.202)
     @xmath      (1.203)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is then a simple algebra to substitute back @xmath and find the
relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.204)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand a real @xmath predicts @xmath and hence from Eq. (
1.196 ) @xmath . More quantitatively, considering the nonsupersymmetric
running for the fermion masses evaluated at @xmath [ 143 ] , one gets
@xmath , which is off by a factor of @xmath .

This brief excursus shows that the @xmath must be complex. In such a
case the fermion mass sum-rule reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.205)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The three different Yukawa sources would certainly weaken the predictive
power of the model. So the proposal in Ref. [ 141 ] was to impose a
Peccei-Quinn (PQ) symmetry [ 144 , 145 ] which forbids the coupling
@xmath , thus mimicking a supersymmetric Yukawa sector (see also Ref. [
142 ] ). The following charge assignment: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
would suffice.

In this case @xmath is responsible both for @xmath and the @xmath
breaking. However, since it cannot break the rank of @xmath by two
units, a global linear combination of @xmath (where @xmath is the
generator orthogonal to @xmath ) survives at the electroweak scale. This
remnant global symmetry is subsequently broken by the VEV of the
electroweak doublets, that is phenomenological unacceptable since it
would give rise to a visible axion [ 146 , 147 ] which is experimentally
excluded.

Actually astrophysical and cosmological limits prefers the PQ breaking
scale in the window @xmath (see e.g. [ 148 ] ). It is therefore
intriguing to link the @xmath breaking scale responsible for neutrino
masses and the PQ breaking one in the same model. This has been proposed
long ago in [ 149 ] and advocated again in [ 141 ] . What is needed is
another representation charged under the PQ symmetry in such a way that
it is decoupled from the SM fermions and which breaks @xmath completely
at very high scales.

In summary the PQ approach is very physical and well motivated since it
does not just forbid a coupling in the Yukawa sector making it more
"predictive", but correlates @xmath with other two relevant questions:
it offers the axion as a dark matter candidate and it solves the strong
CP problem predicting a zero @xmath ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 This is true as long as we
ignore gravity [ 150 ] . .

However one should neither discard pure minimal @xmath solutions with
the SM as the effective low-energy theory. Notice that in the PQ case we
are in the presence of a 2HDM which is more than what required by the
extended survival hypothesis (cf. the discussion in Sect. 1.2.4 ) in
order to set the gauge hierarchy. Indeed two different fine-tunings are
needed in order to get two light doublets ³¹ ³¹ 31 The situation is
different in supersymmetry where the minimal fine-tuning in the doublet
sector makes both @xmath and @xmath light. .

Thus we could minimally consider the sum-rule in Eq. ( 1.5.2 ) with
either @xmath or @xmath . The first option leads to a clearly wrong
conclusion, i.e. @xmath . So we are left with the second one which
implies

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.206)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.207)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that in the case of type-I seesaw the strong hierarchy due to
@xmath must by undone by @xmath which remains proportional to @xmath .
More explicitly, in the case of type-I seesaw, one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.208)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Though a simple two generations argument with real parameters shows that
Eq. ( 1.208 ) could lead to an incompatibility with the data, a full
preliminary three generations study indicates that this is not the case
[ 151 ] .

#### 1.5.3 Type-I vs type-II seesaw

Here we would like to comment about the interplay between type-I and
type-II seesaw in Eq. ( 1.189 ). In a supersymmetric context one
generally expects these two contributions to be comparable. As we have
previously seen (see Sect. 1.5.1 ) the dominance of type-II seesaw leads
to a nice connection between the large atmospheric mixing and @xmath
unification and one would like to keep this feature ³² ³² 32 See
e.g. Ref. [ 152 ] for a supersymmetric @xmath model in which the type-II
seesaw dominance can be realized. . On the other hand without
supersymmetry the @xmath convergence is far from being obtained. For
instance the running within the SM yields @xmath and @xmath at the scale
@xmath [ 143 ] . Thus in the nonsupersymmetric case the dominance of
type-II seesaw would represent a serious issue.

In this respect it is interesting to note that the type-II seesaw
contribution can be naturally subdominant in nonsupersymmetric @xmath .
The reason has to do with the left-right asymmetrization of the scalar
spectrum in the presence of intermediate symmetry breaking stages ³³ ³³
33 For a similar phenomenon occurring in the context of left-right
symmetric theories see Ref. [ 153 ] . . Usually the unification pattern
is such that the mass of the @xmath triplet @xmath responsible for the
@xmath breaking is well below the GUT scale @xmath . The reason is that
@xmath must be fine-tuned at the level of the intermediate scale VEV
@xmath . Then, unless there is a discrete left-right symmetry ³⁴ ³⁴ 34
As we will see in Chapter 2 this can be the case if the @xmath symmetry
breaking is due to either a @xmath or a @xmath . which locks @xmath ,
the mass of the @xmath triplet @xmath , remains automatically at @xmath
. On the other hand the induce VEV @xmath is given by (cf. e.g. Eq. (
1.103 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.209)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote a set of parameters of the scalar
potential and an electroweak VEV respectively. So we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.210)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that type-II seesaw is suppressed by a factor @xmath with
respect to type-I.

### 1.6 Proton decay

The contributions to the proton decay can be classified according to the
dimension of the baryon violating operators appearing in the lagrangian.
Since the external states are fermions and because of the color
structure the proton decay operators arise first at the @xmath level.
Sometimes the source of the baryon violation is hidden in a @xmath or a
@xmath operator involving also scalar fields. These operators are
successively dressed with the exchange of other states in order to get
effectively the @xmath ones.

The so-called @xmath gauge contribution is the most important in
nonsupersymmetric GUTs. In particular if the mass of the lepto-quarks
which mediate these operators is constrained by the running then the
major uncertainty comes only from fermion mixing. There is also another
class of @xmath operators coming from the Higgs sector but they are less
important and more model dependent.

The supersymmetrization of the scalar spectrum gives rise to @xmath and
@xmath baryon and lepton number violating operators which usually lead
to a strong enhancement of the proton decay amplitudes, though they are
very model dependent.

In the next subsections we will analyze in more detail just the gauge
contribution while we will briefly pass through all the other ones. We
refer the reader to the reviews [ 154 , 155 , 156 ] for a more accurate
account of the subject.

#### 1.6.1 @xmath (gauge)

Following the approach of Ref. [ 157 ] , we start by listing all the
possible @xmath baryon number violating operators due to the exchange of
a vector boson and invariant under @xmath [ 25 , 158 , 159 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.211)
     @xmath      (1.212)
     @xmath      (1.213)
     @xmath      (1.214)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the above expressions @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are the masses of the superheavy gauge bosons and the gauge
coupling at the unification scale. The indices @xmath are referred to
@xmath , @xmath to @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are family indices. The
fields @xmath and @xmath are @xmath doublets.

The effective operators @xmath and @xmath appear when we integrate out
the superheavy gauge field @xmath . This is the case in theories based
on the gauge group @xmath . Integrating out @xmath we obtain the
operators @xmath and @xmath . This is the case of flipped @xmath
theories [ 69 , 70 ] , while in @xmath models both the lepto-quarks
@xmath and @xmath are present.

Using the operators listed above, we can write the effective operators
in the physical basis for each decay channel [ 157 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.215)
     @xmath      (1.216)
     @xmath      (1.217)
     @xmath      (1.218)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.219)
     @xmath      (1.220)
     @xmath      (1.221)
     @xmath      (1.222)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . In the equations above we have defined the fermion mixing
matrices as: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath define the Yukawa coupling diagonalization so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.223)
     @xmath      (1.224)
     @xmath      (1.225)
     @xmath      (1.226)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further, one may write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are diagonal
matrices containing respectively three and two phases. Similarly, @xmath
in the case of Dirac neutrinos, or @xmath in the Majorana case.

From this brief excursus we can see that the theoretical predictions of
the proton lifetime from the gauge @xmath operators require the
knowledge of the quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In addition we have three (four) diagonal matrices
containing phases in the case of Majorana (Dirac) neutrino.

Since the gauge @xmath operators conserve @xmath the nucleon decays into
a meson and an antilepton. Let us write the decay rates for the
different channels. We assume that in the proton decay experiments one
can not distinguish the flavor of the neutrino and the chirality of
charged leptons in the exit channel. Using the Chiral Lagrangian
techniques (see e.g. [ 160 ] ), the decay rates of the different
channels due to the gauge @xmath operators are [ 157 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.227)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.228)
     @xmath      (1.229)
     @xmath      (1.230)
     @xmath      (1.231)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . In the equations above @xmath is the average
baryon mass @xmath , @xmath is the pion decay constant, @xmath and
@xmath are low-energy constants of the Chiral Lagrangian which can be
obtained from the analysis of semileptonic hyperon decays [ 161 ] and
@xmath is a proton-to-vacuum matrix element parameter extracted via
Lattice QCD techniques [ 162 ] . Finally @xmath takes into account the
renormalization from @xmath to @xmath GeV.

In spite of the complexity and the model-dependency of the branching
ratios in Eqs. ( 1.227 )–( 1.231 ) the situation becomes much more
constrained in the presence of symmetric Yukawas, relevant for realistic
@xmath models based on @xmath in the Yukawa sector. In that case we get
the following relations for the mixing matrices: @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are diagonal matrices
involving phases. These relations lead to the remarkable prediction [
157 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.232)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.233)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that the expression for @xmath is independent from unknown mixing
matrices and CP violating phases, while the values of @xmath and @xmath
are subject to gauge coupling unification constraints. This is a clear
example of how to test a (nonsupersymmetric) @xmath model with @xmath in
the Yukawa sector through the decay channel @xmath .

We close this subsection with a naive model-independent estimate for the
mass of the superheavy gauge bosons @xmath . Approximating the inverse
lifetime of the proton in the following way (cf. the real computation in
Eqs. ( 1.227 )–( 1.231 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.234)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and using @xmath yr [ 11 ] , one finds the naive lower bound

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.235)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we fixed @xmath . The bound on @xmath as a function of @xmath is
plotted in Fig. 1.3 .

#### 1.6.2 @xmath (scalar)

In nonsupersymmetric scenarios the next-to-leading contribution to the
decay of the proton comes from the Higgs induced @xmath operators. In
this case the proton decay is mediated by scalar leptoquarks @xmath .
For definiteness let us illustrate the case of minimal @xmath with just
one scalar leptoquark. In this model the scalar leptoquark lives in the
@xmath representation together with the SM Higgs. The relevant
interactions for proton decay can be written in the following way [ 155
]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.236)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the above equation we have used the same notation as in the previous
subsection. The matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linear
combinations of the Yukawa couplings in the theory and the possible
contributions coming from higher-dimensional operators. In the minimal
@xmath we have the following relations: @xmath , and @xmath . Now, using
the above interactions we can write the Higgs @xmath effective operators
for proton decay [ 155 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.237)
     @xmath      (1.238)
     @xmath      (1.239)
     @xmath      (1.240)
     @xmath      (1.241)
     @xmath      (1.242)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.243)
     @xmath      (1.244)
     @xmath      (1.245)
     @xmath      (1.246)
     @xmath      (1.247)
     @xmath      (1.248)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath , @xmath is the triplet mass, @xmath are @xmath indices and
@xmath are @xmath indices.

The above analysis exhibits that the Higgs @xmath contributions are
quite model dependent, and because of this it is possible to suppress
them in specific models of fermion masses. For instance, we can set to
zero these contributions by the constraints @xmath and @xmath , except
for @xmath .

Also in this case we can make a naive model-independent estimation for
the mass of the scalar leptoquark using the experimental lower bound on
the proton lifetime. Approximating the inverse lifetime of the proton in
the following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.249)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and taking @xmath yr [ 11 ] , we find the naive lower bound

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.250)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This bound tells us that the triplet Higgs has to be heavy, unless some
special condition on the matrices in Eq. ( 1.236 ) is fulfilled (see
e.g. [ 84 , 85 ] ). Therefore since the triplet Higgs lives with the SM
Higgs in the same multiplet we have to look for a doublet-triplet
splitting mechanism ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 Cf. Sect. 4.4.3 for a short overview of the
mechanisms proposed so far. .

#### 1.6.3 @xmath

In the presence of supersymmetry new @xmath operators of the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.251)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are generated via colored triplet Higgsino exchange with mass @xmath [
159 , 163 ] . These operators can be subsequently dressed at one-loop
with an electroweak gaugino (gluino or wino) or higgsino leading to the
standard @xmath and @xmath operators. Since the amplitude turns out to
be suppressed just by the product @xmath , where @xmath is the soft
scale, this implies a generic enhancement of the proton decay rate with
respect to the ordinary @xmath operators.

Another peculiarity of @xmath operators is that the dominant decay mode
is @xmath which differs from the standard nonsupersymmetric mode @xmath
. A simple symmetry argument shows the reason: the operators @xmath and
@xmath (where @xmath are family indices and color and weak indices are
implicit) must be invariant under @xmath and @xmath . This means that
their color and weak indices must be antisymmetrized. However since this
operators are given by bosonic superfields, they must be totally
symmetric under interchange of all indices. Thus the first operator
vanishes for @xmath and the second vanishes for @xmath . Hence a second
or third generation member must exist in the final state.

In minimal supersymmetric @xmath [ 94 ] the coefficient of the baryon
number violating operator @xmath can be schematically written as (see
e.g. [ 164 ] )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.252)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have assumed the dominance of the gluino exchange and that the
sfermion masses ( @xmath ) are bigger than the gluino one ( @xmath ),
while @xmath and @xmath are couplings of the Yukawa superpotential.
Though there could be a huge enhancement of the proton decay rate which
brought to the claim that minimal supersymmetric @xmath was ruled out [
165 , 166 ] , a closer look to the uncertainties at play makes this
claim much more weaker [ 167 ] :

-   The Yukawa couplings in Eq. ( 1.252 ) are not directly related to
    those of the SM, since in minimal @xmath one needs to take into
    account non-renormalizable operators in order to break the relation
    @xmath , and thus they can conspire to suppress the decay mode [ 168
    ] .

-   A similar suppression could also originate from the soft sector even
    after including the constraints coming from flavor violating effects
    [ 169 ] .

-   Last but not least the mass of the triplet @xmath is constrained by
    the running only in the renormalizable version of the theory [ 166 ]
    . As soon as non-renormalizable operators (which are anyway needed
    for fermion mass relations) are included this is not true anymore [
    167 ] . In this respect it is remarkable that even in the worse case
    scenario of the renormalizable theory the recent accurate three-loop
    analysis in Ref. [ 170 ] increases by about one order of magnitude
    the upper bound on @xmath due to the running constraints.

Thus the bottom-line is that minimal supsersymmetric @xmath is still a
viable theory and more input on the experimental side is needed in order
to say something accurate on proton decay.

#### 1.6.4 @xmath

This last class of operators originates from the @xmath -parity
violating superpotential of the MSSM

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.253)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that @xmath violates baryon number while @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath violate lepton number. So for instance we have the following
interactions in the @xmath -parity violating lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.254)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The tree-level exchange of @xmath generates the baryon violating
operator @xmath with a coefficient which can be written schematically as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.255)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Barring cancellations in the family structure of this coefficient and
assuming a TeV scale soft spectrum, the proton lifetime implies the
generic bound [ 171 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.256)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It’s easy to see that the @xmath -parity violating operators are
generated in supersymmetric GUTs unless special conditions are
fulfilled. For instance in @xmath the effective trilinear couplings
originate from the operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.257)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which leads to @xmath . Analogously in @xmath the @xmath -parity
violating trilinears stem from the operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.258)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If one doesn’t like small numbers such as in Eq. ( 1.256 ) the standard
approach is to impose a @xmath matter parity which forbids the baryon
and lepton number violating operators [ 94 ] . A more physical option in
@xmath is instead suggested by Eq. ( 1.258 ). Actually it seems that as
soon as @xmath is preserved the @xmath -parity violating trilinears are
not generated. In order to better understand this point let us rephrase
the @xmath -parity in the following language [ 172 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.259)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the spin quantum number @xmath is irrelevant as long as the
Lorentz symmetry is preserved. Then, since @xmath is a local generator
of @xmath , it is enough to embed the SM fermions in representations
with odd @xmath (e.g. @xmath ) and the Higgs doublets in representations
with even @xmath (e.g. @xmath ) in order to ensure exact @xmath -parity
conservation. After the @xmath breaking the fate of @xmath -parity
depends on the order parameter responsible for the @xmath breaking.
Employing either a @xmath or a @xmath for the rank reduction of @xmath
the action of the @xmath operator on their VEV is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.260)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the latter case the @xmath -parity is preserved by the vacuum and
becomes an exact symmetry of the MSSM. This feature makes supersymmetric
@xmath models with @xmath very appealing [ 62 ] . On the other hand with
a @xmath at play the amount of R-parity violation is dynamically
controlled by the parameter @xmath , where @xmath . Though conceptually
interesting it is fair to say that in @xmath it is unnatural to have the
@xmath breaking scale much below the unification scale both from the
point of view of unification constraints and neutrino masses ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 As
we will see in Chapter 2 when the GUT breaking is driven either by a
@xmath or a @xmath there are vacuum configurations such that @xmath can
be pulled down till to the TeV scale without conflicting with
unification constraints. On the other hand the issue of neutrino masses
with a low @xmath is more serious. One has either to invoke a strong
fine-tuning in the Yukawa sector or extend the theory with an @xmath
singlet (see e.g. [ 173 ] ). .

## Chapter 2 Intermediate scales in nonsupersymmetric @xmath unification

The purpose of this chapter is to review the constraints enforced by
gauge unification on the intermediate mass scales in the
nonsupersymmetric @xmath GUTs, a needed preliminary step for assessing
the structure of the multitude of the different breaking patterns before
entering the details of a specific model. Eventually, our goal is to
envisage and examine scenarios potentially relevant for the
understanding of the low energy matter spectrum. In particular those
setups that, albeit nonsupersymmetric, may exhibit a predictivity
comparable to that of the minimal supersymmetric @xmath [ 46 , 47 , 48 ]
, scrutinized at length in the last few years.

The constraints imposed by the absolute neutrino mass scale on the
position of the @xmath threshold, together with the proton decay bound
on the unification scale @xmath , provide a discriminating tool among
the many @xmath scenarios and the corresponding breaking patterns. These
were studied at length in the 80’s and early 90’s, and detailed surveys
of two- and three-step @xmath breaking chains (one and two intermediate
thresholds respectively) are found in Refs. [ 174 , 100 , 175 , 64 ] .

We perform a systematic survey of @xmath unification with two
intermediate stages. In addition to updating the analysis to present day
data, this reappraisal is motivated by (a) the absence of @xmath mixing
in previous studies, both at one- and two-loops in the gauge coupling
renormalization, (b) the need for additional Higgs multiplets at some
intermediate stages, and (c) a reassessment of the two-loop beta
coefficients reported in the literature.

The outcome of our study is the emergence of sizeably different features
in some of the breaking patterns as compared to the existing results.
This allows us to rescue previously excluded scenarios. All that before
considering the effects of threshold corrections [ 176 , 177 , 178 ] ,
that are unambiguously assessed only when the details of a specific
model are worked out. Eventually we will comment on the impact of
threshold effects in the Outlook of the thesis.

It is remarkable that the chains corresponding to the minimal @xmath
setup with the smallest Higgs representations ( @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , or @xmath in the renormalizable case) and the smallest number
of parameters in the Higgs potential, are still viable. The complexity
of this nonsupersymmetric scenario is comparable to that of the minimal
supersymmetric @xmath model, what makes it worth of detailed
consideration.

In Sect. 2.1 we set the framework of the analysis. Sect. 2.2 provides a
collection of the tools needed for a two-loop study of grand
unification. The results of the numerical study are reported and
scrutinized in Sect. 2.3 . Finally, the relevant one- and two-loop
@xmath -coefficients are detailed in Appendix A .

### 2.1 Three-step @xmath breaking chains

The relevant @xmath symmetry breaking chains with two intermediate gauge
groups @xmath and @xmath are listed in Table 2.1 . Effective two-step
chains are obtained by joining two of the high-energy scales, paying
attention to the possible deviations from minimality of the scalar
content in the remaining intermediate stage (this we shall discuss in
Sect. 2.3.2 ).

For the purpose of comparison we follow closely the notation of Ref. [
64 ] , where @xmath denotes the unbroken D-parity [ 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 ,
100 ] . For each step the Higgs representation responsible for the
breaking is given.

The breakdown of the lower intermediate symmetry @xmath to the SM gauge
group is driven either by the @xmath - or @xmath -dimensional Higgs
multiplets @xmath or @xmath . An important feature of the scenarios with
@xmath is the fact that in such a case a potentially realistic @xmath
Yukawa sector can be constructed already at the renormalizable level
(cf. Sect. 1.5 ). Together with @xmath all the effective Dirac Yukawa
couplings as well as the Majorana mass matrices at the SM level emerge
from the contractions of the matter bilinears @xmath with @xmath or with
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the scale (above @xmath ) at which the
effective dimension five Yukawa couplings arise.

D-parity is a discrete symmetry acting as charge conjugation in a
left-right symmetric context [ 96 , 97 ] , and as that it plays the role
of a left-right symmetry (it enforces for instance equal left and right
gauge couplings). @xmath invariance then implies exact D-parity (because
D belongs to the @xmath Lie algebra). D-parity may be spontaneously
broken by D-odd Pati-Salam (PS) singlets contained in 210 or 45 Higgs
representations. Its breaking can therefore be decoupled from the @xmath
breaking, allowing for different left and right gauge couplings [ 98 ,
99 ] .

The possibility of decoupling the D-parity breaking from the scale of
right-handed interactions is a cosmologically relevant issue. On the one
hand baryon asymmetry cannot arise in a left-right symmetric ( @xmath )
universe [ 96 ] . On the other hand, the spontaneous breaking of a
discrete symmetry, such as D-parity, creates domain walls that, if
massive enough (i.e. for intermediate mass scales) do not disappear,
overclosing the universe [ 97 ] . These potential problems may be
overcome either by confining D-parity at the GUT scale or by invoking
inflation. The latter solution implies that domain walls are formed
above the reheating temperature, enforcing a lower bound on the D-parity
breaking scale of @xmath GeV. Realistic @xmath breaking patterns must
therefore include this constraint.

#### 2.1.1 The extended survival hypothesis

Throughout all three stages of running we assume that the scalar
spectrum obeys the so called extended survival hypothesis (ESH) [ 82 ]
which requires that at every stage of the symmetry breaking chain only
those scalars are present that develop a vacuum expectation value (VEV)
at the current or the subsequent levels of the spontaneous symmetry
breaking . ESH is equivalent to the requirement of the minimal number of
fine-tunings to be imposed onto the scalar potential [ 83 ] so that all
the symmetry breaking steps are performed at the desired scales.

On the technical side one should identify all the Higgs multiplets
needed by the breaking pattern under consideration and keep them
according to the gauge symmetry down to the scale of their VEVs. This
typically pulls down a large number of scalars in scenarios where @xmath
provides the @xmath breakdown.

On the other hand, one must take into account that the role of @xmath is
twofold: in addition to triggering the @xmath breaking it plays a
relevant role in the Yukawa sector where it provides the necessary
breaking of the down-quark/charged-lepton mass degeneracy (cf. Eq. (
1.190 )). For this to work one needs a reasonably large admixture of the
@xmath component in the effective electroweak doublets. Since @xmath can
mix with @xmath only below the Pati-Salam breaking scale, both fields
must be present at the Pati-Salam level (otherwise the scalar doublet
mass matrix does not provide large enough components of both these
multiplets in the light Higgs fields).

Note that the same argument applies also to the @xmath intermediate
stage when one must retain the doublet component of @xmath , namely
@xmath , in order for it to eventually admix with @xmath in the light
Higgs sector. On the other hand, at the @xmath and @xmath stages, the
(minimal) survival of only one combination of the @xmath and @xmath
scalar doublets (see Table 2.2 ) is compatible with the Yukawa sector
constraints because the degeneracy between the quark and lepton spectra
has already been smeared-out by the Pati-Salam breakdown.

In summary, potentially realistic renormalizable Yukawa textures in
settings with well-separated @xmath and Pati-Salam breaking scales call
for an additional fine tuning in the Higgs sector. In the scenarios with
@xmath , the @xmath bidoublet @xmath , included in Refs [ 174 , 100 ,
175 , 64 ] , must be paired at the @xmath scale with an extra @xmath
scalar bidoublet (or @xmath with @xmath at the @xmath stage). This can
affect the running of the gauge couplings in chains I, II, III, V, VI,
VII, X, XI and XII.

For the sake of comparison with previous studies [ 174 , 100 , 175 , 64
] we shall not include the @xmath multiplets in the first part of the
analysis. Rather, we shall comment on their relevance for gauge
unification in Sect. 2.3.3 .

### 2.2 Two-loop gauge renormalization group equations

In this section we report, in order to fix a consistent notation, the
two-loop renormalization group equations (RGEs) for the gauge couplings.
We consider a gauge group of the form @xmath , where @xmath are simple
groups.

#### 2.2.1 The non-abelian sector

Let us focus first on the non-abelian sector corresponding to @xmath and
defer the full treatment of the effects due to the extra @xmath factors
to section 2.2.2 . Defining @xmath we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gauge group label. Neglecting for the time being the
abelian components, the @xmath -functions for the @xmath gauge couplings
read at two-loop level [ 179 , 180 , 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for Dirac and Weyl fermions respectively. Correspondingly,
@xmath for complex and real scalar fields. The sum over @xmath
corresponding to contributions to @xmath from the other gauge sectors
labelled by @xmath is understood. Given a fermion @xmath or a scalar
@xmath field that transforms according to the representation @xmath ,
where @xmath is an irreducible representation of the group @xmath of
dimension @xmath , the factor @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Dynkin index of the representation @xmath . The
corresponding Casimir eigenvalue is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dimension of the group. In Eq. ( 2.2.1 ) the first
row represents the one-loop contribution while the other terms stand for
the two-loop corrections, including that induced by Yukawa interactions.
The latter is accounted for in terms of a factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the “general” Yukawa coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

includes family as well as group indices. The coupling in Eq. ( 2.6 ) is
written in terms of four-component Weyl spinors @xmath and a scalar
field @xmath (be complex or real). The trace includes the sum over all
relevant fermion and scalar fields.

#### 2.2.2 The abelian couplings and @xmath mixing

In order to include the abelian contributions to Eq. ( 2.2.1 ) at two
loops and the one- and two-loop effects of @xmath mixing [ 185 ] , let
us write the most general interaction of @xmath abelian gauge bosons
@xmath and a set of Weyl fermions @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The gauge coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , couple @xmath to the
fermionic current @xmath . The @xmath gauge coupling matrix @xmath can
be diagonalized by two independent rotations: one acting on the @xmath
charges @xmath and the other on the gauge boson fields @xmath . For a
given choice of the charges, @xmath can be set in a triangular form (
@xmath for @xmath ) by the gauge boson rotation. The resulting @xmath
entries are observable couplings.

Since @xmath in the abelian case is itself gauge invariant, the most
general kinetic part of the lagrangian reads at the renormalizable level

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . A non-orthogonal rotation of the fields @xmath
may be performed to set the gauge kinetic term in a canonical diagonal
form. Any further orthogonal rotation of the gauge fields will preserve
this form. Then, the renormalization prescription may be conveniently
chosen to maintain at each scale the kinetic terms canonical and
diagonal on-shell while renormalizing accordingly the gauge coupling
matrix @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively one may work with off-diagonal kinetic
terms while keeping the gauge interactions diagonal [ 186 ] . . Thus,
even if at one scale @xmath is diagonal, in general non-zero
off-diagonal entries are generated by renormalization effects. One shows
[ 187 ] that in the case the abelian gauge couplings are at a given
scale diagonal and equal (i.e. there is a @xmath unification), there may
exist a (scale independent) gauge field basis such that the abelian
interactions remain to all orders diagonal along the RGE trajectory ² ²
2 Vanishing of the commutator of the @xmath -functions and their
derivatives is needed [ 188 ] . .

In general, the renormalization of the abelian part of the gauge
interactions is determined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, as a consequence of gauge invariance,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath denoting the gauge-boson wave-function renormalization
matrix. In order to further simplify the notation it is convenient to
introduce the “reduced” couplings [ 187 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

that evolve according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The index @xmath labels the fields (fermions and scalars) that carry
@xmath charges.

In terms of the reduced couplings the @xmath -function that governs the
@xmath running up to two loops is given by [ 179 , 180 , 181 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where repeated indices are summed over, labelling fermions ( @xmath ),
scalars ( @xmath ) and @xmath gauge groups ( @xmath ). The terms
proportional to the quadratic Casimir @xmath represent the two-loop
contributions of the non abelian components @xmath of the gauge group to
the @xmath gauge coupling renormalization.

Correspondingly, using the notation of Eq. ( 2.11 ), an additional
two-loop term that represents the renormalization of the non abelian
gauge couplings induced at two loops by the @xmath gauge fields is to be
added to Eq. ( 2.2.1 ), namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eqs. ( 2.2.2 )–( 2.14 ), we use the abbreviation @xmath and @xmath
and, as before, @xmath for Dirac and Weyl fermions, while @xmath for
complex and real scalar fields respectively.

#### 2.2.3 Some notation

When at most one @xmath factor is present, and neglecting the Yukawa
contributions, the two-loop RGEs can be conveniently written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The @xmath -coefficients @xmath and @xmath for the
relevant @xmath chains are given in Appendix A .

Substituting the one-loop solution for @xmath into the right-hand side
of Eq. ( 2.15 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The analytic solution in ( 2.16 ) holds at two
loops (for @xmath ) up to higher order effects. A sample of the rescaled
@xmath -coefficients @xmath is given, for the purpose of comparison with
previous results, in Appendix A .

We shall conveniently write the @xmath -function in Eq. ( 2.2.2 ), that
governs the abelian mixing, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath include both one- and two-loop contributions. Analogously,
the non-abelian beta function in Eq. ( 2.2.1 ), including the @xmath
contribution in Eq. ( 2.14 ), is conveniently written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath functions for the @xmath breaking chains considered in this
work are reported in Appendix A.1 .

Finally, the Yukawa term in Eq. ( 2.5 ), and correspondingly in Eq. (
2.2.2 ), can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the “standard” @xmath Yukawa matrices in the family
space labelled by the flavour index @xmath . The trace is taken over
family indices and @xmath is summed over the different Yukawa terms
present at each stage of @xmath breaking. The coefficients @xmath are
given explicitly in Appendix A.2

#### 2.2.4 One-loop matching

The matching conditions between effective theories in the framework of
dimensional regularization have been derived in [ 189 , 190 ] . Let us
consider first a simple gauge group @xmath spontaneously broken into
subgroups @xmath . Neglecting terms involving logarithms of mass ratios
which are assumed to be subleading (massive states clustered near the
threshold), the one-loop matching for the gauge couplings can be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us turn to the case when several non-abelian simple groups @xmath
(and at most one @xmath ) spontaneously break whilst preserving a @xmath
charge. The conserved @xmath generator @xmath can be written in terms of
the relevant generators of the various Cartan subalgebras (and of the
consistently normalized @xmath ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath runs over the relevant @xmath (and @xmath )
indices. The matching condition is then give by ³ ³ 3 This is easily
proven at tree level [ 191 ] . Let us imagine that the gauge symmetry is
spontaneously broken by the VEV of an arbitrary set of scalar fields
@xmath , such that @xmath . Starting from the covariant derivative

@xmath (2.22)

we derive the gauge boson mass matrix

(2.23)

which has a zero eigenvector corresponding to the massless gauge field
@xmath , where

@xmath (2.24)

It’s easy to see then that the components of @xmath are

@xmath (2.25)

and from the coupling of @xmath to fermions

@xmath (2.26)

we conclude that

@xmath (2.27)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for @xmath , if present, @xmath .

Consider now the breaking of @xmath copies of @xmath gauge factors to a
subset of @xmath elements @xmath (with @xmath ). Denoting by @xmath (
@xmath ) and by @xmath ( @xmath ) their properly normalized generators
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the orthogonality condition @xmath . Let us denote by @xmath (
@xmath ) and by @xmath ( @xmath ) the matrices of abelian gauge
couplings above and below the breaking scale respectively. By writing
the abelian gauge boson mass matrix in the broken vacuum and by
identifying the massless states, we find the following matching
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that Eq. ( 2.30 ) depends on the chosen basis for the @xmath
charges (via @xmath ) but it is invariant under orthogonal rotations of
the gauge boson fields ( @xmath ). The massless gauge bosons @xmath are
given in terms of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The general case of a gauge group @xmath spontaneously broken to @xmath
with @xmath is taken care of by replacing @xmath in Eq. ( 2.30 ) with
the block-diagonal @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus providing, together with the extended Eq. ( 2.29 ) and Eq. ( 2.30
), a generalization of Eq. ( 2.28 ).

### 2.3 Numerical results

At one-loop, and in absence of the @xmath mixing, the gauge RGEs are not
coupled and the unification constraints can be studied analytically.
When two-loop effects are included (or at one-loop more than one @xmath
factor is present) there is no closed solution and one must solve the
system of coupled equations, matching all stages between the weak and
unification scales, numerically. On the other hand (when no @xmath
mixing is there) one may take advantage of the analytic formula in Eq. (
2.16 ). The latter turns out to provide, for the cases here studied, a
very good approximation to the numerical solution. The discrepancies
with the numerical integration do not generally exceed the @xmath level.

We perform a scan over the relevant breaking scales @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath and the value of the grand unified coupling @xmath and impose the
matching with the SM gauge couplings at the @xmath scale requiring a
precision at the per mil level. This is achieved by minimizing the
parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the experimental values at @xmath and @xmath are the
renormalized couplings obtained from unification.

The input values for the (consistently normalized) gauge SM couplings at
the scale @xmath GeV are [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the electroweak scale parameters

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

All these data refer to the modified minimally subtracted ( @xmath )
quantities at the @xmath scale.

For @xmath we shall consider only the central values while we resort to
scanning over the whole @xmath domain for @xmath when a stable solution
is not found.

The results, i.e. the positions of the intermediate scales @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath shall be reported in terms of decadic logarithms of
their values in units of GeV, i.e. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In
particular, @xmath , @xmath are given as functions of @xmath for each
breaking pattern and for different approximations in the loop expansion.
Each of the breaking patterns is further supplemented by the relevant
range of the values of @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 @xmath mixing

The chains VIII to XII require consideration of the mixing between the
two @xmath factors. While @xmath and @xmath do emerge with canonical
diagonal kinetic terms, being the remnants of the breaking of
non-abelian groups, the corresponding gauge couplings are at the onset
different in size. In general, no scale independent orthogonal rotations
of charges and gauge fields exist that diagonalize the gauge
interactions to all orders along the RGE trajectories. According to the
discussion in Sect. 2.2 , off-diagonal gauge couplings arise at the
one-loop level that must be accounted for in order to perform the
matching at the @xmath scale with the standard hypercharge. The
preserved direction in the @xmath charge space is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matching of the gauge couplings is then obtained from Eq. ( 2.30 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

When neglecting the off-diagonal terms, Eq. ( 2.38 ) reproduces the
matching condition used in Refs. [ 174 , 100 , 175 , 64 ] . For all
other cases, in which only one @xmath factor is present, the matching
relations can be read off directly from Eq. ( 2.20 ) and Eq. ( 2.28 ).

#### 2.3.2 Two-loop results (purely gauge)

The results of the numerical analysis are organized as follows: Fig. 2.1
and Fig. 2.2 show the values of @xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath
for the pure gauge running (i.e. no Yukawa interactions), in the @xmath
and @xmath case respectively. The differences between the patterns for
the @xmath and @xmath setups depend on the substantially different
scalar content. The shape and size of the various contributions
(one-loop, with and without @xmath mixing, and two-loops) are compared
in each figure. The dissection of the RGE results shown in the figures
allows us to compare our results with those of Refs. [ 174 , 100 , 175 ,
64 ] .

Table 2.3 shows the two-loop values of @xmath in the allowed region for
@xmath . The contributions of the additional @xmath multiplets, and the
Yukawa terms are discussed separately in Sect. 2.3.3 and Sect. 2.3.4 ,
respectively. With the exception of a few singular cases detailed
therein, these effects turn out to be generally subdominant.

As already mentioned in the introduction, two-loop precision in a GUT
scenario makes sense once (one-loop) thresholds effects are coherently
taken into account, as their effect may become comparable if not larger
than the two loop itself (the argument becomes stronger as the number of
intermediate scales increases). On the other hand, there is no control
on the spectrum unless a specific model is studied in details. The
purpose of this chapter is to set the stage for such a study by
reassessing and updating the general constraints and patterns that
@xmath grand unification enforces on the spread of intermediate scales.

The one and two-loop @xmath -coefficients used in the present study are
reported in Appendix A . Table A.5 in the appendix shows the reduced
@xmath coefficients for those cases where we are at variance with Ref. [
100 ] .

One of the largest effects in the comparison with Refs. [ 174 , 100 ,
175 , 64 ] emerges at one-loop and it is due to the implementation of
the @xmath gauge mixing when @xmath appears as an intermediate stage of
the @xmath breaking ⁴ ⁴ 4 The lack of abelian gauge mixing in Ref. [ 64
] was first observed in Ref. [ 192 ] . . This affects chains VIII to
XII, and it exhibits itself in the exact (one-loop) flatness of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath .

The rationale for such a behaviour is quite simple. When considering the
gauge coupling renormalization in the @xmath stage, no effect at
one-loop appears in the non-abelian @xmath -functions due to the abelian
gauge fields. On the other hand, the Higgs fields surviving at the
@xmath stage, responsible for the breaking to @xmath , are (by
construction) SM singlets. Since the SM one-loop @xmath -functions are
not affected by their presence, the solution found for @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath in the @xmath case holds for @xmath as well. Only by
performing correctly the mixed @xmath gauge running and the consistent
matching with @xmath one recovers the expected @xmath flatness of the
GUT solution.

In this respect, it is interesting to notice that the absence of @xmath
mixing in Refs. [ 174 , 100 , 175 , 64 ] makes the argument for the
actual possibility of a light (observable) @xmath gauge boson an
“approximate" statement (based on the approximate flatness of the
solution).

One expects this feature to break at two-loops. The @xmath and @xmath
@xmath -functions are affected at two-loops directly by the abelian
gauge bosons via Eq. ( 2.14 ) (the Higgs multiplets that are responsible
for the @xmath breaking do not enter through the Yukawa interactions).
The net effect on the non-abelian gauge running is related to the
difference between the contribution of the @xmath and @xmath gauge
bosons and that of the standard hypercharge. We checked that such a
difference is always a small fraction (below 10%) of the typical
two-loop contributions to the @xmath and @xmath @xmath -functions. As a
consequence, the @xmath flatness of the GUT solution is at a very high
accuracy ( @xmath ) preserved at two-loops as well, as the inspection of
the relevant chains in Figs. 2.1 – 2.2 shows.

Still at one-loop we find a sharp disagreement in the @xmath range of
chain XIIa, with respect to the result of Ref. [ 64 ] . The authors find
@xmath , while strictly following their procedure and assumptions we
find @xmath (the updated one- and two-loop results are given in Fig. 2.1
k). As we shall see, this difference brings chain XIIa back among the
potentially realistic ones.

As far as two-loop effects are at stakes, their relevance is generally
related to the length of the running involving the largest non-abelian
groups. On the other hand, there are chains where @xmath and @xmath have
a strong dependence on @xmath (we will refer to them as to “unstable"
chains) and where two-loop corrections affect substantially the one-loop
results. Evident examples of such unstable chains are Ia, IVa, Va, IVb,
and VIIb. In particular, in chain Va the two-loop effects flip the
slopes of @xmath and @xmath , that implies a sharp change in the allowed
region for @xmath . It is clear that when dealing with these breaking
chains any statement about their viability should account for the
details of the thresholds in the given model.

In chains VIII to XII (where the second intermediate stage is @xmath ,
two-loop effects are mild and exhibit the common behaviour of lowering
the GUT scale ( @xmath ) while raising (with the exception of Xb and
XIa,b) the largest intermediate scale ( @xmath ). The mildness of
two-loop corrections (no more that one would a-priori expect) is
strictly related to the ( @xmath ) flatness of the GUT solution
discussed before.

Worth mentioning are the limits @xmath and @xmath . While the former is
equivalent to neglecting the first stage @xmath and to reducing
effectively the three breaking steps to just two (namely @xmath ) with a
minimal fine tuning in the scalar sector, care must be taken of the
latter. One may naively expect that the chains with the same G2 should
exhibit for @xmath the same numerical behavior ( @xmath ), thus
clustering the chains (I,V,X), (II,III,VI,VII,XI) and (IV,IX). On the
other hand, one must recall that the existence of G1 and its breaking
remain encoded in the G2 stage through the Higgs scalars that are
responsible for the G2 @xmath G1 breaking. This is why the chains with
the same G2 are not in general equivalent in the @xmath limit. The
numerical features of the degenerate patterns (with @xmath ) can be
crosschecked among the different chains by direct inspection of Figs.
2.1 – 2.2 and Table 2.3 .

In any discussion of viability of the various scenarios the main
attention is paid to the constraints emerging from the proton decay. In
nonsupersymmetric GUTs this process is dominated by baryon number
violating gauge interactions, inducing at low energies a set of
effective @xmath operators that conserve @xmath (cf. Sect. 1.6.1 ). In
the @xmath scenarios we consider here such gauge bosons are integrated
out at the unification scale and therefore proton decay constrains
@xmath from below. Considering the naive estimate of the inverse
lifetime of the proton in Eq. ( 1.234 ), the present experimental limit
@xmath yr [ 11 ] yields @xmath , for @xmath . Taking the results in
Figs. 2.1 – 2.2 and Table 2.3 at face value the chains VIab, XIab,
XIIab, Vb and VIIb should be excluded from realistic considerations.

On the other hand, one must recall that once a specific model is
scrutinized in detail there can be large threshold corrections in the
matching [ 176 , 177 , 178 ] , that can easily move the unification
scale by a few orders of magnitude (in both directions). In particular,
as a consequence of the spontaneous breaking of accidental would-be
global symmetries of the scalar potential, pseudo-Goldstone modes (with
masses further suppressed with respect to the expected threshold range)
may appear in the scalar spectrum, leading to potentially large RGE
effects [ 47 ] . Therefore, we shall follow a conservative approach in
interpreting the limits on the intermediate scales coming from a simple
threshold clustering. These limits, albeit useful for a preliminary
survey, may not be sharply used to exclude marginal but otherwise well
motivated scenarios.

Below the scale of the @xmath breaking, processes that violate
separately the barion or the lepton numbers emerge. In particular,
@xmath effective interactions give rise to the phenomenon of neutron
oscillations (for a recent review see Ref. [ 104 ] ). Present bounds on
nuclear instability give @xmath years, which translates into a bound on
the neutron oscillation time @xmath sec. Analogous limits come from
direct reactor oscillations experiments. This sets a lower bound on the
scale of @xmath nonsupersymmetric ( @xmath ) operators that varies from
10 to 300 TeV depending on model couplings. Thus, neutron-antineutron
oscillations probe scales far below the unification scale. In a
supersymmetric context the presence of @xmath @xmath operators softens
the dependence on the @xmath scale and for the present bounds the
typical limit goes up to about @xmath GeV.

Far more reaching in scale sensitivity are the @xmath neutrino masses
emerging from the see-saw mechanism. At the @xmath breaking scale the
@xmath ( @xmath ) scalars acquire @xmath ( @xmath ) VEVs that give a
Majorana mass to the right-handed neutrinos. Once the latter are
integrated out, @xmath operators of the form @xmath generate light
Majorana neutrino states in the low energy theory.

In the type-I seesaw, the neutrino mass matrix @xmath is proportional to
@xmath where the largest entry in the Yukawa couplings is typically of
the order of the top quark one and @xmath . Given a neutrino mass above
the limit obtained from atmospheric neutrino oscillations and below the
eV, one infers a (loose) range @xmath . It is interesting to note that
the lower bound pairs with the cosmological limit on the D-parity
breaking scale (see Sect. 2.1 ).

In the scalar-triplet induced (type-II) seesaw the evidence of the
neutrino mass entails a lower bound on the VEV of the heavy @xmath
triplet in @xmath . This translates into an upper bound on the mass of
the triplet that depends on the structure of the relevant Yukawa
coupling. If both type-I as well as type-II contribute to the light
neutrino mass, the lower bound on the @xmath scale may then be weakened
by the interplay between the two contributions. Once again this can be
quantitatively assessed only when the vacuum of the model is fully
investigated.

Finally, it is worth noting that if the @xmath breakdown is driven by
@xmath , the elementary triplets couple to the Majorana currents at the
renormalizable level and @xmath is directly sensitive to the position of
the @xmath threshold @xmath . On the other hand, the @xmath -dependence
of @xmath is loosened in the b-type of chains due to the
non-renormalizable nature of the relevant effective operator @xmath ,
where the effective scale @xmath accounts for an extra suppression.

With these considerations at hand, the constraints from proton decay and
the see-saw neutrino scale favor the chains II, III and VII, which all
share @xmath in the first @xmath breaking stage [ 141 ] . On the other
hand, our results rescue from oblivion other potentially interesting
scenarios that, as we shall expand upon shortly, are worth of in depth
consideration. In all cases, the bounds on the @xmath scale enforced by
the see-saw neutrino mass excludes the possibility of observable @xmath
gauge bosons.

#### 2.3.3 The @xmath Higgs multiplets

As mentioned in Sect. 2.1.1 , in order to ensure a rich enough Yukawa
sector in realistic models there may be the need to keep more than one
@xmath Higgs doublet at intermediate scales, albeit at the price of an
extra fine-tuning. A typical example is the case of a relatively low
Pati-Salam breaking scale where one needs at least a pair of @xmath
bidoublets with different @xmath quantum numbers to transfer the
information about the PS breakdown into the matter sector. Such
additional Higgs multiplets are those labelled by @xmath in Table 2.2 .

Table 2.4 shows the effects of including @xmath at the @xmath stages of
the relevant breaking chains. The two-loop results at the extreme values
of the intermediate scales, with and without the @xmath multiplet, are
compared. In the latter case the complete functional dependence among
the scales is given in Fig. 2.1 . Degenerate patterns with only one
effective intermediate stage are easily crosschecked among the different
chains in Table 2.4 .

In most of the cases, the numerical results do not exhibit a sizeable
dependence on the additional @xmath (or @xmath ) scalar multiplets. The
reason can be read off Table A.6 in Appendix A and it rests on an
accidental approximate coincidence of the @xmath contributions to the
@xmath and @xmath one-loop beta coefficients (the same argument applies
to the @xmath case).

Considering for instance the @xmath stage, one obtains @xmath , and
@xmath , that only slightly affects the value of @xmath (when the PS
scale is low enough), but has generally a negligible effect on the
intermediate scales.

An exception to this argument is observed in chains Ia and Va that, due
to their @xmath slopes, are most sensitive to variations of the @xmath
-coefficients. In particular, the inclusion of @xmath in the Ia chain
flips at two-loops the slopes of @xmath and @xmath so that the limit
@xmath (i.e. no G2 stage) is obtained for the maximal value of @xmath
(while the same happens for the minimum @xmath if there is no @xmath ).

Fig. 2.3 shows three template cases where the @xmath effects are
visible. The highly unstable Chain Ia shows, as noticed earlier, the
largest effects. In chain Va the effects of @xmath are moderate. Chain
VII is the only "stable" chain that exhibits visible effects on the
intermediate scales. This is due to the presence of two full-fledged PS
stages.

#### 2.3.4 Yukawa terms

The effects of the Yukawa couplings can be at leading order approximated
by constant negative shifts of the one-loop @xmath coefficients @xmath
with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The impact of @xmath on the position of the unification scale and the
value of the unified coupling can be simply estimated by considering the
running induced by the Yukawa couplings from a scale @xmath up to the
unification point ( @xmath ). The one-loop result for the change of the
intersection of the curves corresponding to @xmath and @xmath reads (at
the leading order in @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath . For simplicity we have neglected the changes in the
@xmath coefficients due to crossing intermediate thresholds. It is clear
that for a common change @xmath the unification scale is not affected,
while a net effect remains on @xmath . In all cases, the leading
contribution is always proportional to @xmath (this holds exactly for
@xmath ).

In order to assess quantitatively such effects we shall consider first
the SM stage that accounts for a large part of the running in all
realistic chains. The case of a low @xmath scale leads, as we explain in
the following, to comparably smaller effects. The impact of the Yukawa
interactions on the gauge RGEs is readily estimated assuming only the
up-type Yukawa contribution to be sizeable and constant, namely @xmath .
This yields @xmath , where the values of the @xmath coefficients are
given in Table A.7 . For @xmath and @xmath one obtains @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Since @xmath and @xmath , the first term in ( 2.43 )
dominates and one finds @xmath . For a typical value of @xmath this
translates into @xmath . The impact on @xmath is indeed tiny, namely
@xmath . In both cases the estimated effect agrees to high accuracy with
the actual numerical behavior we observe.

The effects of the Yukawa interactions emerging at intermediate scales
(or of a non-negligible @xmath in a two Higgs doublet settings with
large @xmath ) can be analogously accounted for. As a matter of fact, in
the @xmath type of models @xmath due to the common origin of @xmath and
@xmath . The unified structure of the Yukawa sector yields therefore
homogeneous @xmath factors (see the equality of @xmath in Table A.7 ).
This provides the observed large suppression of the Yukawa effects on
threshold scales and unification compared to typical two-loop gauge
contributions.

In summary, the two-loop RGE effects due to Yukawa couplings on the
magnitude of the unification scale (and intermediate thresholds) and the
value of the GUT gauge coupling turn out to be very small. Typically we
observe negative shifts at the per-mil level in both @xmath and @xmath ,
with no relevant impact on the gauge-mediated proton decay rate.

#### 2.3.5 The privilege of being minimal

With all the information at hand we can finally approach an assessment
of the viability of the various scenarios. As we have argued at length,
we cannot discard a marginal unification setup without a detailed
information on the fine threshold structure.

Obtaining this piece of information involve the study of the vacuum of
the model, and for @xmath GUTs this is in general a most challenging
task. In this respect supersymmetry helps: the superpotential is
holomorphic and the couplings in the renormalizable case are limited to
at most cubic terms; the physical vacuum is constrained by GUT-scale
@xmath - and @xmath -flatness and supersymmetry may be exploited to
studying the fermionic rather than the scalar spectra.

It is not surprising that for nonsupersymmetric @xmath , only a few
detailed studies of the Higgs potential and the related threshold
effects (see for instance Refs. [ 56 , 193 , 58 , 59 , 194 ] ) are
available. In view of all this and of the intrinsic predictivity related
to minimality, the relevance of carefully scrutinizing the simplest
scenarios is hardly overstressed.

The most economical @xmath Higgs sector includes the adjoint @xmath ,
that provides the breaking of the GUT symmetry, either @xmath or @xmath
, responsible for the subsequent @xmath breaking, and @xmath ,
participating to the electroweak symmetry breaking. The latter is needed
together with @xmath or @xmath in order to obtain realistic patterns for
the fermionic masses and mixing. Due to the properties of the adjoint
representation this scenario exhibits a minimal number of parameters in
the Higgs potential. In the current notation such a minimal
nonsupersymmetric @xmath GUT corresponds to the chains VIII and XII.

From this point of view, it is quite intriguing that our analysis of the
gauge unification constraints improves the standing of these chains (for
XIIa dramatically) with respect to existing studies. In particular,
considering the renormalizable setups ( @xmath ), we find for chain
VIIIa, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (to be compared to @xmath given in
Ref. [ 64 ] ). This is due to the combination of the updated weak scale
data and two loop running effects. For chain XIIa we find @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , showing a dramatic (and pathological) change from
@xmath obtained in [ 64 ] . Our result sets the @xmath scale nearby the
needed scale for realistic light neutrino masses.

We observe non-negligible two-loop effects for the chains VIIIb and XIIb
( @xmath ) as well. For chain VIIIb we obtain @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
(that lifts the @xmath scale while preserving @xmath well above the
proton decay bound Eq. ( LABEL:pdecaybound )). A similar shift in @xmath
is observed in chain XIIb where we find @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As
we have already stressed one should not too readily discard @xmath as
being incompatible with the proton decay bound. We have verified that
reasonable GUT threshold patterns exist that easily lift @xmath above
the experimental bound. For all these chains D-parity is broken at the
GUT scale thus avoiding any cosmological issues (see the discussion in
Sect. 2.1 ).

As remarked in Sect. 2.3.2 , the limit @xmath leads to an effective
two-step @xmath breaking with a non-minimal set of surviving scalars at
the G2 stage. As a consequence, the unification setup for the minimal
scenario can be recovered (with the needed minimal fine tuning) by
considering the limit @xmath in those chains among I to VII where G1 is
either @xmath or @xmath (see Table 2.1 ). From inspection of Figs. 2.1 –
2.2 and of Table 2.3 , one reads the following results: for @xmath we
find

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (case @xmath ),

-   @xmath @xmath and @xmath (case @xmath ),

while for @xmath

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (case @xmath ),

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (case @xmath ).

We observe that the patterns are quite similar to those of the
non-minimal setups obtained from chains VIII and XII in the @xmath
limit. Adding the @xmath multiplet, as required by a realistic matter
spectrum in case @xmath , does not modify the scalar content in the
@xmath case: only one linear combination of the @xmath and @xmath
bidoublets (see Table 2.2 ) is allowed by minimal fine tuning. On the
other hand, in the @xmath case, the only sizeable effect is a shift on
the unified coupling constant, namely @xmath (see the discussion in
Sect. 2.3.3 ).

In summary, in view of realistic thresholds effects at the GUT (and
@xmath ) scale and of a modest fine tuning in the see-saw neutrino mass,
we consider both scenarios worth of a detailed investigation.

## Chapter 3 The quantum vacuum of the minimal @xmath Gut

### 3.1 The minimal SO(10) Higgs sector

In this chapter we consider a nonsupersymmetric @xmath setup featuring
the minimal Higgs content sufficient to trigger the spontaneous
breakdown of the GUT symmetry down to the standard electroweak model.
Minimally, the scalar sector spans over a reducible @xmath
representation. The adjoint @xmath and the spinor @xmath multiplets
contain three SM singlets that may acquire GUT scale VEVs.

As we have seen in Chapter 2 the phenomenologically favored scenarios
allowed by gauge coupling unification correspond to a three-step
breaking along one of the following directions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the first two breaking stages at @xmath and @xmath are driven by
the @xmath VEVs, while the breaking to the SM at the intermediate scale
@xmath is controlled by the @xmath . The constraints coming from gauge
unification are such that @xmath . In particular, even without proton
decay limits, any intermediate @xmath -symmetric stage is excluded. On
the other hand, a series of studies in the early 1980’s of the @xmath
model [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] indicated that the only intermediate stages
allowed by the scalar sector dynamics were the flipped @xmath for
leading @xmath VEVs or the standard @xmath GUT for dominant @xmath VEV.
This observation excluded the simplest @xmath Higgs sector from
realistic consideration.

In this chapter we show that the exclusion of the breaking patterns in
Eqs. ( 3.1 )–( 3.2 ) is an artifact of the tree level potential. As a
matter of fact, some entries of the scalar hessian are accidentally
over-constrained at the tree level. A number of scalar interactions
that, by a simple inspection of the relevant global symmetries and their
explicit breaking, are expected to contribute to these critical entries,
are not effective at the tree level.

On the other hand, once quantum corrections are considered,
contributions of @xmath induced on these entries open in a natural way
all group-theoretically allowed vacuum configurations. Remarkably
enough, the study of the one-loop effective potential can be
consistently carried out just for the critical tree level hessian
entries (that correspond to specific pseudo-Goldstone boson masses). For
all other states in the scalar spectrum, quantum corrections remain
perturbations of the tree level results and do not affect the discussion
of the vacuum pattern.

Let us emphasize that the issue we shall be dealing with is inherent to
all nonsupersymmetric @xmath models with one adjoint @xmath governing
the first breaking step. Only one additional scalar representation
interacting with the adjoint is sufficient to demonstrate conclusively
our claim. In this respect, the choice of the @xmath spinor to trigger
the intermediate symmetry breakdown is a mere convenience and a similar
line of reasoning can be devised for the scenarios in which @xmath is
broken for instance by a 126-dimensional @xmath tensor.

We shall therefore study the structure of the vacua of a @xmath Higgs
potential with only the @xmath representation at play. Following the
common convention, we define @xmath and denote by @xmath and @xmath the
multiplets transforming as positive and negative chirality components of
the reducible 32-dimensional @xmath spinor representation respectively.
Similarly, we shall use the symbol @xmath (or the derived @xmath for the
components in the natural basis, cf. Appendix B ) for the adjoint Higgs
representation @xmath .

#### 3.1.1 The tree-level Higgs potential

The most general renormalizable tree-level scalar potential which can be
constructed out of @xmath and @xmath reads (see for instance Refs. [ 45
, 195 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, according to the notation in Appendix B ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The mass terms and coupling constants above are real by hermiticity. The
cubic @xmath self-interaction is absent due the zero trace of the @xmath
adjoint representation. For the sake of simplicity, all tensorial
indices have been suppressed.

#### 3.1.2 The symmetry breaking patterns

##### The SM singlets

There are in general three SM singlets in the @xmath representation of
@xmath . Labeling the field components according to @xmath (where the
@xmath generator is @xmath ), the SM singlets reside in the @xmath and
@xmath submultiplets of @xmath and in the @xmath component of @xmath .
We denote their VEVs as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are real and @xmath can be taken real by a phase
redefinition of the @xmath . Different VEV configurations trigger the
spontaneous breakdown of the @xmath symmetry into a number of subgroups.
Namely, for @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath standing for the two different embedding of the
@xmath subgroup into @xmath , i.e. standard and “flipped” respectively
(see the discussion at the end of the section).

When @xmath all intermediate gauge symmetries are spontaneously broken
down to the SM group, with the exception of the last case which
maintains the standard @xmath subgroup unbroken and will no further be
considered.

The classification in Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) depends on the phase conventions
used in the parametrization of the SM singlet subspace of @xmath . The
statement that @xmath yields the standard @xmath vacuum while @xmath
corresponds to the flipped setting defines a particular basis in this
subspace (see Sect. 3.1.2 ). The consistency of any chosen framework is
then verified against the corresponding Goldstone boson spectrum.

The decomposition of the @xmath and @xmath representations with respect
to the relevant @xmath subgroups is detailed in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 .

##### The L-R chains

According to the analysis in Chapter 2 , the potentially viable breaking
chains fulfilling the basic gauge unification constraints (with a
minimal @xmath Higgs sector) correspond to the settings:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As remarked in Sect. 2.3.2 , the cases @xmath or @xmath lead to
effective two-step @xmath breaking patterns with a non-minimal set of
surviving scalars at the intermediate scale. On the other hand, a truly
two-step setup can be recovered (with a minimal fine tuning) by
considering the cases where @xmath or @xmath exactly vanish. Only the
explicit study of the scalar potential determines which of the textures
are allowed.

##### Standard SU(5) versus flipped SU(5)

There are in general two distinct SM-compatible embeddings of @xmath
into @xmath [ 69 , 70 ] . They differ in one generator of the @xmath
Cartan algebra and therefore in the @xmath cofactor.

In the “standard” embedding, the weak hypercharge operator @xmath
belongs to the @xmath algebra and the orthogonal Cartan generator @xmath
(obeying @xmath for all @xmath ) is given by @xmath .

In the “flipped” @xmath case, the right-handed isospin assignment of
quark and leptons into the @xmath multiplets is turned over so that the
“flipped” hypercharge generator reads @xmath . Accordingly, the
additional @xmath generator reads @xmath , such that @xmath for all
@xmath . Weak hypercharge is then given by @xmath .

Tables 4.4 – 4.5 show the standard and flipped @xmath decompositions of
the spinorial and adjoint @xmath representations respectively.

The two @xmath vacua in Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) differ by the texture of the
adjoint representation VEVs: in the standard @xmath case they are
aligned with the @xmath operator while they match the @xmath structure
in the flipped @xmath setting (see Appendix B.4 for an explicit
representation).

### 3.2 The classical vacuum

#### 3.2.1 The stationarity conditions

By substituting Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) into Eq. ( 3.3 ) the vacuum manifold reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding three stationary conditions can be conveniently
written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.11)
  -- -- -- --------

which lead respectively to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have chosen linear combinations that factor out the uninteresting
standard @xmath solution, namely @xmath .

In summary, when @xmath , Eqs. ( 3.12 )–( 3.13 ) allow for four possible
vacua:

-   @xmath (standard @xmath )

-   @xmath (flipped @xmath )

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

As we shall see, the last two options are not tree level minima. Let us
remark that for @xmath , Eq. ( 3.13 ) implies naturally a correlation
among the @xmath and @xmath VEVs, or a fine tuned relation between
@xmath and @xmath , depending on the stationary solution. In the cases
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath one obtains @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Consistency with the scalar mass spectrum must be verified
in each case.

#### 3.2.2 The tree-level spectrum

The gauge and scalar spectra corresponding to the SM vacuum
configuration (with non-vanishing VEVs in @xmath ) are detailed in
Appendix D .

The scalar spectra obtained in various limits of the tree-level Higgs
potential, corresponding to the appearance of accidental global
symmetries, are derived in Apps. D.2.1 – D.2.5 . The emblematic case
@xmath is scrutinized in Appendix D.2.6 .

#### 3.2.3 Constraints on the potential parameters

The parameters (couplings and VEVs) of the scalar potential are
constrained by the requirements of boundedness and the absence of
tachyonic states, ensuring that the vacuum is stable and the stationary
points correspond to physical minima.

Necessary conditions for vacuum stability are derived in Appendix C . In
particular, on the @xmath section one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the general case, the absence of tachyons in the scalar
spectrum yields among else

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strict constraint on @xmath is a consequence of the tightly
correlated form of the tree-level masses of the @xmath and @xmath
submultiplets of @xmath , labeled according to the SM ( @xmath ) quantum
numbers, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that are simultaneously positive only if Eq. ( 3.16 ) is enforced. For
comparison with previous studies, let us remark that in the @xmath limit
(corresponding to an extra @xmath symmetry @xmath ) the intersection of
the constraints from Eq. ( 3.13 ), Eqs. ( 3.17 )–( 3.18 ) and the mass
eigenvalues of the @xmath and @xmath states, yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus recovering the results of Refs. [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] .

In either case, one concludes by inspecting the scalar mass spectrum
that flipped @xmath is for @xmath the only solution admitted by Eq. (
3.13 ) consistent with the constraints in Eq. ( 3.16 ) (or Eq. ( 3.19
)). For @xmath , the fine tuned possibility of having or @xmath such
that @xmath is obtained at an intermediate scale fails to reproduce the
SM couplings (see e.g. Sect. 2.3.2 ). Analogous and obvious conclusions
hold for @xmath and for @xmath (standard @xmath in the first stage).

This is the origin of the common knowledge that nonsupersymmetric @xmath
settings with the adjoint VEVs driving the gauge symmetry breaking are
not phenomenologically viable. In particular, a large hierarchy between
the @xmath VEVs, that would set the stage for consistent unification
patterns, is excluded.

The key question is: why are the masses of the states in Eqs. ( 3.17 )–(
3.18 ) so tightly correlated? Equivalently, why do they depend on @xmath
only?

### 3.3 Understanding the scalar spectrum

A detailed comprehension of the patterns in the scalar spectrum may be
achieved by understanding the correlations between mass textures and the
symmetries of the scalar potential. In particular, the appearance of
accidental global symmetries in limiting cases may provide the rationale
for the dependence of mass eigenvalues from specific couplings. To this
end we classify the most interesting cases, providing a counting of the
would-be Goldstone bosons (WGB) and pseudo Goldstone bosons (PGB) for
each case. A side benefit of this discussion is a consistency check of
the explicit form of the mass spectra.

#### 3.3.1 45 only with @xmath

Let us first consider the potential generated by @xmath , namely @xmath
in Eq. ( 3.3 ). When @xmath , i.e. when only trivial @xmath invariants
(built off moduli) are considered, the scalar potential exhibits an
enhanced global symmetry: @xmath . The spontaneous symmetry breaking
(SSB) triggered by the @xmath VEV reduces the global symmetry to @xmath
. As a consequence, 44 massless states are expected in the scalar
spectrum. This is verified explicitly in Appendix D.2.1 . Considering
the case of the @xmath gauge symmetry broken to the flipped @xmath ,
@xmath WGB, with the quantum numbers of the coset @xmath algebra,
decouple from the physical spectrum while, @xmath PGB remain, whose mass
depends on the explicit breaking term @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 16 only with @xmath

We proceed in analogy with the previous discussion. Taking @xmath in
@xmath enhances the global symmetry to @xmath . The spontaneous breaking
of @xmath to @xmath due to the @xmath VEV leads to 31 massless modes, as
it is explicitly seen in Appendix D.2.2 . Since the gauge @xmath
symmetry is broken by @xmath to the standard @xmath , @xmath WGB, with
the quantum numbers of the coset @xmath algebra, decouple from the
physical spectrum, while @xmath PGB do remain. Their masses depend on
the explicit breaking term @xmath .

#### 3.3.3 A trivial 45-16 potential @xmath

When only trivial invariants (i.e. moduli) of both @xmath and @xmath are
considered, the global symmetry of @xmath in Eq. ( 3.3 ) is @xmath .
This symmetry is spontaneously broken into @xmath by the @xmath and
@xmath VEVs yielding 44+31=75 GB in the scalar spectrum (see Appendix
D.2.4 ). Since in this case, the gauge @xmath symmetry is broken to the
SM gauge group, @xmath WGB, with the quantum numbers of the coset @xmath
algebra, decouple from the physical spectrum, while @xmath PGB remain.
Their masses are generally expected to receive contributions from the
explicitly breaking terms @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.3.4 A trivial 45-16 interaction @xmath

Turning off just the @xmath and @xmath couplings still allows for
independent global rotations of the @xmath and @xmath Higgs fields. The
largest global symmetries are those determined by the @xmath and @xmath
terms in @xmath , namely @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Consider the
spontaneous breaking to global flipped @xmath and the standard @xmath by
the @xmath and @xmath VEVs, respectively. This setting gives rise to
@xmath massless scalar modes. The gauged @xmath symmetry is broken to
the SM group so that 33 WGB decouple from the physical spectrum.
Therefore, 41-33=8 PGB remain, whose masses receive contributions from
the explicit breaking terms @xmath and @xmath . All of these features
are readily verified by inspection of the scalar mass spectrum in
Appendix D.2.5 .

#### 3.3.5 A tree-level accident

The tree-level masses of the crucial @xmath and @xmath multiplets
belonging to the @xmath depend only on the parameter @xmath but not on
the other parameters expected (cf. 3.3.3 ), namely @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

While the @xmath and @xmath terms cannot obviously contribute at the
tree level to @xmath mass terms, one would generally expect a
contribution from the @xmath term, proportional to @xmath . Using the
parametrization @xmath , where the @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ) matrices
represent the @xmath algebra on the 16-dimensional spinor basis
(cf. Appendix B ), one obtains a @xmath mass term of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The projection of the @xmath fields onto the @xmath and @xmath
components lead, as we know, to vanishing contributions.

This result can actually be understood on general grounds by observing
that the scalar interaction in Eq. ( 3.20 ) has the same structure as
the gauge boson mass from the covariant-derivative interaction with the
@xmath , cf. Eq. ( D.7 ). As a consequence, no tree-level mass
contribution from the @xmath coupling can be generated for the @xmath
scalars carrying the quantum numbers of the standard @xmath algebra.
This behavior can be again verified by inspecting the relevant scalar
spectra in Appendix D.2 .

The above considerations provide a clear rationale for the accidental
tree level constraint on @xmath , that holds independently on the size
of @xmath .

On the other hand, we should expect the @xmath and @xmath interactions
to contribute @xmath terms to the masses of @xmath and @xmath at the
quantum level. Similar contributions should also arise from the gauge
interactions, that break explicitly the independent global
transformations on the @xmath and @xmath discussed in the previous
subsections.

The typical one-loop self energies, proportional to the @xmath VEVs, are
diagrammatically depicted in Fig. 3.1 . While the exchange of @xmath
components is crucial, the @xmath is not needed to obtain the large mass
shifts. In the phenomenologically allowed unification patterns it gives
actually negligible contributions.

It is interesting to notice that the @xmath -induced mass corrections do
not depend on the gauge symmetry breaking, yielding an @xmath symmetric
contribution to all scalars in @xmath .

One is thus lead to the conclusion that any result based on the
particular shape of the tree-level @xmath vacuum is drastically affected
at the quantum level. Let us emphasize that although one may in
principle avoid the @xmath -term by means of e.g. an extra @xmath
symmetry, no symmetry can forbid the @xmath -term and the gauge loop
contributions.

In case one resorts to @xmath , in place of @xmath , for the purpose of
@xmath breaking, the more complex tensor structure of the class of
@xmath quartic invariants in the scalar potential may admit tree-level
contributions to the states @xmath and @xmath proportional to @xmath .
On the other hand, as mentioned above, whenever @xmath is small on the
unification scale, the same considerations apply, as for the @xmath
case.

#### 3.3.6 The @xmath limit

From the previous discussion it is clear that the answer to the question
whether the non- @xmath vacua are allowed at the quantum level is
independent on the specific value of the @xmath breaking VEV ( @xmath in
potentially realistic cases).

In order to simplify the study of the scalar potential beyond the
classical level it is therefore convenient (and sufficient) to consider
the @xmath limit.

When @xmath the mass matrices of the @xmath and @xmath sectors are not
coupled. The stationary equations in Eqs. ( 3.12 )–( 3.13 ) lead to the
four solutions

-   @xmath ( @xmath )

-   @xmath ( @xmath )

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

In what follows, we will focus our discussion on the last three cases
only.

It is worth noting that the tree level spectrum in the @xmath limit is
not directly obtained from the general formulae given in Appendix D.2.3
, since Eq. ( 3.14 ) is trivially satisfied for @xmath . The
corresponding scalar mass spectra are derived and discussed in Appendix
D.2.6 . Yet again, it is apparent that the non @xmath vacuum
configurations exhibit unavoidable tachyonic states in the scalar
spectrum.

### 3.4 The quantum vacuum

#### 3.4.1 The one-loop effective potential

We shall compute the relevant one-loop corrections to the tree level
results by means of the one-loop effective potential (effective action
at zero momentum) [ 196 ] . We can formally write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tree level potential and @xmath denote the quantum
contributions induced by scalars, fermions and gauge bosons
respectively. In dimensional regularization with the modified minimal
subtraction ( @xmath ) and in the Landau gauge, they are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath for real (complex) scalars and @xmath for Weyl (Dirac)
fermions. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the functional scalar, fermion
and gauge boson mass matrices respectively, as obtained from the tree
level potential.

In the case at hand, we may write the functional scalar mass matrix,
@xmath as a 77-dimensional hermitian matrix, with a lagrangian term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

defined on the vector basis @xmath . More explicitly, @xmath takes the
block form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts denote the derivatives of the scalar potential with
respect to the set of fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In the
one-loop part of the effective potential @xmath .

We neglect the fermionic component of the effective potential since
there are no fermions at the GUT scale (we assume that the right-handed
(RH) neutrino mass is substantially lower than the unification scale).

The functional gauge boson mass matrix, @xmath is given in Appendix D ,
Eqs. ( D.6 )–( D.7 ).

#### 3.4.2 The one-loop stationary equations

The first derivative of the one-loop part of the effective potential,
with respect to the scalar field component @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath stands for the partial derivative of @xmath with
respect to @xmath . Analogous formulae hold for @xmath . The trace
properties ensure that Eq. ( 3.27 ) holds independently on whether
@xmath does commute with its first derivatives or not.

The calculation of the loop corrected stationary equations due to gauge
bosons and scalar exchange is straightforward (for @xmath the @xmath and
@xmath blocks decouple in Eq. ( 3.26 )). On the other hand, the
corrected equations are quite cumbersome and we do not explicitly report
them here. It is enough to say that the quantum analogue of Eq. ( 3.13 )
admits analytically the same solutions as we had at the tree level.
Namely, these are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , corresponding
respectively to the standard @xmath , flipped @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
preserved subalgebras.

#### 3.4.3 The one-loop scalar mass

In order to calculate the second derivatives of the one-loop
contributions to @xmath it is in general necessary to take into account
the commutation properties of @xmath with its derivatives that enter as
a series of nested commutators. The general expression can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the commutators in the last line are taken @xmath times. Let us
also remark that, although not apparent, the RHS of Eq. ( 3.28 ) can be
shown to be symmetric under @xmath , as it should be. In specific cases
(for instance when the nested commutators vanish or they can be
rewritten as powers of a certain matrix commuting with @xmath ) the
functional mass evaluated on the vacuum may take a closed form.

##### Running and pole mass

The effective potential is a functional computed at zero external
momenta. Whereas the stationary equations allow for the localization of
the new minimum (being the VEVs translationally invariant), the mass
shifts obtained from Eq. ( 3.28 ) define the running masses @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the renormalized masses and @xmath are the @xmath
renormalized self-energies. The physical (pole) masses @xmath are then
obtained as a solution to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a given eigenvalue

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives the physical mass. The gauge and scheme dependence in Eq. ( 3.29 )
is canceled by the relevant contributions from Eq. ( 3.31 ). In
particular, infrared divergent terms in Eq. ( 3.29 ) related to the
presence of massless WGB in the Landau gauge cancel in Eq. ( 3.32 ).

Of particular relevance is the case when @xmath is substantially smaller
than the (GUT-scale) mass of the particles that contribute to @xmath .
At @xmath , in the @xmath limit, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case the running mass computed from Eq. ( 3.29 ) contains the
leading gauge independent corrections. As a matter of fact, in order to
study the vacua of the potential in Eq. ( 3.21 ), we need to compute the
zero momentum mass corrections just to those states that are tachyonic
at the tree level and whose corrected mass turns out to be of the order
of @xmath .

We may safely neglect the one loop corrections for all other states with
masses of order @xmath . It is remarkable, as we shall see, that for
@xmath the relevant corrections to the masses of the critical PGB states
can be obtained from Eq. ( 3.28 ) with vanishing commutators.

#### 3.4.4 One-loop PGB masses

The stringent tree-level constraint on the ratio @xmath , coming from
the positivity of the @xmath and @xmath masses, follows from the fact
that some scalar masses depend only on the parameter @xmath . On the
other hand, the discussion on the would-be global symmetries of the
scalar potential shows that in general their mass should depend on other
terms in the scalar potential, in particular @xmath and @xmath .

A set of typical one-loop diagrams contributing @xmath renormalization
to the masses of @xmath states is depicted in Fig. 3.1 . As we already
pointed out the @xmath VEV does not play any role in the leading GUT
scale corrections (just the interaction between @xmath and @xmath , or
with the massive gauge bosons is needed). Therefore we henceforth work
in the strict @xmath limit, that simplifies substantially the
calculation. In this limit the scalar mass matrix in Eq. ( 3.26 ) is
block diagonal (cf. Appendix D.2.6 ) and the leading corrections from
the one-loop effective potential are encoded in the @xmath sector.

More precisely, we are interested in the corrections to those @xmath
scalar states whose tree level mass depends only on @xmath and have the
quantum numbers of the preserved non-abelian algebra (see Sect. 3.3.1
and Appendix D.2.6 ). It turns out that focusing to this set of PGB
states the functional mass matrix @xmath and its first derivative do
commute for @xmath and Eq. ( 3.28 ) simplifies accordingly. This allows
us to compute the relevant mass corrections in a closed form.

The calculation of the EP running mass from Eq. ( 3.28 ) leads for the
states @xmath and @xmath at @xmath to the mass shifts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sub-leading (and gauge dependent) logarithmic terms are not
explicitly reported. For the vacuum configurations of interest we find
the results reported in Appendix E . In particular, we obtain

-   @xmath ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.37)
         @xmath      (3.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.39)
         @xmath      (3.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

In the effective theory language Eqs. ( 3.36 )–( 3.40 ) can be
interpreted as the one-loop GUT-scale matching due to the decoupling of
the massive @xmath states where @xmath is the preserved gauge group.
These are the only relevant one-loop corrections needed in order to
discuss the vacuum structure of the model.

It is quite apparent that a consistent scalar mass spectrum can be
obtained in all cases, at variance with the tree level result.

In order to fully establish the existence of the non- @xmath minima at
the quantum level one should identify the regions of the parameter space
supporting the desired vacuum configurations and estimate their depths.
We shall address these issues in the next section.

#### 3.4.5 The one-loop vacuum structure

##### Existence of the new vacuum configurations

The existence of the different minima of the one-loop effective
potential is related to the values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath at the scale @xmath . For the flipped @xmath case it
is sufficient, as one expects, to assume the tree level condition @xmath
. On the other hand, from Eqs. ( 3.37 )–( 3.40 ) we obtain

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

Considering for naturalness @xmath , Eqs. ( 3.41 )–( 3.42 ) imply @xmath
. This constraint remains within the natural perturbative range for
dimensionless couplings. While all PGB states whose mass is proportional
to @xmath receive large positive loop corrections, quantum corrections
are numerically irrelevant for all of the states with GUT scale mass. On
the same grounds we may safely neglect the multiplicative @xmath loop
corrections induced by the @xmath states on the PGB masses.

##### Absolute minimum

It remains to show that the non @xmath solutions may actually be
absolute minima of the potential. To this end it is necessary to
consider the one-loop corrected stationary equations and calculate the
vacuum energies in the relevant cases. Studying the shape of the
one-loop effective potential is a numerical task. On the other hand, in
the approximation of neglecting at the GUT scale the logarithmic
corrections, we may reach non-detailed but definite conclusions. For the
three relevant vacuum configurations we obtain:

-   @xmath ( @xmath )

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.43)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.44)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath )

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.45)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --------

A simple numerical analysis reveals that for natural values of the
dimensionless couplings and GUT mass parameters any of the qualitatively
different vacuum configurations may be a global minimum of the one-loop
effective potential in a large domain of the parameter space.

This concludes the proof of existence of all of the group-theoretically
allowed vacua. Nonsupersymmetric @xmath models broken at @xmath by the
@xmath SM preserving VEVs, do exhibit at the quantum level the full
spectrum of intermediate symmetries. This is crucially relevant for
those chains that, allowed by gauge unification, are accidentally
excluded by the tree level potential.

## Chapter 4 Susy-@xmath breaking with small representations

### 4.1 What do neutrinos tell us?

In Chapter 3 we showed that quantum effects solve the long-standing
issue of the incompatibility between the dynamics of the simplest
nonsupersymmetric @xmath Higgs sector spanning over @xmath and gauge
coupling unification.

In order to give mass to the SM fermions at the renormalizable level one
has to minimally add a @xmath . So it would be natural to consider the
Higgs sector @xmath as a candidate for the minimal @xmath theory, as
advocated long ago by Witten [ 67 ] . However the experimental data
accumulated since the @xmath tell us that such an Higgs sector cannot
work. It is anyway interesting to review the general idea, especially as
far as concerns the generation of neutrino masses.

First of all with just one @xmath the Yukawa lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which readily implies @xmath , since @xmath can be always diagonalized
by a rotation in the flavor space of the @xmath . However this is not a
big issue. It would be enough to add a second @xmath or even better a
@xmath which can break the down-quark/charged-lepton symmetry
(cf. Eqs. ( 1.180 )–( 1.183 )).

The most interesting part is about neutrinos. In order to give a
Majorana mass to the RH neutrinos @xmath must be broken by two units.
Since @xmath this means that we have to couple the bilinear @xmath to
@xmath . Such a @xmath operator can be generated radiatively due to the
exchange of GUT states [ 67 ] .

Effectively the bilinear @xmath can be viewed as a @xmath . So we are
looking for states which can connect the matter bilinear @xmath with an
effective @xmath . Since @xmath a possibility is given by the
combination @xmath (where @xmath are the @xmath gauge bosons). Indeed
the @xmath and the @xmath ’s can be respectively attached to the matter
bilinear via Yukawa ( @xmath ) and gauge ( @xmath ) interactions; and to
the bilinear @xmath via scalar potential couplings ( @xmath ) and again
gauge interactions. The topology of the diagram is such that this
happens for the first time at the two-loop level (see e.g. Fig. 4.1 ).

Notice that the same diagram generates also a Majorana mass term for LH
neutrinos, while a Dirac mass term arises from the Yukawa lagrangian
in Eq. ( 4.1 ). At the leading order the contribution to the RH
Majorana, Dirac and LH Majorana neutrino mass matrices (respectively
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) is estimated to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is @xmath breaking VEV of the @xmath in the @xmath singlet
direction, @xmath and @xmath are instead electroweak VEVs. After
diagonalizing the full @xmath neutrino mass matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

defined on the symmetric basis @xmath , we get the usual type-II and
type-I contributions to the @xmath light neutrinos mass matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The type-II seesaw is clearly too small ( @xmath ) while the type-I is
naturally too big ¹ ¹ 1 Accidentally gravity would be responsible for a
contribution of the same order of magnitude. Indeed if we take the Plank
scale as the cut-off of the @xmath theory we find a @xmath effective
operators of the type @xmath , which leads to @xmath . The analogy comes
from the fact that @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the estimates we have taken @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath by unification constraints.

The only chance in order to keep neutrino masses below @xmath is either
to push @xmath or to take @xmath . The first option is unlikely in
nonsupersymmetric @xmath because of unification constraints ² ² 2 In
supersymmetry @xmath , but then the two-loop diagram in Fig. 4.1 would
disappear due to the non-renormalization theorems of the superpotential.
This brought the authors of Refs. [ 117 , 118 ] to reconsider the Witten
mechanism in the context of split-supersymmetry [ 197 , 198 , 199 ] . ,
while the second one is forbidden by the fact that @xmath , in the
simplest case with just the @xmath in the Yukawa sector (cf. e.g. Eqs. (
1.180 )–( 1.183 )) .

As we have already anticipated the reducible representation @xmath is
needed in the Yukawa sector in order to generate non trivial mixing and
break the down-quark/charged-lepton symmetry. Interestingly this system
would also allow for a disentanglement between @xmath and @xmath
(cf. e.g. Eqs. ( 1.180 )–( 1.183 )) and a fine-tuning in order to
suppress neutrino masses is in principle conceivable. However the Higgs
sector @xmath starts to deviate from minimality and maybe there is a
better option to be considered.

The issue can be somewhat alleviated by considering a @xmath in place of
a @xmath in the Higgs sector, since in such a case the neutrino masses
is generated at the renormalizable level by the term @xmath . This lifts
the problematic @xmath suppression factor inherent to the @xmath
effective mass and yields @xmath , that might be, at least in principle,
acceptable. This scenario, though conceptually simple, involves a
detailed one-loop analysis of the scalar potential governing the
dynamics of the @xmath Higgs sector and is subject of an ongoing
investigation [ 74 ] . We will briefly mention some preliminary results
in the Outlook of the thesis.

On the other hand it would be also nice to have a viable Higgs sector
with only representations up to the adjoint. This is not possible in
ordinary @xmath , but what about the supersymmetric case? Invoking
TeV-scale supersymmetry (SUSY), the qualitative picture changes
dramatically. Indeed, the gauge running within the MSSM prefers @xmath
in the proximity of @xmath and, hence, the Planck-suppressed @xmath RH
neutrino mass operator @xmath , available whenever @xmath is present in
the Higgs sector, can naturally reproduce the desired range for @xmath .

This well known fact motivates us to re-examin the issue of the breaking
of SUSY- @xmath in the presence of small representations.

### 4.2 SUSY alignment: a case for flipped @xmath

In the presence of supersymmetry one would naively say that the minimal
Higgs sector that suffices to break @xmath to the SM is given by @xmath
. Let us recall that both @xmath as well as @xmath are required in order
to retain SUSY below the GUT scale.

However, it is well known [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] that the relevant
superpotential does not support, at the renormalizable level, a
supersymmetric breaking of the @xmath gauge group to the SM. This is due
to the constraints on the vacuum manifold imposed by the @xmath - and
@xmath -flatness conditions which, apart from linking the magnitudes of
the @xmath -singlet @xmath and @xmath vacuum expectation values (VEVs),
make the adjoint VEV @xmath aligned to @xmath . As a consequence, an
@xmath subgroup of the initial @xmath gauge symmetry remains unbroken.
In this respect, a renormalizable Higgs sector with @xmath in place of
@xmath suffers from the same “ @xmath lock” [ 62 ] , because also in
@xmath the SM singlet direction is @xmath -invariant.

This issue can be addressed by giving up renormalizability [ 61 , 62 ] .
However, this option may be rather problematic since it introduces a
delicate interplay between physics at two different scales, @xmath ,
with the consequence of splitting the GUT-scale thresholds over several
orders of magnitude around @xmath . This may affect proton decay as well
as the SUSY gauge unification, and may force the @xmath scale below the
GUT scale. The latter is harmful for the setting with @xmath relying on
a @xmath RH neutrino mass operator. The models with @xmath are also
prone to trouble with gauge unification, due to the number of large
Higgs multiplets spread around the GUT-scale.

Thus, in none of the cases above the simplest conceivable @xmath Higgs
sector spanned over the lowest-dimensionality irreducible
representations (up to the adjoint) seems to offer a natural scenario
for realistic model building. Since the option of a simple GUT-scale
Higgs dynamics involving small representations governed by a simple
renormalizable superpotential is particularly attractive, we aimed at
studying the conditions under which the seemingly ubiquitous @xmath lock
can be overcome, while keeping only spinorial and adjoint @xmath
representations.

Let us emphasize that the assumption that the gauge symmetry breaking is
driven by the renormalizable part of the Higgs superpotential does not
clash with the fact that, in models with @xmath , the neutrino masses
are generated at the non-renormalizable level, and other fermions may be
sensitive to physics beyond the GUT scale. As far as symmetry breaking
is concerned, Planck induced @xmath effective interactions are
irrelevant perturbations in this picture.

The simplest attempt to breaking the @xmath lock by doubling either
@xmath or @xmath in order to relax the @xmath -flatness constraints is
easily shown not to work. In the former case, there is only one SM
singlet field direction associated to each of the @xmath pairs. Thus,
@xmath -flatness makes the VEVs in @xmath align along this direction
regardless of the number of @xmath ’s contributing to the relevant
@xmath -term, @xmath (see for instance Eq. (6) in ref. [ 62 ] ).
Doubling the number of @xmath ’s does not help either. Since there is no
mixing among the 45’s besides the mass term, @xmath -flatness aligns
both @xmath in the @xmath direction of @xmath . For three (and more)
adjoints a mixing term of the form @xmath is allowed, but it turns out
to be irrelevant to the minimization so that the alignment is
maintained.

From this brief excursus one might conclude that, as far as the Higgs
content is considered, the price for tractability and predictivity is
high on SUSY @xmath models, as the desired group-theoretical simplicity
of the Higgs sector, with representations up to the adjoint, appears not
viable.

In this chapter, we point out that all these issues are alleviated if
one considers a flipped variant of the SUSY @xmath unification. In
particular, we shall show that the flipped @xmath scenario [ 71 , 72 ,
73 ] offers an attractive option to break the gauge symmetry to the SM
at the renormalizable level by means of a quite simple Higgs sector,
namely a couple of @xmath spinors @xmath and one adjoint @xmath .

Within the extended @xmath gauge algebra one finds in general three
inequivalent embeddings of the SM hypercharge. In addition to the two
solutions with the hypercharge stretching over the @xmath or the @xmath
subgroups of @xmath (respectively dubbed as the “standard” and “flipped”
@xmath embeddings), there is a third, “flipped” @xmath , solution
inherent to the @xmath case, with a non-trivial projection of the SM
hypercharge onto the @xmath factor.

Whilst the difference between the standard and the flipped @xmath
embedding is semantical from the @xmath point of view, the flipped
@xmath case is qualitatively different. In particular, the
symmetry-breaking “power” of the @xmath spinor and adjoint
representations is boosted with respect to the standard @xmath case,
increasing the number of SM singlet fields that may acquire non
vanishing VEVs. Technically, flipping allows for a pair of SM singlets
in each of the @xmath and @xmath “Weyl” spinors, together with four SM
singlets within @xmath . This is at the root of the possibility of
implementing the gauge symmetry breaking by means of a simple
renormalizable Higgs sector. Let us just remark that, if
renormalizability is not required, the breaking can be realized without
the adjoint Higgs field, see for instance the flipped @xmath model with
an additional anomalous @xmath of Ref. [ 200 ] .

Nevertheless, flipping is not per-se sufficient to cure the @xmath lock
of standard @xmath with @xmath in the Higgs sector. Indeed, the adjoint
does not reduce the rank and the bi-spinor, in spite of the two
qualitatively different SM singlets involved, can lower it only by a
single unit, leaving a residual @xmath symmetry (the two SM singlet
directions in the @xmath still retain an @xmath algebra as a little
group). Only when two pairs of @xmath (interacting via @xmath ) are
introduced the two pairs of SM singlet VEVs in the spinor multiplets may
not generally be aligned and the little group is reduced to the SM.

Thus, the simplest renormalizable SUSY Higgs model that can provide the
spontaneous breaking of the @xmath GUT symmetry to the SM by means of
Higgs representations not larger than the adjoint, is the flipped @xmath
scenario with two copies of the @xmath bi-spinor supplemented by the
adjoint @xmath . Notice further that in the flipped embedding the spinor
representations include also weak doublets that may trigger the
electroweak symmetry breaking and allow for renormalizable Yukawa
interactions with the chiral matter fields distributed in the flipped
embedding over @xmath .

Remarkably, the basics of the mechanism we advocate can be embedded in
an underlying non-renormalizable @xmath Higgs model featuring a pair of
@xmath and the adjoint @xmath .

Technical similarities apart, there is, however, a crucial difference
between the @xmath and @xmath scenarios, that is related to the fact
that the Lie-algebra of @xmath is larger than that of @xmath . It has
been shown long ago [ 201 ] that the renormalizable SUSY @xmath Higgs
model spanned on a single copy of @xmath leaves an @xmath symmetry
unbroken. Two pairs of @xmath are needed to reduce the rank by two
units. In spite of the fact that the two SM singlet directions in the
@xmath are exactly those of the “flipped” @xmath , the little group of
the SM singlet directions @xmath and @xmath remains at the
renormalizable level @xmath , as we will explicitly show.

Adding non-renormalizable adjoint interactions allows for a
disentanglement of the @xmath , such that the little group is reduced to
the SM. Since a one-step @xmath breaking is phenomenologically
problematic as mentioned earlier, we argue for a two-step breaking, via
flipped @xmath , with the @xmath scale near the Planck scale.

In summary, we make the case for an anomaly free flipped @xmath partial
unification scenario. We provide a detailed discussion of the symmetry
breaking pattern obtained within the minimal flipped @xmath SUSY Higgs
model and consider its possible @xmath embedding. We finally present an
elementary discussion of the flavour structure offered by these
settings.

### 4.3 The GUT-scale little hierarchy

In supersymmetric @xmath models with just @xmath governing the GUT
breaking, one way to obtain the misalignment between the adjoint and the
spinors is that of invoking new physics at the Planck scale,
parametrized in a model-independent way by a tower of effective
operators suppressed by powers of @xmath .

What we call the “GUT-scale little hierarchy" is the hierarchy induced
in the GUT spectrum by @xmath suppressed effective operators, which may
split the GUT-scale thresholds over several orders of magnitude. In turn
this may be highly problematic for proton stability and the gauge
unification in low energy SUSY scenarios (as discussed for instance in
Ref. [ 202 ] ). It may also jeopardize the neutrino mass generation in
the seesaw scheme. We briefly review the relevant issues here.

#### 4.3.1 GUT-scale thresholds and proton decay

In Ref. [ 203 ] the emphasis is set on a class of neutrino-mass-related
operators which turns out to be particularly dangerous for proton
stability in scenarios with a non-renormalizable GUT-breaking sector.
The relevant interactions can be schematically written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are matrices in the family space, @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ) is the color triplet (anti-triplet) contained in the
@xmath ( @xmath ). Integrating out the color triplets, whose mass term
is labelled @xmath , one obtains the following effective superpotential
involving fields belonging to @xmath doublets

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the physical left-handed up quarks and
charged lepton superfields in the basis in which neutral gaugino
interactions are flavor diagonal. The @xmath and @xmath fields are
related to the physical down quark and light neutrino fields @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath and @xmath . In turn @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
diagonalize the left-handed up quark and charged lepton mass matrices
respectively. The @xmath matrices @xmath are given by @xmath .

By exploiting the correlations between the @xmath and @xmath matrices
and the matter masses and mixings and by taking into account the
uncertainties related to the low-energy SUSY spectrum, the
GUT-thresholds and the hadronic matrix elements, the authors of Ref. [
203 ] argue that the effective operators in Eq. ( 4.7 ) lead to a proton
lifetime

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

at the verge of the current experimental lower bound of @xmath years [
80 ] . In obtaining Eq. ( 4.8 ) the authors assume that the color
triplet masses cluster about the GUT scale, @xmath . On the other hand,
in scenarios where at the renormalizable level @xmath is broken to
@xmath and the residual @xmath symmetry is broken to SM by means of
non-renormalizable operators, the effective scale of the @xmath breaking
physics is typically suppressed by @xmath or @xmath with respect to
@xmath . As a consequence, the @xmath -part of the colored triplet
higgsino spectrum is effectively pulled down to the @xmath scale, in a
clash with proton stability.

#### 4.3.2 GUT-scale thresholds and one-step unification

The “delayed” residual @xmath breakdown has obvious implications for the
shape of the gauge coupling unification pattern. Indeed, the gauge
bosons associated to the @xmath coset, together with the relevant part
of the Higgs spectrum, tend to be uniformly shifted [ 61 ] by a factor
@xmath below the scale of the @xmath gauge spectrum, that sets the
unification scale, @xmath . These thresholds may jeopardize the
successful one-step gauge unification pattern favoured by the TeV-scale
SUSY extension of the SM (MSSM).

#### 4.3.3 GUT-scale thresholds and neutrino masses

With a non-trivial interplay among several GUT-scale thresholds [ 61 ]
one may in principle end up with a viable gauge unification pattern.
Namely, the threshold effects in different SM gauge sectors may be such
that unification is preserved at a larger scale. In such a case the
@xmath suppression is at least partially undone. This, in turn, is
unwelcome for the neutrino mass scale because the VEVs entering the
@xmath effective operator responsible for the RH neutrino Majorana mass
term @xmath are raised accordingly and thus @xmath tends to overshoot
the upper limit @xmath GeV implied by the light neutrino masses
generated by the seesaw mechanism.

Thus, although the Planck-induced operators can provide a key to
overcoming the @xmath lock of the minimal SUSY @xmath Higgs model with
@xmath , such an effective scenario is prone to failure when addressing
the measured proton stability and light neutrino phenomenology.

### 4.4 Minimal flipped @xmath Higgs model

As already anticipated in the previous sections, in a standard @xmath
framework with a Higgs sector built off the lowest-dimensional
representations (up to the adjoint), it is rather difficult to achieve a
phenomenologically viable symmetry breaking pattern even admitting
multiple copies of each type of multiplets. Firstly, with a single
@xmath at play, at the renormalizable-level the little group of all SM
singlet VEVs is @xmath regardless of the number of @xmath pairs. The
reason is that one can not get anything more than an @xmath singlet out
of a number of @xmath singlets. The same is true with a second @xmath
added into the Higgs sector because there is no renormalizable mixing
among the two @xmath ’s apart from the mass term that, without loss of
generality, can be taken diagonal. With a third adjoint Higgs
representation at play a cubic @xmath interaction is allowed. However,
due to the total antisymmetry of the invariant and to the fact that the
adjoints commute on the SM vacuum, the cubic term does not contribute to
the F-term equations [ 204 ] . This makes the simple flipped @xmath
model proposed in this work a framework worth of consideration. For the
sake of completeness, let us also recall that admitting Higgs
representations larger than the adjoint a renormalizable @xmath SM
breaking can be devised with the Higgs sector of the form @xmath [ 205 ]
, or @xmath [ 62 ] for a renormalizable seesaw.

In Tables 4.1 and 4.2 we collect a list of the supersymmetric vacua that
are obtained in the basic @xmath Higgs models and their @xmath
embeddings by considering a set of Higgs representations of the
dimension of the adjoint and smaller, with all SM singlet VEVs turned
on. The cases of a renormalizable (R) or non-renormalizable (NR) Higgs
potential are compared. We quote reference papers where results relevant
for the present study were obtained without any aim of exhausting the
available literature. The results without reference are either verified
by us or follow by comparison with other cases and rank counting. The
main results of this study are shown in boldface.

We are going to show that by considering a non-standard hypercharge
embedding in @xmath (flipped @xmath ) the breaking to the SM is
achievable at the renormalizable level with @xmath Higgs fields. Let us
stress that what we require is that the GUT symmetry breaking is driven
by the renormalizable part of the superpotential, while Planck
suppressed interactions may be relevant for the fermion mass spectrum,
in particular for the neutrino sector.

#### 4.4.1 Introducing the model

##### Hypercharge embeddings in @xmath

The so called flipped realization of the @xmath gauge symmetry requires
an additional @xmath gauge factor in order to provide an extra degree of
freedom for the SM hypercharge identification. For a fixed embedding of
the @xmath subgroup within @xmath , the SM hypercharge can be generally
spanned over the three remaining Cartans generating the abelian @xmath
subgroup of the @xmath coset. There are two consistent implementations
of the SM hypercharge within the @xmath algebra (commonly denoted by
standard and flipped @xmath ), while a third one becomes available due
to the presence of @xmath .

In order to discuss the different embeddings we find useful to consider
two bases for the @xmath subgroup. Adopting the traditional left-right
(LR) basis corresponding to the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath , one can
span the SM hypercharge on the generators of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normalization of the @xmath and @xmath charges is chosen so that the
decompositions of the spinorial and vector representations of @xmath
with respect to @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which account for the standard @xmath and @xmath assignments.

Alternatively, considering the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath , we identify
the @xmath subgroup of @xmath , and equivalently write:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are normalized so that the @xmath analogue of
eqs. ( 4.10 ) reads:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In both cases, the @xmath charge has been conveniently fixed to @xmath
for the spinorial representation (and thus @xmath and also @xmath for
the @xmath vector and singlet, respectively; this is also the minimal
way to obtain an anomaly-free @xmath , that allows @xmath to be
naturally embedded into @xmath ).

It is a straightforward exercise to show that in order to accommodate
the SM quark multiplets with quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
there are only three solutions.

On the @xmath bases of Eq. ( 4.9 ) (and Eq. ( 4.11 ), respectively) one
obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is nothing but the “standard” embedding of the SM matter into
@xmath . Explicitly, @xmath in the LR basis (while @xmath in the @xmath
picture).

The second option is characterized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is usually denoted “flipped @xmath ” [ 69 , 70 ] embedding because
the SM hypercharge is spanned non-trivially on the @xmath subgroup ³ ³ 3
By definition, a flipped variant of a specific GUT model based on a
simple gauge group @xmath is obtained by embedding the SM hypercharge
nontrivially into the @xmath tensor product. of @xmath , @xmath .
Remarkably, from the @xmath perspective this setting corresponds to a
sign flip of the @xmath Cartan operator @xmath , namely @xmath which can
be viewed as a @xmath rotation in the @xmath algebra.

A third solution corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

denoted as “flipped @xmath ” [ 71 , 72 , 73 ] embedding of the SM
hypercharge. Notice, in particular, the fundamental difference between
the setting ( 4.15 ) with @xmath and the two previous cases ( 4.13 ) and
( 4.14 ) where @xmath does not play any role.

Analogously to what is found for @xmath , once we consider the
additional anomaly-free @xmath gauge factor, there are three
SM-compatible ways of embedding the physical @xmath into @xmath . Using
the @xmath compatible description they are respectively given by (see
Ref. [ 206 ] for a complete set of relations)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first assignment is the standard @xmath embedding in Eq. ( 4.9
). Out of @xmath possible pairs of @xmath and @xmath charges only @xmath
do correspond to the quantum numbers of the SM matter [ 206 ] . By
focussing on the flipped @xmath hypercharge embedding in Eq. ( 4.15 ),
the two SM-compatible @xmath assignments are those in Eqs. ( 4.17 )–(
4.18 ) (they are related by a sign flip in @xmath ). In what follows we
shall employ the @xmath assignment in Eq. ( 4.18 ).

##### Spinor and adjoint SM singlets in flipped @xmath

The active role of the @xmath generator in the SM hypercharge (and
@xmath ) identification within the flipped @xmath scenario has relevant
consequences for model building. In particular, the SM decomposition of
the @xmath representations change so that there are additional SM
singlets both in @xmath as well as in @xmath .

The pattern of SM singlet components in flipped @xmath has a simple and
intuitive interpretation from the @xmath perspective, where @xmath (with
the subscript indicating the @xmath charge) are contained in @xmath
while @xmath is a part of the @xmath adjoint @xmath . The point is that
the flipped SM hypercharge assignment makes the various SM singlets
within the complete @xmath representations “migrate” among their
different @xmath sub-multiplets; namely, the two SM singlets in the
@xmath of @xmath that in the standard embedding ( 4.13 ) reside in the
@xmath singlet @xmath and spinorial @xmath components both happen to
fall into just the single @xmath in the flipped @xmath case.

Similarly, there are two additional SM singlet directions in @xmath in
the flipped @xmath scenario, that, in the standard @xmath embedding,
belong to the @xmath components of the @xmath of @xmath , thus
accounting for a total of four adjoint SM singlets.

In Tables 4.3 , 4.4 and 4.5 we summarize the decomposition of the @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath representations of @xmath under the SM subgroup, in
both the standard and the flipped @xmath cases (and in both the LR and
@xmath descriptions). The pattern of the SM singlet components is
emphasized in boldface.

##### The supersymmetric flipped @xmath model

The presence of additional SM singlets (some of them transforming
non-trivially under @xmath ) in the lowest-dimensional representations
of the flipped realisation of the @xmath gauge symmetry provides the
ground for obtaining a viable symmetry breaking with a significantly
simplified renormalizable Higgs sector. Naively, one may guess that the
pair of VEVs in @xmath (plus another conjugated pair in @xmath to
maintain the required @xmath -flatness) might be enough to break the GUT
symmetry entirely, since one component transforms as a @xmath of @xmath
, while the other one is identified with the @xmath singlet (cf. Table
4.4 ). Notice that even in the presence of an additional
four-dimensional vacuum manifold of the adjoint Higgs multiplet, the
little group is determined by the @xmath VEVs since, due to the simple
form of the renormalizable superpotential @xmath -flatness makes the
VEVs of @xmath align with those of @xmath , providing just enough
freedom for them to develop non-zero values.

Unfortunately, this is still not enough to support the desired symmetry
breaking pattern. The two VEV directions in @xmath are equivalent to one
and a residual @xmath symmetry is always preserved by @xmath [ 195 ] .
Thus, even in the flipped @xmath setting the Higgs model spanned on
@xmath suffers from an @xmath lock analogous to the one of the standard
SUSY @xmath models with the same Higgs sector. This can be understood by
taking into account the freedom in choosing the basis in the @xmath
algebra so that the pair of VEVs within @xmath can be “rotated” onto a
single component, which can be then viewed as the direction of the
singlet in the decomposition of @xmath with respect to an @xmath
subgroup of the original @xmath gauge symmetry.

On the other hand, with a pair of interacting @xmath ’s the vacuum
directions in the two @xmath ’s need not be aligned and the intersection
of the two different invariant subalgebras (e.g. , standard and flipped
@xmath for a specific VEV configuration) leaves as a little group the
@xmath of the SM. @xmath -flatness makes then the adjoint VEVs ( @xmath
is the needed carrier of @xmath interaction at the renormalizable level)
aligned to the SM vacuum. Hence, as we will show in the next section,
@xmath defines the minimal renormalizable Higgs setting for the SUSY
flipped @xmath model. For comparison, let us reiterate that in the
standard renormalizable @xmath setting the SUSY vacuum is always @xmath
regardless of how many copies of @xmath are employed together with at
most a pair of adjoints.

##### The matter sector

Due to the flipped hypercharge assignment, the SM matter can no longer
be fully embedded into the 16-dimensional @xmath spinor, as in the
standard case. By inspecting Table 4.4 one can see that in the flipped
setting the pair of the SM sub-multiplets of @xmath transforming as
@xmath and @xmath is traded for an extra @xmath -like state and an extra
SM singlet. The former pair is instead found in the @xmath vector and
the singlet (the lepton doublet as well appears in the vector
multiplet). Thus, flipping spreads each of the SM matter generations
across @xmath of @xmath , which, by construction, can be viewed as the
complete 27-dimensional fundamental representation of @xmath . This
brings in a set of additional degrees of freedom, in particular @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where the subscript indicates
their @xmath origin. Notice, however, that these SM “exotics” can be
grouped into superheavy vector-like pairs and thus no extra states
appear in the low energy spectrum. Furthermore, the @xmath anomalies
associated with each of the @xmath matter multiplets cancel when summed
over the entire reducible representation @xmath . An elementary
discussion of the matter spectrum in this scenario is deferred to Sect.
4.6 .

#### 4.4.2 Supersymmetric vacuum

The most general renormalizable Higgs superpotential, made of the
representations @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the notation is explained in Appendix F.1 . Without
loss of generality we can take @xmath real by a global phase
redefinition, while @xmath (or @xmath ) can be diagonalized by a
bi-unitary transformation acting on the flavor indices of the @xmath and
the @xmath . Let us choose, for instance, @xmath , with @xmath real. We
label the SM-singlets contained in the @xmath ’s in the following way:
@xmath (only for flipped @xmath ) and @xmath (for all embeddings).

By plugging in the SM-singlet VEVs @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (cf. Appendix F.1 ), the
superpotential on the vacuum reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to retain SUSY down to the TeV scale we must require that the
GUT gauge symmetry breaking preserves supersymmetry. In Appendix F.2 we
work out the relevant @xmath - and @xmath -term equations. We find that
the existence of a nontrivial vacuum requires @xmath (and @xmath for
consistency) to be hermitian matrices. This is a consequence of the fact
that @xmath -term flatness for the flipped @xmath embedding implies
@xmath (see Eq. ( F.2 ) and the discussion next to it). With this
restriction the vacuum manifold is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are fixed in terms of the superpotential
parameters,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath      (4.23)
     @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The phase factors @xmath and @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of the relevant phases @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Eqs. ( 4.24
)–( 4.25 ) imply that for @xmath , Eq. ( 4.24 ) reduces to @xmath while
@xmath is undetermined (thus parametrizing an orbit of isomorphic
vacua).

In order to determine the little group of the vacuum manifold we
explicitly compute the corresponding gauge boson spectrum in Appendix
F.3 . We find that, for @xmath and/or @xmath , the vacuum in Eq. ( 4.4.2
) does preserve the SM algebra.

As already mentioned in the introduction this result is a consequence of
the misalignement of the spinor VEVs, that is made possible at the
renormalizable level by the interaction with the @xmath . If we choose
to align the @xmath and @xmath VEVs ( @xmath and @xmath ) or
equivalently, to decouple one of the Higgs spinors from the vacuum (
@xmath for instance) the little group is @xmath .

This result can be easily understood by observing that in the case with
just one pair of @xmath (or with two pairs of @xmath aligned) the two
SM-singlet directions, @xmath and @xmath , are connected by an @xmath
transformation. This freedom can be used to rotate one of the VEVs to
zero, so that the little group is standard or flipped @xmath , depending
on which of the two VEVs is zero.

In this respect, the Higgs adjoint plays the role of a renormalizable
agent that prevents the two pairs of spinor vacua from aligning with
each other along the @xmath direction. Actually, by decoupling the
adjoint Higgs, @xmath -flatness makes the (aligned) @xmath vacuum
trivial, as one verifies by inspecting the @xmath -terms in Eq. ( F.14 )
of Appendix F.2 for @xmath and @xmath .

The same result with just two pairs of @xmath Higgs multiplets is
obtained by adding non-renormalizable spinor interactions, at the cost
of introducing a potentially critical GUT-scale threshold hierarchy. In
the flipped @xmath setup here proposed the GUT symmetry breaking is
driven by the renormalizable part of the Higgs superpotential, thus
allowing naturally for a one-step matching with the minimal
supersymmetric extension of the SM (MSSM).

Before addressing the possible embedding of the model in a unified
@xmath scenario, we comment in brief on the naturalness of the
doublet-triplet mass splitting in flipped embeddings.

#### 4.4.3 Doublet-Triplet splitting in flipped models

Flipped embeddings offers a rather economical way to implement the
Doublet-Triplet (DT) splitting through the so called Missing Partner
(MP) mechanism [ 207 , 208 ] . In order to show the relevat features let
us consider first the flipped @xmath .

In order to implement the MP mechanism in the flipped @xmath the Higgs
superpotential is required to have the couplings

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts correspond to the @xmath quantum numbers, but not
the @xmath mass term. From Eq. ( 4.28 ) we extract the relevant terms
that lead to a mass for the Higgs triplets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the Higgs doublets, contained in the @xmath remain
massless since they have no partner in the @xmath to couple with.

The MP mechanism cannot be implemented in standard @xmath . The relevant
interactions, analogue of Eq. ( 4.28 ), are contained into the @xmath
invariant term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, however, gives a mass to the doublets as well, via the
superpotential terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Flipped @xmath , on the other hand, offers again the possibility of
implementing the MP mechanism. The prize to pay is the necessity of
avoiding a large number of terms, both bilinear and trilinear, in the
Higgs superpotential. In particular, the analogue of Eq. ( 4.28 ) is
given by the non-renormalizable term [ 200 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

By requiring that @xmath ( @xmath ) takes a VEV in the @xmath ( @xmath )
direction while @xmath ( @xmath ) in the @xmath ( @xmath ) component,
one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which closely resembles Eq. ( 4.28 ), leading to massive triplets and
massless doublets. In order to have minimally one pair of electroweak
doublets, one must further require that the @xmath mass matrix of the
@xmath ’s has rank equal to one. Due to the active role of
non-renormalizable operators, the Higgs triplets turn out to be two
orders of magnitude below the flipped @xmath scale, reintroducing the
issues discussed as in Sect. 4.3 .

An alternative possibility for naturally implementing the DT splitting
in @xmath is the Dimopoulos-Wilczek (DW) (or the missing VEV) mechanism
[ 209 ] . In order to explain the key features it is convenient to
decompose the relevant @xmath representations in terms of the @xmath
group

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . In the standard @xmath case (see [ 210 , 211 ]
and [ 212 ] for a recent discussion) one assumes that the @xmath
doublets are contained in two vector multiplets ( @xmath and @xmath ).
From the decompositions in Eq. ( 4.4.3 ) it’s easy to see that the
interaction @xmath (where the antisymmetry of @xmath requires the
presence of two @xmath ’s) leaves the @xmath doublets massless provided
that @xmath . For the naturalness of the setting other superpotential
terms must not appear, as a direct mass term for one of the @xmath ’s
and the interaction term @xmath . The latter aligns the SUSY vacuum in
the @xmath direction ( @xmath ), thus destabilizing the DW solution.

On the other hand, the absence of the @xmath interaction enlarges the
global symmetries of the scalar potential with the consequent appearance
of a set of light pseudo-Goldstone bosons in the spectrum. To avoid that
the adjoint and the spinor sector must be coupled in an indirect way by
adding extra fields and symmetries (see for instance [ 210 , 211 , 212 ]
).

Our flipped @xmath setting offers the rather economical possibility of
embedding the electroweak doublets directly into the spinors without the
need of @xmath (see Sect. 4.6 ). As a matter of fact, there exists a
variant of the DW mechanism where the @xmath doublets, contained in the
@xmath , are kept massless by the condition @xmath (see e.g. [ 213 ] ).
However, in order to satisfy in a natural way the @xmath -flatness for
the configuration @xmath , again a contrived superpotential is required,
when compared to that in Eq. ( 4.19 ). In conclusion, we cannot
implement in our simple setup any of the natural mechanisms so far
proposed and we have to resort to the standard minimal fine-tuning.

### 4.5 Minimal @xmath embedding

The natural and minimal unified embedding of the flipped @xmath model is
@xmath with one @xmath and two pairs of @xmath in the Higgs sector. The
three matter families are contained in three @xmath chiral superfields.
The decomposition of the @xmath and @xmath representations under the SM
quantum numbers is detailed in Tables 4.6 and 4.7 , according to the
different hypercharge embeddings.

In analogy with the flipped @xmath discussion, we shall label the
SM-singlets contained in the @xmath as @xmath and @xmath .

As we are going to show, the little group of @xmath is SUSY- @xmath in
the renormalizable case. This is just a consequence of the larger @xmath
algebra. In order to obtain a SM vacuum, we need to resort to a
non-renormalizable scenario that allows for a disentanglement of the
@xmath directions, and, consistently, for a flipped @xmath intermediate
stage. We shall make the case for an @xmath gauge symmetry broken near
the Planck scale, leaving an effective flipped @xmath scenario down to
the @xmath GeV.

#### 4.5.1 @xmath and @xmath into @xmath

Interpreting the different possible definitions of the SM hypercharge in
terms of the @xmath maximal subalgebra @xmath , one finds that the three
assignments in Eqs. ( 4.13 )–( 4.15 ) are each orthogonal to the three
possible ways of embedding @xmath (with @xmath ) into @xmath [ 206 ] .
Working in the Gell-Mann basis (cf. Appendix G.1 ) the @xmath Cartan
generators read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which defines the @xmath embedding. The @xmath and @xmath embeddings are
obtained from Eqs. ( 4.35 )–( 4.36 ) by flipping respectively @xmath and
@xmath . Considering the standard and flipped @xmath embeddings of the
hypercharge in Eq. ( 4.13 ) and Eq. ( 4.15 ), in the @xmath notation
they are respectively given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, the three SM-compatible assignments of @xmath in Eqs. (
4.16 )–( 4.18 ) are as well orthogonal to the three possible ways of
embedding @xmath into @xmath . However, once we fix the embedding of the
hypercharge we have only two consistent choices for @xmath available.
They correspond to the pairs where @xmath and @xmath are not orthogonal
to the same @xmath [ 206 ] .

For the standard hypercharge embedding, the @xmath assignment in Eq. (
4.16 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the @xmath assignment in Eq. ( 4.18 ), consistent with the flipped
@xmath embedding of the hypercharge, reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.5.2 The @xmath vacuum manifold

The most general renormalizable Higgs superpotential, made of the
representations @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The couplings @xmath and @xmath are totally symmetric in
@xmath , so that each one of them contains four complex parameters.
Without loss of generality we can take @xmath real by a phase
redefinition of the superpotential, while @xmath can be diagonalized by
a bi-unitary transformation acting on the indices of the @xmath and the
@xmath . We take, @xmath , with @xmath real. Notice that @xmath and
@xmath are not relevant for the present study, since the corresponding
invariants vanish on the SM orbit.

In the standard hypercharge embedding of Eq. ( 4.37 ), the SM-preserving
vacuum directions are parametrized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are 13 SM-singlet VEVs (see Appendix G.1 for
notation). Given the @xmath expression in Eq. ( 4.39 ) and the fact that
we can rewrite the Cartan part of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

we readily identify the standard @xmath VEVs used in the previous
section with the present @xmath notation as @xmath , @xmath , while
@xmath is the @xmath singlet VEV in @xmath ( @xmath ).

We can also write the vacuum manifold in such a way that it is
manifestly invariant under the flipped @xmath hypercharge in Eq. ( 4.38
). This can be obtained by flipping @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.42 )–( 4.44 ),
yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we recognize the @xmath generator defined in Eq. ( 4.40 ). Notice
that the Cartan subalgebra is actually invariant both under the standard
and the flipped @xmath form of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

thus making the use of @xmath or @xmath directions in the flipped or
standard vacuum manifold completely equivalent. We can now complete the
identification of the notation used for @xmath with that of the flipped
@xmath model studied in Sect. 4.4 , by @xmath .

From the @xmath stand point, the analyses of the standard and flipped
vacuum manifolds given, respectively, in Eqs. ( 4.42 )–( 4.44 ) and
Eqs. ( 4.46 )–( 4.48 ), lead, as expected, to the same results with the
roles of standard and flipped hypercharge interchanged (see Appendix G
). In order to determine the vacuum little group we may therefore
proceed with the explicit discussion of the standard setting.

By writing the superpotential in Eq. ( 4.41 ) on the SM-preserving
vacuum in Eqs. ( 4.42 )–( 4.44 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

When applying the constraints coming from @xmath - and @xmath -term
equations, a nontrivial vacuum exists if @xmath and @xmath are
hermitian, as in the flipped @xmath case. This is a consequence of the
fact that @xmath -flatness implies @xmath (see Appendix G.2 for
details).

After imposing all the constraints due to @xmath - and @xmath -flatness,
the @xmath vacuum manifold can be finally written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are fixed in terms of superpotential parameters,
as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath      (4.55)
     @xmath      (4.56)
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The phase factors @xmath and @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Appendix G.3 we show that the little group of the the vacuum manifold
in Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) is @xmath .

It is instructive to look at the configuration in which one pair of
@xmath , let us say @xmath , is decoupled. This case can be obtained by
setting @xmath in the relevant equations. In agreement with Ref. [ 201 ]
, we find that @xmath turns out to be undetermined by the @xmath -term
constraints, thus parametrizing a set of isomorphic solutions. We may
therefore take in Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) @xmath and show that the little group
corresponds in this case to @xmath (see Appendix G.3 ), thus recovering
the result of Ref. [ 201 ] .

The same result is obtained in the case in which the vacua of the two
copies of @xmath are aligned, i.e. @xmath and @xmath . Analogously to
the discussion in Sect. 4.4.2 , @xmath is in this case undetermined and
it can be set to zero, that leads us again to the one @xmath case, with
@xmath as the preserved algebra.

These results are intuitively understood by considering that in case
there is just one pair of @xmath (or the vacua of the two pairs of
@xmath are aligned) the SM-singlet directions @xmath and @xmath are
connected by an @xmath transformation which can be used to rotate one of
the VEVs to zero, so that the little group is locked to an @xmath
configuration. On the other hand, two misaligned @xmath VEVs in the
@xmath plane lead (just by inspection of the VEV quantum numbers) to an
@xmath little group.

In analogy with the flipped @xmath case, the Higgs adjoint plays the
role of a renormalizable agent that prevents the two pairs of @xmath
from aligning within each other along the @xmath vacuum. Actually, by
decoupling the adjoint Higgs, @xmath -flatness makes the (aligned)
@xmath vacuum trivial, as one verifies by inspecting the @xmath -terms
in Eq. ( G.18 ) of Appendix G.2 for @xmath and @xmath .

In conclusion, due to the larger @xmath algebra, the vacuum little group
remains @xmath , never landing to the SM. In this respect we guess that
the authors of Ref. [ 214 ] , who advocate a @xmath Higgs sector,
implicitly refer to a non-renormalizable setting.

#### 4.5.3 Breaking the residual @xmath via effective interactions

In this section we consider the possibility of breaking the residual
@xmath symmetry of the renormalizable @xmath vacuum through the
inclusion of effective adjoint Higgs interactions near the Planck scale
@xmath . We argue that an effective flipped @xmath may survive down to
the @xmath GeV scale, with thresholds spread in between @xmath and
@xmath in such a way not to affect proton stability and lead to
realistic neutrino masses.

The relevant part of the non-renormalizable superpotential at the @xmath
scale @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the ellipses stand for terms which include powers of the @xmath ’s
representations and @xmath operators. Projecting Eq. ( 4.60 ) along the
SM-singlet vacuum directions in Eqs. ( 4.42 )–( 4.44 ) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.61)
  -- -- -- --------

One verifies that including the non-renormalizable contribution in the
@xmath -term equations allows for a disentanglement of the @xmath and
@xmath VEVs, so that the breaking to the SM is achieved. In particular,
the SUSY vacuum allows for an intermediate @xmath stage (that is
prevented by the simple renormalizable vacuum manifold in Eq. ( 4.5.2
)). By including Eq. ( 4.61 ) in the @xmath -term equations, we can
consistently neglect all VEVs but the @xmath singlet @xmath , that reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is therefore possible to envisage a scenario where the @xmath
symmetry is broken at a scale @xmath leaving an effective flipped @xmath
scenario down to the @xmath GeV, as discussed in Sect. 4.4 . All
remaining SM singlet VEVs are contained in @xmath that are the only
Higgs multiplets required to survive at the @xmath scale. It is clear
that this is a plausibility argument and that a detailed study of the
@xmath vacuum and related thresholds is needed to ascertain the
feasibility of the scenario.

The non-renormalizable breaking of @xmath through an intermediate @xmath
stage driven by @xmath , while allowing (as we shall discuss next) for a
consistent unification pattern, avoids the issues arising within a
one-step breaking. As a matter of fact, the colored triplets responsible
for @xmath proton decay live naturally at the @xmath scale, while the
masses of the SM-singlet neutrino states which enter the "extended"
type-I seesaw formula are governed by the @xmath (see the discussion in
Sect. 4.6 ).

#### 4.5.4 A unified @xmath scenario

Let us examine the plausibility of the two-step gauge unification
scenario discussed in the previous subsection. We consider here just a
simplified description that neglects thresholds effects. As a first
quantitative estimate of the running effects on the @xmath couplings let
us introduce the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath unification scale and @xmath is the @xmath
gauge coupling. The @xmath charge has been properly normalized to @xmath
. The one-loop beta coefficients for the superfield content @xmath are
found to be @xmath and @xmath .

Taking, for the sake of an estimate, a typical MSSM value for the GUT
coupling @xmath , for @xmath one finds @xmath .

In order to match the @xmath couplings with the measured SM couplings,
we consider as a typical setup the two-loop MSSM gauge running with a 1
TeV SUSY scale. The (one-loop) matching of the non abelian gauge
couplings (in dimensional reduction) at the scale @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the properly normalized hypercharge @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have implemented the relation among the properly normalized U(1)
generators (see Eq. ( 4.15 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

The result of this simple exercise is depicted in Fig. 4.2 .

Barring detailed threshold effects, it is interesting to see that the
qualitative behavior of the relevant gauge couplings is, indeed,
consistent with the basic picture of the flipped @xmath embedded into a
genuine @xmath GUT emerging below the Planck scale.

### 4.6 Towards a realistic flavor

The aim of this section is to provide an elementary discussion of the
main features and of the possible issues arising in the Yukawa sector of
the flipped @xmath model under consideration. In order to keep the
discussion simple we shall consider a basic Higgs contents with just one
pair of @xmath . As a complement of the tables given in Sect. 4.4 , we
summarize the SM-decomposition of the representations relevant to the
Yukawa sector in Table 4.8 .

For what follows, we refer to [ 215 , 216 , 217 , 218 ] and references
therein where the basic features of models with extended matter sector
are discussed in the @xmath and the standard @xmath context. For a
scenario employing flipped @xmath (with an additional anomalous @xmath )
see Ref. [ 200 ] .

#### 4.6.1 Yukawa sector of the flipped @xmath model

Considering for simplicity just one pair of spinor Higgs multiplets and
imposing a @xmath matter-parity (negative for matter and positive for
Higgs superfields) the Yukawa superpotential (up to @xmath operators)
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where family indexes are understood. Notice (cf. Table 4.9 ) that due to
the flipped embedding the up-quarks receive mass at the renormalizable
level, while all the other fermion masses need Planck-suppressed
effective contributions in order to achieve a realistic texture.

##### Mass matrices

In order to avoid the recursive @xmath factors we introduce the
following notation for the relevant VEVs (see Table 4.8 ): @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -scale mass matrices for the matter
fields sharing the same unbroken @xmath quantum numbers can be extracted
readily by inspecting the SM decomposition of the relevant @xmath matter
multiplets in the flipped SO(10) setting:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, for convenience, we redefined @xmath and @xmath . The basis
@xmath is used for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
The Majorana mass matrix @xmath is written in the basis @xmath .

##### Effective mass matrices

Below the @xmath scale, the exotic (vector) part of the matter spectrum
decouples and one is left with the three standard MSSM families. In what
follows, we shall use the calligraphic symbol @xmath for the @xmath
effective MSSM fermion mass matrices in order to distinguish them from
the mass matrices in Eqs. ( 4.6.1 )–( 4.69 ). i) Up-type quarks: The
effective up-quark mass matrix coincides with the mass matrix in Eq. (
4.6.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

ii) Down-type quarks and charged leptons: The @xmath mass matrices in
Eqs. ( 4.6.1 )–( 4.68 ) can be brought into a convenient form by means
of the transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are @xmath unitary matrices such that @xmath and @xmath are
block-triangular

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.72)
  -- -- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes weak scale entries. This corresponds to the change
of basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the right-handed (RH) down quark and left-handed (LH) charged lepton
sectors, respectively. The upper components of the rotated vectors (
@xmath and @xmath ) correspond to the light MSSM degrees of freedom.
Since the residual rotations acting on the LH down quark and RH charged
lepton components, that transform the @xmath matrices into fully
block-diagonal forms, are extremely tiny (of @xmath ), the @xmath
upper-left blocks (ULB) in Eq. ( 4.72 ) can be identified with the
effective light down-type quark and charged lepton mass matrices, i.e.,
@xmath and @xmath .

It is instructive to work out the explicit form of the unitary matrices
@xmath and @xmath . For the sake of simplicity, in what follows we shall
stick to the single family case and assume the reality of all the
relevant parameters. Dropping same order Yukawa factors as well, one
writes Eqs. ( 4.6.1 )–( 4.68 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the matrices @xmath and @xmath are explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

By applying Eq. ( 4.71 ) we get that @xmath and @xmath have the form in
Eq. ( 4.72 ) provided that @xmath . In particular, with a specific
choice of the global phase, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the mass eigenstates (up to @xmath effects) are finally given by
(see Eq. ( 4.73 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the upper (SM) components have mass of @xmath and the lower
(exotic) ones of @xmath .

iii) Neutrinos: Working again in the same approximation, the lightest
eigenvalue of @xmath in Eq. ( 4.69 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is within the ballpark of the current lower bounds on the light
neutrino masses set by the oscillation experiments.

It is also useful to examine the composition of the lightest neutrino
eigenstate @xmath . At the leading order, the light neutrino eigenvector
obeys the equation @xmath which, in the components @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath      (4.82)
     @xmath      (4.83)
     @xmath      (4.84)
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inspection, Eqs. ( 4.84 )–( 4.85 ) are compatible only if @xmath ,
while Eqs. ( 4.81 )–( 4.82 ) imply @xmath . Thus, the non-vanishing
components of the neutrino eigenvector are just @xmath and @xmath . From
Eq. ( 4.83 ), up to a phase factor, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the lightest neutrino eigenstate @xmath and the lightest
charged lepton show the same admixtures of the corresponding electroweak
doublet components. Actually, this can be easily understood by taking
the limit @xmath in which the preserved @xmath gauge symmetry imposes
the same @xmath transformation on the @xmath components. Explicitly,
given the form of @xmath in Eq. ( 4.75 ), one obtains in the rotated
basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have taken @xmath . @xmath is defined on the basis @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

In conclusion, we see that the "light" eigenstate @xmath decouples from
the heavy spectrum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath      (4.90)
     @xmath      (4.91)
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two Majorana neutrinos of intermediate mass,
@xmath GeV, while the states @xmath and @xmath form a pseudo-Dirac
neutrino of mass of @xmath GeV.

Notice finally that the charged current @xmath coupling is unaffected
(cf. Eq. ( 4.86 ) with Eq. ( 4.78 )), contrary to the claim in Refs. [
215 ] and [ 216 ] , that are based on the unjustified assumption that
the physical electron @xmath is predominantly made of @xmath .

## Outlook: the quest for the minimal nonsupersymmetric @xmath theory

In the previous chapters we argued that an Higgs sector based on @xmath
has all the ingredients to be the minimal nonsupersymmetric @xmath
theory. We are going to conclude this thesis by mentioning some
preliminary results of ongoing work and future developments.

The first issue to be faced is the minimization of the scalar potential.
Though there exist detailed studies of the scalar spectrum of
nonsupersymmetric @xmath Higgs sectors based on @xmath [ 219 , 220 ] ,
such a survey is missing in the @xmath case. The reason can be simply
attributed the tree level no-go which was plaguing the class of models
with just the adjoint governing the first stage of the GUT breaking [ 56
, 57 , 58 , 59 ] . On the other hand the results obtained in Chapter 3
show that the situation is drastically changed at the quantum level,
making the study of the @xmath scalar potential worth of a detailed
investigation.

We have undertaken such a computation in the case of the @xmath scalar
potential and some preliminary results are already available [ 74 ] .
The first technical trouble in such a case has to do with the
group-theoretical treatment of the @xmath , especially as far as
concerns the @xmath invariants. The presence of several invariants in
the scalar potential is reflected in the fact that there are many SM
sub-multiplets into the @xmath reducible representation and each one of
them feels the @xmath breaking in a different way. Indeed the number of
real parameters is 16 and apparently, if compared with the 9 of the
@xmath system (cf. e.g. Eqs. ( 3.4 )–( 3.5 )), one would think that
predictivity is compromised. However, out of these 16 couplings, 3 are
fixed by the stationary equations, 3 contribute only to the mass of
SM-singlet states and 3 do not contribute at all to the scalar masses.
Thus we are left with 7 real parameters governing the 22 scalar states
that transform non-trivially under the SM gauge group. After imposing
the gauge hierarchy @xmath , required by gauge unification, the
GUT-scale spectrum is controlled just by 4 real parameters while the
intermediate-scale spectrum is controlled by the remaining 3. Notice
also that these couplings are not completely free since they must
fulfill the vacuum constraints, like e.g. the positivity of the scalar
spectrum.

The message to take home is that in spite of the complexity of the
@xmath system one cannot move the scalar states at will. This can be
considered a nice counterexample to the criticism developed in [ 176 ]
about the futility of high-precision @xmath calculations.

Actually the knowledge of the scalar spectrum is a crucial information
in view of the (two-loop) study of gauge coupling unification. The
analysis of the intermediate scales performed in Chapter 2 was based on
the ESH [ 82 ] : at every stage of the symmetry breaking only those
scalars are present that develop a VEV at the current or the subsequent
levels of the spontaneous symmetry breaking, while all the other states
are clustered at the GUT scale ⁴ ⁴ 4 With the spectrum at hand one can
verify explicitly that this assumption is equivalent to the requirement
of the minimal number of fine-tunings to be imposed onto the scalar
potential, as advocated in full generality by [ 83 ] . . In this respect
the two-loop values obtained for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the case
of the two phenomenologically allowed breaking chains were

-   @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Taken at face value both the scenarios are in trouble either because of
a too small @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath case) or a too small @xmath (
@xmath case). Strictly speaking the lower bound on the @xmath breaking
scale depends from the details of the Yukawa sector, but it would be
natural to require @xmath . On the other hand the lower bound on the
unification scale is sharper since it comes from the @xmath gauge
induced proton decay. This constraint yields something like @xmath .

Thus in order to restore the agreement with the phenomenology one has to
go beyond the ESH and consider thresholds effects, i.e. states which are
not exactly clustered at the GUT scale and that can contribute to the
running. Let us stress that whenever we pull down a state from the GUT
scale the consistence with the vacuum constraints must be checked and it
is not obvious a priori that we can do it.

For definiteness let us analyze the @xmath case. A simple one-loop
analytical survey of the gauge running equations yields the following
closed solutions for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the properly normalized gauge couplings at the @xmath
scale, while @xmath and @xmath are respectively the one-loop
beta-functions for the SM and the @xmath gauge groups.

The values of the gauge couplings are such that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and, assuming the field content of the ESH (cf. e.g. Table 2.2 ), we
have @xmath . Then as long as @xmath remains negative when lowering new
states below the GUT scale, the fact that the matter fields contribute
positively to the beta-functions leads us to conclude that @xmath is
increased (reduced) by the states charged under @xmath ( @xmath or
@xmath or @xmath ).

Thus, in order maximize the raise of @xmath , we must select among the
@xmath sub-multiplets of @xmath those fields with @xmath . The best
candidate turns out to be the scalar multiplet @xmath . By pulling this
color sextet down to the scale @xmath , we get at one-loop

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is closer to a phenomenologically reasonable benchmark. In order
for the color sextet to be lowered we have to impose a fine-tuning which
goes beyond that needed for the gauge hierarchy. It is anyway remarkable
that the vacuum dynamics allows such a configuration. Another allowed
threshold that helps in increasing @xmath is given by the scalar triplet
@xmath which can be eventually pulled down till to the TeV scale. A full
treatment of the threshold patterns is still ongoing [ 74 ] .

What about the addition of a @xmath in the scalar potential? Though it
brings in many new couplings it does not change the bulk of the @xmath
spectrum. The reason is simply because the @xmath can develop only
electroweak VEVs which are negligible when compared with the GUT
(intermediate) scale one of the @xmath ( @xmath ). Thus we expect that
adding a @xmath will not invalidate the conclusions about the vacuum of
the @xmath scalar potential, including the threshold patterns. Of course
that will contribute to the mass matrices of the isospin doublets and
color triplets which are crucial for other issues like the
doublet-triplet splitting and the scalar induced @xmath proton decay.

The other aspect of the theory to be addressed is the Yukawa sector.
Such a program has been put forward in Ref. [ 141 ] . The authors focus
on renormalizable models with combinations of @xmath and @xmath (or
@xmath ) in the Yukawa sector. They work out, neglecting the first
generation masses, some interesting analytic correlations between the
neutrino and the charged fermion sectors.

In a recent paper [ 221 ] the full three generation study of such
settings has been numerically addressed. The authors claim that the
model with @xmath cannot fit the fermions, while the setting with @xmath
and @xmath yields an excellent fit in the case of type-I seesaw
dominance.

A subtle feature, as pointed out in [ 141 ] , is that the @xmath must be
complex. The reason being that in the real case one predicts @xmath (at
least when working in the two heaviest generations limit and with real
parameters). A complex @xmath implies then the presence of one
additional Yukawa coupling. In turn this entails a loss of predictivity
in the Yukawa sector when compared to the supersymmetric case. The
proposed way out advocated by the authors of Ref. [ 141 ] was to
consider a PQ symmmetry, relevant for dark matter and the strong CP
problem, which forbids that extra Yukawa.

Sticking to a pure @xmath approach, some predictivity could be also
recovered working with three Yukawas but requiring only one Higgs
doublet in the effective theory, as a preliminary numerical study with
three generations shows [ 151 ] .

The comparison between the @xmath scenario and the next-to-minimal one
with a @xmath in place of a @xmath is also worth a comment. At first
sight the @xmath seems a good option as well in view of the two-loop
values emerging from the unification analysis of Chapter 2 : @xmath and
@xmath . However the choice between the @xmath and the @xmath leads to
crucially distinctive features.

The first issue has to do with the nature of the light Higgs. In this
respect the @xmath plays a fundamental role in the Yukawa sector where
it provides the necessary breaking of the down-quark/charged-lepton mass
degeneracy (cf. Eqs. ( 1.181 )–( 1.182 )). For this to work one needs a
reasonably large admixture between the bi-doublets @xmath and @xmath .
In the model with the @xmath this mixing is guaranteed by the
interaction @xmath , but there is not such a similar invariant in the
case of the @xmath . Though there always exists a mixing term of the
type @xmath , this yields a suppressed mixing due to the unification
constraint @xmath .

The other peculiar difference between the models with @xmath and @xmath
has to do with the interplay between type-I and type-II seesaw. As
already observed in Sect. 1.5.3 one expects that in theories in which
the breaking of the D-parity is decoupled from that of @xmath the
type-II seesaw is naturally suppressed by a factor @xmath with respect
to the type-I. Whilst the @xmath leads to this last class of models, the
@xmath preserves the D-parity which is subsequently broken by the @xmath
together with @xmath . The dominance of type-I seesaw in the case of the
@xmath has a double role: it makes the Yukawa sector more predictive and
it does not lead to @xmath - @xmath unification, which is badly violated
without supersymmetry.

So where do we stand at the moment? In order to say something sensible
one has to test the consistency of the @xmath vacuum against gauge
unification and the SM fermion spectrum. If the vacuum turned out to be
compatible with the phenomenological requirements it would be then
important to perform an accurate estimate of the proton decay braching
ratios. As a matter of fact nonsupersymmetric GUTs offer the possibility
of making definite predictions for proton decay, especially in the
presence of symmetric Yukawa matrices, as in the @xmath case, where the
main theoretical uncertainty lies in the mass of the leptoquark vector
bosons, subject to gauge unification constraints.

Though the path is still long we hope to have contributed to a little
step towards the quest for the minimal @xmath theory.

## Appendix A One- and Two-loop beta coefficients

In this appendix we report the one- and two-loop @xmath -coefficients
used in the numerical analysis of Chapter 2 . The calculation of the
@xmath mixing coefficients and of the Yukawa contributions to the gauge
coupling renormalization is detailed in Apps. A.1 and A.2 respectively.

### a.1 Beta-functions with @xmath mixing

The basic building blocks of the one- and two-loop @xmath -functions for
the abelian couplings with @xmath mixing, cf. Eqs. ( 2.2.2 )–( 2.14 ),
can be conveniently written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions of the abelian charges @xmath and,
at two loops, also of the gauge couplings. In the case of interest, i.e.
for two abelian charges @xmath and @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

All other contributions in Eq. ( 2.2.2 ) and Eq. ( 2.14 ) can be easily
obtained from Eqs. ( A.3 )–( A.1 ) by including the appropriate group
factors. It is worth mentioning that for complete @xmath multiplets,
@xmath for n and m odd (with @xmath at one-loop and @xmath at two-loop
level).

By evaluating Eqs. ( A.3 )–( A.1 ) for the particle content relevant to
the @xmath stages in chains VIII-XII, and by substituting into Eqs. (
2.2.2 )–( 2.14 ), one finally obtains

-   Chains VIII-XII with @xmath in the Higgs sector:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.5)
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Chains VIII-XII with @xmath in the Higgs sector:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (A.6)
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- -------

By setting @xmath and @xmath in Eqs. ( A.5 )–( A.6 ) one obtains the
one- and two-loop @xmath -coefficients in the diagonal approximation, as
reported in Table A.3 . The latter are used in Figs. 2.1 – 2.2 for the
only purpose of exhibiting the effect of the abelian mixing in the gauge
coupling renormalization.

### a.2 Yukawa contributions

The Yukawa couplings enter the gauge @xmath -functions first at the
two-loop level, cf. Eq. ( 2.2.1 ) and Eq. ( 2.2.2 ). Since the notation
adopted in Eqs. ( 2.5 )–( 2.6 ) is rather concise we shall detail the
structure of Eq. ( 2.5 ), paying particular attention to the calculation
of the @xmath coefficients in Eq. ( 2.19 ).

The trace on the RHS of Eq. ( 2.5 ) is taken over all indices of the
fields entering the Yukawa interaction in Eq. ( 2.6 ). Considering for
instance the up-quark Yukawa sector of the SM the term @xmath (with
@xmath ) can be explicitly written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath label flavour, @xmath and @xmath
indices respectively, while @xmath denotes the @xmath -dimensional
Kronecker @xmath symbol. Thus, the Yukawa coupling entering Eq. ( 2.5 )
is a 6-dimensional object with the index structure @xmath . The
contribution of Eq. ( A.7 ) to the three @xmath coefficients
(conveniently separated into two terms corresponding to the fermionic
representations @xmath and @xmath ) can then be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The sum can be factorized into the flavour space part @xmath times the
trace over the gauge contractions @xmath where @xmath . For the SM gauge
group (with the properly normalized hypercharge) one then obtains @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , that coincide with the values given in the first
column of the matrix (B.5) in Refs. [ 182 , 183 , 184 ] .

All of the @xmath coefficients as well as the structures of the relevant
@xmath -tensors are reported in Table A.7 .

## Appendix B @xmath algebra representations

We briefly collect here the conventions for the @xmath algebra
representations adopted in Chapter 3 .

### b.1 Tensorial representations

The hermitian and antisymmetric generators of the fundamental
representation of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and the square bracket stands for anti-symmetrization. They
satisfy the @xmath commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with normalization

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fundamental (vector) representation @xmath @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the infinitesimal parameters of the transformation.

The adjoint representation is then obtained as the antisymmetric part of
the 2-index @xmath tensor @xmath @xmath and transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that @xmath and @xmath .

### b.2 Spinorial representations

Following the notation of Ref. [ 59 ] , the @xmath generators @xmath (
@xmath ) acting on the 32-dimensional spinor @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s satisfy the Clifford algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

An explicit representation given by [ 222 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath matrices are defined as ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are given by the
following tensor products of @xmath matrices

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stand for the ordinary Pauli matrices. Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , the algebra ( B.6 ) is represented by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Cartan subalgebra is spanned over @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . One can construct a chiral projector @xmath , that splits
the 32-dimensional spinor @xmath into a pair of irreducible
16-dimensional components:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is readily verified that @xmath has the following properties: @xmath
, @xmath and hence @xmath . Introducing the chiral projectors @xmath ,
the irreducible chiral spinors are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the @xmath charge conjugation matrix (see
next subsection). Analogously, we can use the chiral projectors to write
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the properties @xmath , @xmath and @xmath were used.

Finally, matching Eq. ( B.15 ) with Eq. ( B.12 ), one identifies the
hermitian generators @xmath and @xmath acting on the @xmath and @xmath
spinors, respectively, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with normalization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is convenient to trace out the @xmath -matrices in the invariants
built off the adjoint representation in the natural basis @xmath . From
the traces of two and four @xmath -matrices one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to maintain a consistent notation, from now on we shall label
the indices of the spinorial generators from 1 to 10, and use the
following mapping from the basis of Ref. [ 59 ] into the basis of Ref. [
51 ] for both vectors and tensors: @xmath .

### b.3 The charge conjugation @xmath

According to the notation of the previous subsection, the spinor @xmath
and its complex conjugate @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The charge conjugated spinor @xmath obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account Eq. ( B.2 ), a formal solution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in our basis yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence @xmath .

### b.4 The Cartan generators

It is convenient to write the five @xmath Cartan generators in the
@xmath basis, where the generator @xmath is @xmath . For the spinorial
representation we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the @xmath ’s act on @xmath , the @xmath ’s (characterized by a
sign flip in @xmath ) act on @xmath . The normalization of the Cartan
generators is chosen according to the usual SM convention. A
GUT-consistent normalization across all generators is obtained by
rescaling @xmath (and @xmath ) by @xmath .

In order to obtain the physical generators acting on the fundamental
representation it is enough to replace @xmath in Eq. ( B.25 ) by @xmath
.

With this information at hand, one can identify the spinor components of
@xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a self-explanatory SM notation has been naturally extended into
the scalar sector. In particular, the relative signs in Eqs. ( B.26 )–(
B.27 ) arise from the charge conjugation of the @xmath and @xmath
components of @xmath and @xmath .

The standard and flipped embeddings of @xmath commute with two different
Cartan generators, @xmath and @xmath respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the relation @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the weak hypercharge generator.

As a consequence, the standard @xmath contains the SM group, while
@xmath has a subgroup @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath and of @xmath the weak hypercharge reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the explicit form of the Cartan generators in the vector
representation one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The vacuum configurations @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 3.1.2 ) are aligned
with the @xmath and the @xmath generator respectively, thus preserving
@xmath and @xmath , respectively.

## Appendix C Vacuum stability

The boundedness of the scalar potential is needed in order to ensure the
global stability of the vacuum. The requirement that the potential is
bounded from below sets non trivial constraints on the quartic
interactions. We do not provide a fully general analysis for the whole
field space, but limit ourselves to the constraints obtained for the
given vacuum directions.

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

    From the quartic part of the scalar potential @xmath one obtains

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Notice that the @xmath term vanishes along the @xmath vacuum
    direction.

-   @xmath , @xmath

    Along this direction the quartic potential @xmath reads

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    which implies

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

From now on, we focus on the @xmath case, cf. Sect. 3.3.6 .

-   @xmath , @xmath

    On this orbit the quartic part of the scalar potential reads

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Taking into account that the scalar mass spectrum implies @xmath ,
    we obtain

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

    At the tree level this VEV configuration does not correspond to a
    minimum of the potential. It is nevertheless useful to inspect the
    stability conditions along this direction. Since

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    boundedness is obtained, independently on the sign of @xmath , when

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

    In analogy with the previous case we have

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    which implies the constraint

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (C.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    In the case @xmath the constraint in Eq. ( C.5 ) provides the global
    lower bound on @xmath .

## Appendix D Tree level mass spectra

### d.1 Gauge bosons

Given the covariant derivatives of the scalar fields

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (D.1)
        @xmath      (D.2)
        @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

and the canonically normalizaed kinetic terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

one may write the field dependent mass matrices for the gauge bosons as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stand for ordered pairs of indices, and @xmath ( @xmath )
with @xmath are the generators of the fundamental (spinor)
representation (see Appendix B ).

Eqs. ( D.6 )–( D.7 ), evaluated on the generic ( @xmath ) vacuum, yield
the following contributions to the tree level gauge boson masses:

#### d.1.1 Gauge bosons masses from 45

Focusing on Eq. ( D.4 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.8)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where the SM singlet matrix is defined on the basis ( @xmath , @xmath ),
with the superscript referring to the original @xmath representation and
the subscript to the @xmath origin (see Table 4.5 ).

Note that, in the limits of standard @xmath @xmath , flipped @xmath
@xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ) vacua, we have
respectively 25, 25, 15 and 19 massless gauge bosons, as expected.

#### d.1.2 Gauge bosons masses from 16

The contributions from Eq. ( D.5 ) read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.9)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last matrix is again spanned over ( @xmath , @xmath ),
yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number of vanishing entries corresponds to the dimension of the
@xmath algebra preserved by the @xmath VEV @xmath .

Summing together the @xmath and @xmath contributions, we recognize 12
massless states, that correspond to the SM gauge bosons.

### d.2 Anatomy of the scalar spectrum

In order to understand the dependence of the scalar masses on the
various parameters in the Higgs potential we detail the scalar mass
spectrum in the relevant limits of the scalar couplings, according to
the discussion on the accidental global symmetries in Sect. 3.3 .

#### d.2.1 45 only

Applying the stationary conditions in Eqs. ( 3.12 )–( 3.13 ), to the
flipped @xmath vacuum with @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.12)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

and, as expected, the spectrum exhibits 20 WGB and 24 PGB whose mass
depends on @xmath only. The required positivity of the scalar masses
gives the constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equation coincides with the constraint coming from the
stability of the scalar potential (see Eq. ( C.5 ) in Appendix C ).

#### d.2.2 16 only

When only the @xmath part of the scalar potential is considered the
symmetry is spontaneously broken to the standard @xmath gauge group.
Applying the stationary Eq. ( 3.14 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.14)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

in the ( @xmath , @xmath ) basis, with the subscripts referring to the
standard @xmath origin, that yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and as expected we count 21 WGB and 10 PGB modes whose mass depends on
@xmath only. The required positivity of the scalar masses leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equation coincides with the constraint coming from the
stability of the scalar potential (see Eq. ( C.3 ) in Appendix C ).

#### d.2.3 Mixed 45-16 spectrum (@xmath)

In the general case the unbroken symmetry is the SM group. Applying
first the two stationary conditions in Eq. ( 3.12 ) and Eq. ( 3.14 ) we
find the spectrum below. The @xmath matrices are spanned over the (
@xmath , @xmath ) basis whereas the @xmath SM singlet matrix is given in
the ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) basis.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.17)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.18)
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (D.19)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

By applying the remaining stationary condition in Eq. ( 3.13 ) one
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.21)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eqs. ( D.2.3 )–( D.21 ) we recognize the 33 WGB with the quantum
numbers of the coset @xmath algebra.

In using the stationary condition in Eq. ( 3.13 ), we paid attention not
to divide by ( @xmath ), since the flipped vacuum @xmath is an allowed
configuration. On the other hand, we can freely put @xmath and @xmath
into the denominators, as the vacua @xmath and @xmath are excluded at
the tree level. The coupling @xmath in Eq. ( D.21 ) is understood to
obey the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### d.2.4 A trivial 45-16 potential (@xmath)

It is interesting to study the global symmetries of the scalar potential
when only the moduli of @xmath and @xmath appear in the scalar
potential. In order to correctly count the corresponding PGB, the @xmath
mass matrix in the limit of @xmath needs to be scrutinized. We find in
the ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) basis,

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.23)
  -- -- -- --------

with the properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected from the discussion in Sect. 3.3 , Eqs. ( D.2.3 )–( D.23 )
in the @xmath limit exhibit 75 massless modes out of which 42 are PGB.

#### d.2.5 A trivial 45-16 interaction (@xmath)

In this limit, the interaction part of the potential consists only of
the @xmath term, which is the product of @xmath and @xmath moduli. Once
again, in order to correctly count the massless modes we specialize the
@xmath matrix to the @xmath limit. In the ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ) basis, we find

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.25)
  -- -- -- --------

with the properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to the discussion in Sect. 3.3 , upon inspecting Eqs. ( D.2.3
)–( D.21 ) in the @xmath limit, one finds 41 massless scalar modes of
which 8 are PGB.

#### d.2.6 The 45-16 scalar spectrum for @xmath

The application of the stationary conditions in Eqs. ( 3.12 )–( 3.13 )
(for @xmath , Eq. ( 3.14 ) is trivially satisfied) leads to four
different spectra according to the four vacua: standard @xmath , flipped
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We specialize our discussion to the last
three cases.

The mass eigenstates are conveniently labeled according to the
subalgebras of @xmath left invariant by each vacuum. With the help of
Tables 4.4 – 4.5 one can easily recover the decomposition in the SM
components. In the limit @xmath the states @xmath and @xmath do not mix.
All of the WGB belong to the @xmath , since for @xmath the @xmath
preserves @xmath .

Consider first the case: @xmath (which preserves the flipped @xmath
group). For the @xmath components we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.27)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, for the @xmath components we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.28)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the unbroken group is the flipped @xmath we recognize, as
expected, 45-25=20 WGB. When only trivial @xmath invariants (moduli) are
considered the global symmetry of the scalar potential is @xmath ,
broken spontaneously by @xmath to @xmath . This leads to 44 GB in the
scalar spectrum. Therefore 44-20=24 PGB are left in the spectrum. On
general grounds, their masses should receive contributions from all of
the explicitly breaking terms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As it is
directly seen from the spectrum, only the @xmath term contributes at the
tree level to @xmath . By choosing @xmath one may obtain a consistent
minimum of the scalar potential. Quantum corrections are not relevant in
this case.

Consider then the case @xmath and @xmath which preserves the @xmath
gauge group. For the @xmath components we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.29)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, for the @xmath components we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Worth of a note is the mass degeneracy of the @xmath and @xmath
multiplets which is due to the fact that for @xmath D-parity is
conserved by even @xmath powers. On the contrary, in the @xmath
components the D-parity is broken by the @xmath term that is linear in
@xmath .

Since the unbroken group is @xmath there are 45-15=30 WGB, as it appears
from the explicit pattern of the scalar spectrum. When only trivial
invariants (moduli terms) of @xmath are considered the global symmetry
of the scalar potential is @xmath , broken spontaneously to @xmath ,
thus leading to 44 GB in the scalar spectrum. As a consequence 44-30=14
PGB are left in the spectrum. On general grounds, their masses should
receive contributions from all of the explicitly breaking terms @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . As it is directly seen from the spectrum, only the
@xmath term contributes at the tree level to the mass of the 14 PGB,
leading unavoidably to a tachyonic spectrum. This feature is naturally
lifted at the quantum level.

Let us finally consider the case @xmath and @xmath (which preserves the
@xmath gauge symmetry). For the @xmath components we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.31)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath components we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (D.32)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The unbroken gauge symmetry in this case corresponds to @xmath .
Therefore, one can recognize 45-19=26 WGB in the scalar spectrum. When
only trivial (moduli) @xmath invariants are considered the global
symmetry of the scalar potential is @xmath , which is broken
spontaneously by @xmath to @xmath . This leads globally to 44 massless
states in the scalar spectrum. As a consequence, 44-26=18 PGB are left
in the @xmath spectrum, that should receive mass contributions from the
explicitly breaking terms @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . At the tree level
only the @xmath term is present, leading again to a tachyonic spectrum.
This is an accidental tree level feature that is naturally lifted at the
quantum level.

## Appendix E One-loop mass spectra

We have checked explicitly that the one-loop corrected stationary
equation ( 3.13 ) maintains in the @xmath limit the four tree level
solutions, namely, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , corresponding
respectively to the standard @xmath , flipped @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
vacua.

In what follows we list, for the last three cases, the leading one-loop
corrections, arising from the gauge and scalar sectors, to the critical
PGB masses. For all other states the loop corrections provide only
sub-leading perturbations of the tree-level masses, and as such
irrelevant to the present discussion.

### e.1 Gauge contributions to the PGB mass

Before focusing to the three relevant vacuum configurations, it is
convenient to write the gauge contribution to the @xmath and @xmath
states in the general case.

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.1)
  -- -- -- -------

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.2)
  -- -- -- -------

One can easily recognize the (tree-level) masses of the gauge bosons in
the log’s arguments and cofactors (see Appendix F.3.2 ). Note that only
the massive states do contribute to the one-loop correction. (see Sect.
3.4.3 ).

Let’s now specialize to the three relevant vacua. First, for the flipped
@xmath case @xmath one has:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, for @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Finally, for @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

### e.2 Scalar contributions to the PGB mass

Since the general formula for the SM vacuum configuration is quite
involved, we give directly the corrections to the PGB masses on the
three vacua of our interest. We consider first the case @xmath (flipped
@xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ), we find:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, for @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ), we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.9)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (E.10)
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Also in these formulae we recognize the (tree level) mass eigenvalues of
the @xmath states contributing to the one-loop effective potential (see
Appendix D.2.6 ).

Notice that the singlets with respect to each vacuum, namely @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , for the flipped @xmath , @xmath and @xmath vacua
respectively, receive a tree level contribution from both @xmath as well
as @xmath (see Appendix D.2.6 ). The @xmath term leads the tree level
mass and radiative corrections can be neglected.

One may verify that in the limit of vanishing VEVs the one-loop masses
vanish identically on each of the three vacua, as it should be. This is
a non trivial check of the calculation of the scalar induced
corrections.

## Appendix F Flipped @xmath vacuum

### f.1 Flipped @xmath notation

We work in the basis of Ref. [ 223 ] , where the adjoint is projected
along the positive-chirality spinorial generators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Here

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional identity matrix and @xmath is
the 10-dimensional analogue of the Dirac @xmath matrix defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath factors are given by the following tensor products of
ordinary Pauli matrices @xmath and the @xmath -dimensional identity
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which satisfy the Clifford algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spinorial generators, @xmath , are then defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the flipped @xmath vacuum the adjoint representation reads

  -- -- -- -------
           (F.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the convention defined in section 4.4.2 (cf. also caption of Table
4.5 ), the diagonal entries are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are real, while @xmath .

Analogously, the spinor and the anti-spinor SM-preserving vacuum
directions are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.11)
     @xmath      (F.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots stand for zeros, and the non-vanishing VEVs are generally
complex.

It is worth reminding that the shorthand notation @xmath and @xmath in
Eq. ( 4.19 ) stands for @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the “charge
conjugation” matrix obeying @xmath . In the current convention, @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the four-dimensional identity matrix.

### f.2 Supersymmetric vacuum manifold

In order for SUSY to survive the spontaneous GUT symmetry breakdown at
@xmath the vacuum manifold must be @xmath - and @xmath -flat at the GUT
scale. The relevant superpotential @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.19 ), with
the SM-preserving vacuum parametrized by Eq. ( F.7 ) and Eqs. ( F.11 )–(
F.12 ), yields the following @xmath -flatness equations:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can use the first four equations above to replace @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in the remaining eight (complex) relations which can
be rewritten in the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.15)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the other four equations are obtained from these by exchanging
@xmath .

There are two classes of @xmath -flatness conditions corresponding,
respectively, to the VEVs of the @xmath and the @xmath generators. For
the @xmath -charge one finds

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.19)
  -- -- -- --------

while for the @xmath generators one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.22)
  -- -- -- --------

Given that

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.23)
  -- -- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is real and @xmath , @xmath as it should be. Notice that
@xmath -flatness implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the reality of @xmath has been taken into account.

For the spinorial contribution in ( F.20 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given @xmath and the explicit form of @xmath in Eq. ( F.13 ), one can
verify readily that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, @xmath can be simplified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, with Eq. ( F.19 ) at hand, to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account the basic features of the spinorial generators
@xmath (e.g. , the bracket [ @xmath and @xmath can never act against
each other because at least one of them always vanishes, or the fact
that @xmath is complex) Eq. ( F.31 ) can be satisfied for all @xmath if
and only if

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining this with Eq. ( F.27 ), the required @xmath - and @xmath
-flatness can be in general maintained only if @xmath and @xmath .
Hence, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this at hand, one can further simplify the @xmath -flatness
conditions Eq. ( F.18 ). To this end, it is convenient to define the
following linear combinations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.34)
     @xmath      (F.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath running over the spinorial VEVs @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath real by definition, the
requirement of @xmath for all @xmath is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.38)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as before, the remaining eight real equations for V= @xmath are
obtained by swapping @xmath .

Focusing first on @xmath , one finds that @xmath and @xmath . Thus, we
can consider just @xmath and @xmath as independent equations. For
instance, from @xmath one readily gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

On top of that, the remaining @xmath equations can be solved only for
@xmath , which, plugged into Eq. ( F.43 ) gives @xmath . Thus, we end up
with the following condition for the off-diagonal entries of the @xmath
matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into the @xmath and @xmath equations, they simplify to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (F.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have denoted

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

These, taken together, yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that in the zero phases limit the constraint ( F.48 ) is
trivially relaxed, while @xmath .

Returning to the @xmath equations, the constraint ( F.44 ) implies, e.g.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For generic VEVs, these relations require @xmath and @xmath to vanish.
In conclusion, a nontrivial vacuum requires @xmath (and hence @xmath for
consistency) to be hermitian. This is a consequence of the fact that
@xmath -flatness for the flipped @xmath embedding implies @xmath ,
cf. Eq. ( F.2 ). Let us also note that such a setting is preserved by
supersymmetric wavefunction renormalization.

Taking @xmath in the remaining @xmath equations and trading @xmath for
@xmath in @xmath by means of Eq. ( F.45 ) and for @xmath in @xmath via
Eq. ( F.46 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (F.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since only two out of these four are independent constraints, it is
convenient to consider the following linear combinations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which admit for a simple factorized form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (F.54)
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (F.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These relations can be generically satisfied only if the square brackets
are zero, providing

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By introducing a pair of symbolic 2-dimensional vectors @xmath and
@xmath one can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, in combination with eqs. ( F.49 ) and ( F.56 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this at hand, the vacuum manifold can be conveniently parametrized
by means of two angles @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are fixed in terms of the superpotential parameters. By defining
@xmath , Eqs. ( F.57 )–( F.59 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, Eq. ( F.48 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus, using Eq. ( F.60 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice also that in the real case (i.e., @xmath ) @xmath is
undetermined, while @xmath .

This justifies the shape of the vacuum manifold given in Eq. ( 4.4.2 )
of Sect. 4.4.2 .

### f.3 Gauge boson spectrum

In order to determine the residual symmetry corresponding to a specific
vacuum configuration we compute explicitly the gauge spectrum. Given the
@xmath covariant derivatives for the scalar components of the Higgs
chiral superfields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices in brackets @xmath stand for ordered pairs, and the
properly normalized kinetic terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can write the 46-dimensional gauge boson mass matrix governing the
mass bilinear of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relevant matrix elements are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (F.69)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (F.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### f.3.1 Spinorial contribution

Considering first the contribution of the reducible representation
@xmath to the gauge boson mass matrix, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.71)
     @xmath      (F.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the @xmath basis (see Table 4.5 for the labelling of the states) we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The five dimensional SM singlet mass matrix in the @xmath basis reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

For generic VEVs @xmath , and we recover 12 massless gauge bosons with
the quantum numbers of the SM algebra.

We verified that this result is maintained when implementing the
constraints of the flipped vacuum manifold in Eq. ( 4.4.2 ). Since it
is, by construction, the smallest algebra that can be preserved by the
whole vacuum manifold, it must be maintained when adding the @xmath
contribution. We can therefore claim that the invariant algebra on the
generic vacuum is the SM. On the other hand, the @xmath plays already an
active role in this result since it allows for a misalignment of the VEV
directions in the two @xmath spinors such that the spinor vacuum
preserves SM and not @xmath . More details shall be given in the next
section.

#### f.3.2 Adjoint contribution

Considering the contribution of @xmath to the gauge spectrum, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.76)
     @xmath      (F.77)
     @xmath      (F.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, in the @xmath basis, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The SM singlet mass matrix in the @xmath basis reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

For generic VEVs we find @xmath leading globally to the 14 massless
gauge bosons of the @xmath algebra.

#### f.3.3 Vacuum little group

With the results of sections F.3.1 and F.3.2 at hand the residual gauge
symmetry can be readily identified from the properties of the complete
gauge boson mass matrix. For the sake of simplicity here we shall
present the results in the real VEV approximation.

Trading the VEVs for the superpotential parameters, one can immediately
identify the strong and weak gauge bosons of the SM that, as expected,
remain massless:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, it is straightforward to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the complete matrices @xmath and @xmath turn out to
be quite involved once the vacuum constraints are imposed, and we do not
show them here explicitly. Nevertheless, it is sufficient to consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

to see that for a generic non-zero value of @xmath one gets Rank @xmath
. On the other hand, when @xmath (i.e., @xmath ) or @xmath (i.e., @xmath
), @xmath and one is left with an additional massless @xmath gauge
boson, corresponding to an enhanced residual symmetry.

In the case of the @xmath -dimensional matrix @xmath it is sufficient to
notice that for a generic non-zero @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the vacuum manifold, which leaves a massless @xmath gauge boson, thus
completing the SM algebra. As before, for @xmath or for @xmath , we find
@xmath . Taking into account the massless states in the @xmath sector,
we recover, as expected, the flipped @xmath algebra.

## Appendix G @xmath vacuum

### g.1 The @xmath formalism

Following closely the notation of Refs. [ 201 , 224 ] , we decompose the
adjoint and fundamental representations of @xmath under its @xmath
maximal subalgebra as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (G.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the greek, latin and primed-latin indices, corresponding to @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , respectively, run from @xmath to @xmath . As far
as the @xmath algebras in Eq. ( G.1 ) are concerned, the generators
follow the standard Gell-Mann convention

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.4)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , so they are all normalized so that @xmath .

Taking into account Eqs. ( G.1 )–( G.1 ), the @xmath algebra can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action of the algebra on the fundamental @xmath representation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and accordingly on @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the SM hypercharge definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the SM-preserving vacuum direction corresponds to [ 201 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are SM-singlet VEVs. This can be checked by means of
Eqs. ( G.5 )–( G.13 ). Notice that the adjoint VEVs @xmath and @xmath
are real, while @xmath . The VEVs of @xmath are generally complex.

### g.2 @xmath vacuum manifold

Working out the @xmath -flatness equations, one finds that the
nontrivial constraints are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ladder operator from the @xmath sub-multiplet of
@xmath . Notice that the relations corresponding to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are linearly dependent, since the linear combination associated
to the SM hypercharge in Eq. ( G.14 ) vanishes.

The superpotential @xmath in Eq. ( 4.41 ) evaluated on the vacuum
manifold ( G.15 )-( G.16 ) yields Eq. ( 4.52 ). Accordingly, one finds
the following @xmath -flatness equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Following the strategy of Appendix F.2 one can solve the first five
equations above for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath and @xmath can be taken real without loss of
generality (see Sect. 4.5.2 ), the first two equations above imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( G.19 ) the remaining @xmath -flatness conditions in Eq. (
G.18 ) can be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the additional four relations can be again obtained by exchanging
@xmath . Similarly, the triplet of linearly independent @xmath -flatness
conditions in Eq. ( G.17 ) can be brought to the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining these with Eq. ( G.20 ), the @xmath -flatness is ensured if
and only if @xmath and @xmath . Hence, in complete analogy with the
flipped @xmath case Eq. ( F.2 ), one can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

From now on, the discussion of the vacuum manifold follows very closely
that for the flipped @xmath in Sect. F.2 and we shall not repeat it
here. In particular the existence of a nontrivial vacuum requires the
hermiticity of the @xmath and @xmath couplings. This is related to the
fact that @xmath - and @xmath -flatness require @xmath . The detailed
shape of the resulting vacuum manifold so obtained is given in Eq. (
4.5.2 ) of Sect. 4.5.2 .

### g.3 Vacuum little group

In order to find the algebra left invariant by the vacuum configurations
in Eq. ( 4.5.2 ), we need to compute the action of the @xmath generators
on the @xmath VEV. From Eqs. ( G.5 )–( G.6 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (G.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

on the adjoint vacuum. For @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and, accordingly, for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (G.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On the vacuum manifold in Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) one finds that the generators
generally preserved by the VEVs of @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which generate an @xmath algebra. As an example showing the nontrivial
constraints enforced by the vacuum manifold in Eq. ( 4.5.2 ), let us
inspect the action of one of the lepto-quark generators, say @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.31)
                 
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that @xmath vanishes on the whole vacuum manifold in
Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) and, thus, @xmath is preserved. Let us also remark that
the @xmath charges above correspond to the standard @xmath embedding
(see the discussion in sect. 4.5.2 ). In the flipped @xmath embedding,
the @xmath generators in Eq. ( G.30 ) carry hypercharges @xmath ,
respectively.

Considering instead the vacuum manifold invariant with respect to the
flipped @xmath hypercharge (see Eqs. ( 4.46 )–( 4.48 )), the preserved
generators, in addition to those of the SM, are @xmath . These, for the
standard hypercharge embedding of Eq. ( 4.37 ), transform as @xmath ,
whereas with the flipped hypercharge assignment in Eq. ( 4.38 ), the
same transform as @xmath . Needless to say, one finds again @xmath as
the vacuum little group.

It is interesting to consider the configuration @xmath , which can be
chosen without loss of generality once a pair, let us say @xmath , is
decoupled or when the two copies of @xmath are aligned. According to
Eq. ( 4.5.2 ) this implies all VEVs equal to zero but @xmath and @xmath
( @xmath ). Then, from Eqs. ( G.3 )–( G.3 ), one verifies that the
preserved generators are (see Eq. ( G.1 ) for notation)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (G.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which support an @xmath algebra. In particular, @xmath preserves @xmath
, where the extra @xmath generator, which commutes with all @xmath
generators, is proportional to @xmath . On the other hand, the VEV
@xmath breaks @xmath (while preserving the sum). We therefore recover
the result of Ref. [ 201 ] for the @xmath setting with @xmath .