The central topic of this thesis is two dimensional Quantum Gravity and
its properties. The term Quantum Gravity itself is ambiguous as there
are many proposals for its correct formulation and none of them have
been verified experimentally. In this thesis we consider a number of
closely related approaches to two dimensional quantum gravity that share
the property that they may be formulated in terms of random graphs. In
one such approach known as Causal Dynamical Triangulations, numerical
computations suggest an interesting phenomenon in which the effective
spacetime dimension is reduced in the UV. In this thesis we first
address whether such a dynamical reduction in the number of dimensions
may be understood in a simplified model. We introduce a continuum limit
where this simplified model exhibits a reduction in the effective
dimension of spacetime in the UV, in addition to having rich cross-over
behaviour.

In the second part of this thesis we consider an approach closely
related to causal dynamical triangulation; namely dynamical
triangulation. Although this theory is less well-behaved than causal
dynamical triangulation, it is known how to couple it to matter,
therefore allowing for potentially multiple boundary states to appear in
the theory. We address the conjecture of Seiberg and Shih which states
that all these boundary states are degenerate and may be constructed
from a single principal boundary state. By use of the random graph
formulation of the theory we compute the higher genus amplitudes with a
single boundary and find that they violate the Seiberg-Shih conjecture.
Finally we discuss whether this result prevents the replacement of
boundary states by local operators as proposed by Seiberg.
