## Introduction

The modern notion of momentum map was first introduced by Kostant [ 29 ]
and Souriau [ 52 ] , as a refinement of the idea developed by Lie [ 32 ]
in 1890. The momentum map provides a mathematical formalization of the
notion of conserved quantity associated to symmetries of a dynamical
system. The definition of momentum map only requires a canonical Lie
algebra action and its existence is guaranteed whenever the
infinitesimal generators of the Lie algebra action are Hamiltonian
vector fields.

It is important to underline that the momentum map is a fundamental tool
for the study of the so-called symplectic reduction of certain manifolds
[ 40 ] . This method is a synthesis of different techniques of reduction
of the phase space (generally a symplectic manifold) associated to a
dynamical system, in which the symmetries are divided out. In
particular, the Marsden-Weinstein reduction [ 40 ] gives a description
of the symplectic leaves on the orbit space, obtained by a Hamiltonian
action on a symplectic manifold.

These theories can be further generalized to the Poisson geometry
framework, considering more general structures which reduce to the
symplectic ones under certain conditions. This generalization has been
performed with several approaches, see e.g. [ 15 ] , [ 34 ] and [ 39 ] .
Poisson geometry was introduced by Lie in [ 32 ] as a geometrization of
Poisson’s studies of classical mechanics [ 46 ] . During the past 40
years, Poisson geometry has become an interesting and active field of
research, motivated by connections with many research fields as
mechanics of particles and continua (Arnold [ 1 ] , Lichnerowicz [ 31 ]
, Marsden–Weinstein [ 41 ] ) and integrable systems (Gel’fand-Dickey [
18 ] and Kostant [ 30 ] ).

Furthermore, the theory of Poisson Lie groups has been developed through
the work of Drinfel’d [ 10 ] and Semenov-Tian-Shansky [ 50 ] , [ 49 ] on
completely integrable systems and quantum groups. These new structures
can be naturally used to define Poisson actions, i.e. actions of Poisson
Lie groups on Poisson manifolds, as a generalization of Lie group
actions.

In this thesis we mainly focus on a generalization of the momentum map
provided by Lu [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] . In particular, we give a detailed
discussion about existence and uniqueness of Lu’s momentum map. More
precisely, we introduce a weaker momentum map, called infinitesimal
momentum map, and we study the conditions under which the infinitesimal
momentum map determines a momentum map in the usual sense. We describe
the theory of reconstruction of the momentum map from the infinitesimal
one in two explicit cases. Moreover, we provide the conditions which
ensure the uniqueness of the momentum map.

Furthermore, we exploit Lu’s momentum map to construct a theory of
reduction for Poisson actions. Indeed, the local description of Poisson
manifolds given by Weinstein in [ 55 ] and the properties of Lu’s
momentum map provide an explicit description of the infinitesimal
generator of a Poisson action, which allows us to define a Poisson
reduced space.

A similar mathematical construction can be implemented for the study of
symmetries in quantum mechanics. The passage between classical and
quantum systems can be performed with the theory of deformation
quantization [ 27 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 12 ] . We use this approach to study the
relation between symmetries in classical and quantum mechanics. The key
idea resides in defining a quantum momentum map such that the classical
conserved quantities can be regarded as a classical limit of the quantum
ones.

The problem of quantization of the momentum map and the reduction has
been the main topic of many works, see e.g. [ 13 ] and [ 35 ] . In [ 13
] , Fedosov uses the theory of deformation quantization to define a
quantum momentum map and, as a consequence, a quantum reduction. The
author proves that the quantum reduced space is isomorphic to the
algebra obtained by canonical deformation quantization of the symplectic
reduced manifold. In [ 35 ] , Lu defines the quantization of a Poisson
action in terms of quantum group action and the quantum momentum map as
a map which induces the quantum group action.

Motivated by these two works, in the present thesis we discuss a
quantization procedure for the momentum map associated to a Poisson
action, which uses quantum group and deformation quantization
techniques.

### Plan of Work

We give here a brief description of the contents of this thesis,
underlining the main new results.

Chapter 1 gives some background about momentum map in symplectic
geometry. After a short overview of Lie group actions and Hamiltonian
systems, we present the momentum map with some basic examples and we
describe the Marsden-Weinstein reduction. The chapter aims to introduce
the language that we use throughout this thesis.

Chapter 2 starts by recalling some elements of Poisson geometry. In
particular, we focus on Poisson Lie groups and Lie bialgebras and we
discuss some properties of Poisson manifolds. Within this framework, we
introduce the Poisson action and the momentum map, and, as a warm up, we
see the way they generalize the discussion in Chapter 1.

Afterwards we commence the study of the part of the momentum map, the
infinitesimal momentum map, given by a certain family of differential
forms associated to the momentum map and which has the advantage that it
can be generalized to the quantized case - see the definition 2.4.12 .

In Theorem 2.4.13 we give explicit, computable conditions for the
infinitesimal momentum map to determine a global momentum map. In
Section 2.4.3 we study concrete cases of this globalization question and
we prove the existence and uniqueness/nonuniqueness of a momentum map
associated to a given infinitesimal momentum map, for the particular
case when the dual Poisson Lie group is abelian, respectively the
Heisenberg group.

In the following section we study the question of infinitesimal
deformations of a given momentum map. The main result is Theorem 2.4.19
, which describes explicitly the space tangent to the space of momentum
maps at a given point. In particular, modulo the trivial infinitesimal
deformations (which are given by vector fields on @xmath commuting with
the Poisson bivector and invariant under the group action), the tangent
space is given by a subspace of the cohomology group @xmath . As an
application, in the case of a compact and semisimple Poisson Lie group
@xmath acting on a Poisson manifold @xmath , the only infinitesimal
deformations of a momentum map are the trivial ones.

The following section (Sec. 2.5 ) is devoted to the theory of Poisson
reduction. The main result of this section is the theorem 2.5.3 , which
gives a generalization of the Marsden-Weinstein reduction to the general
case of an arbitrary Poisson Lie group action on a Poisson manifold -
the results that can be found in the literature are restricted to the
case when the Poisson manifold in question is in fact a symplectic
manifold.

Chapter 3 is dedicated to the study of the quantum momentum map. As
proved by Kontsevich [ 27 ] , any Poisson manifold admits a canonical
quantization. We start this chapter by giving a short introduction to
Kontsevich’s theorem and its corollary describing the deformation
quantization theory for Poisson manifolds. Afterwards we give some
background information on Hopf algebras, quantum groups and the
quantization of Poisson Lie groups and Lie bialgebras.

The quantum action is naturally expressed in terms of the action of the
Hopf algebra on the deformation quantization of the smooth manifold.

Since we work with deformation quantization of the Lie bialgebra of our
Poisson Lie group, the natural context is quantization of the
infinitesimal momentum map. This is defined in Section 3.3.1 . One can
briefly describe it as follows. Let @xmath denote the quantized Lie
bialgebra. Then the coproduct @xmath of @xmath extends to an odd
derivation on the tensor algebra @xmath . If @xmath denotes the
quantized algebra of functions on the manifold, the action of @xmath on
@xmath becomes a morphism of complexes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and quantum momentum map is a factorization of this morphism through the
complex of formal differential forms @xmath , which reduces, modulo
@xmath , to the classical infinitesimal momentum map.

Section 3.3.2 is devoted to the discussion of some examples of quantum
momentum map and of quantum reduction. The interesting observation is
that the existence of the quantum momentum map in the above sense
dictates the formulas for the quantization of the Lie bialgebra. In
fact, in the low dimensional examples studied in this section, the
quantization of the Lie bialgebra is essentially uniquely determined by
existence of universal formulas for the quantum momentum map.

The corresponding quantum reduction seems to be much more subtle then in
the case of the undeformed action of the group. The problem is as
follows. In the case of undeformed group action, the quantum momentum
map has the form @xmath , and the reduction has the form @xmath . In the
general case, the “Hamiltonian forms” become of the form @xmath with, as
the examples show, some of the @xmath ’s (and @xmath ’s) invertible,
hence the quotients of this form vanish. We can construct the quantum
reduction in our case, but it seems, at the moment, somewhat ad hoc.

## Chapter 1 Momentum Map in Symplectic Geometry

In this chapter we explain how the symmetries of a Hamiltonian dynamical
system can be used to simplify the study of that system. The description
of symmetries is implemented via Lie group actions, discussed in the
first part of the chapter. The treatment of Lie group actions and
Hamiltonian systems is necessary to introduce the key concept of this
chapter, the momentum map. This is a mathematical construction
introduced by Lie [ 32 ] , Kostant [ 29 ] and Souriau [ 52 ] that
describes the conservation laws associated to the symmetries of a
Hamiltonian dynamical system.

As will be seen, the momentum map is the basic ingredient for the
construction of the symplectic reduction. This is a procedure that uses
symmetries and conserved quantities to reduce the dimensionality of a
Hamiltonian system.

### 1.1 Lie Group Actions

This section presents a brief review of the theory of Lie group actions
on a manifold, with some examples. This provides the background
necessary to introduce the concepts of symmetries of a Hamiltonian
system and momentum map. For details the reader should consult e.g. [ 47
] and [ 38 ] .

###### Definition 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be a manifold and @xmath a Lie group. A left action of @xmath
on @xmath is a smooth mapping @xmath such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

where @xmath denotes the identity of @xmath .

We often use the notation @xmath . Similarly as for the left action, a
right action is a smooth map @xmath , such that @xmath , for all @xmath
, and @xmath , for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Example 1.1.2.

An example of left action of a Lie group @xmath on itself is given by
the left translation @xmath . Similarly, the right translation @xmath ,
@xmath defines a right action. The inner automorphism @xmath , given by
@xmath , defines a left action of @xmath on itself called conjugation.

###### Example 1.1.3.

The differential at the identity of the conjugation map defines a linear
left action of a Lie group @xmath on its Lie algebra @xmath , called the
adjoint representation of @xmath on @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is the dual of @xmath , then the map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

defines also a linear left action of @xmath on @xmath called the
coadjoint representation of @xmath on @xmath .

Given a (left) action @xmath , the infinitesimal generator @xmath
associated to @xmath is the vector field on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

An infinitesimal generator is a complete vector field. Indeed, the flow
of @xmath equals @xmath . Moreover, the map @xmath is a Lie algebra
homomorphism, that is,

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath ,

for all @xmath and @xmath . Motivated by these properties, we introduce
the following definition.

###### Definition 1.1.4.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra and @xmath a smooth manifold. A right (left)
Lie algebra action of @xmath on @xmath is a Lie algebra homomorphism
@xmath such that the mapping @xmath is smooth.

Given a Lie group action, we refer to the Lie algebra action induced by
its infinitesimal generators as the associated Lie algebra action. An
example of Lie algebra action is given by the adjoint representation of
the algebra @xmath , defined by the map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consider a Lie group @xmath acting on a manifold @xmath . The isotropy
subgroup or stabilizer of an element @xmath acted upon by the Lie group
@xmath is the closed subgroup

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose Lie algebra @xmath equals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The orbit @xmath of the element @xmath under the group action @xmath is
the set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The notion of orbit can be used to characterize an equivalence relation
on the manifold @xmath . Two elements @xmath are equivalent, @xmath , if
and only if they are in the same orbit, hence if there exists an element
@xmath such that @xmath . The orbit space is the space of these
equivalence classes and is denoted by @xmath .

In the following we discuss the conditions which ensure that the orbit
space is a regular quotient manifold.

A group action on @xmath is said to be

1.   transitive, if there is only one orbit,

2.   free, if the isotropy of every element in @xmath consists only of
    the identity element,

3.   faithful, if @xmath implies that @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath be two topological spaces with @xmath first
countable. A continuous map @xmath is called proper if for any sequence
@xmath such that @xmath there exist a convergent subsequence @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . A map @xmath is proper if and only if it is
closed and @xmath is compact, for any @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.5.

Let @xmath be a Lie group acting on the manifold @xmath via the map
@xmath . We say that @xmath is proper whenever the map @xmath defined by
@xmath is proper.

The properness of the action is equivalent to the following condition:
for any two convergent sequences @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , there
exists a convergent subsequence @xmath in @xmath . We say that the
action @xmath is proper at the point @xmath when for any two convergent
sequences @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath ,
there exists a convergent subsequence @xmath in @xmath .

The following proposition is crucial in the theory of symplectic
reduction. A proof can be found e.g. in [ 47 ] and [ 3 ] .

###### Proposition 1.1.6.

Let @xmath be a proper action of the Lie group @xmath on the manifold
@xmath . Then

1.   For any @xmath , the isotropy subgroup @xmath is compact.

2.   The orbit space @xmath is a Hausdorff topological space

3.   If the action is free, @xmath is a smooth manifold, and the
    canonical projection @xmath defines on @xmath the structure of a
    smooth left principal @xmath -bundle.

### 1.2 Hamiltonian systems

We start this section with a brief review of some basic notions about
symplectic manifolds and invariant Hamiltonian dynamics. This provides
us all the necessary background that we use in the next sections.

###### Definition 1.2.1.

A symplectic manifold is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a manifold and
@xmath is a closed nondegenerate two form on @xmath , that is, @xmath
and, for every @xmath , the map @xmath is a linear isomorphism between
the tangent space @xmath and the cotangent space @xmath .

Since @xmath is a differential two-form, hence skew-symmetric, the
dimension of @xmath is always even. A Hamiltonian dynamical system is a
triple @xmath , where @xmath is a symplectic manifold and @xmath is the
Hamiltonian function of the system. By nondegeneracy of the symplectic
form @xmath , to each Hamiltonian system one can associate a Hamiltonian
vector field @xmath , defined by the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

It’s clear that @xmath is a Hamiltonian vector field if and only if the
one form @xmath is exact.

###### Definition 1.2.2.

Let @xmath . The Poisson bracket of these functions is the function
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given a symplectic manifold @xmath , the set @xmath can be always
equipped with a real Lie algebra structure relative to the Poisson
bracket:

###### Definition 1.2.3.

A Poisson manifold is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a smooth manifold
and @xmath is a bilinear operation on @xmath , such that the pair @xmath
is a Lie algebra and @xmath is a derivation in each argument. The pair
@xmath is called Poisson algebra. The functions in the center of the Lie
algebra @xmath are called Casimir functions.

Since there is an isomorphism between derivations on @xmath and vector
fields on @xmath , it follows that each @xmath induces a vector field on
@xmath via the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

called the Hamiltonian vector field associated to the Hamiltonian
function @xmath . The Hamiltonian equations @xmath can be equivalently
written in Poisson bracket form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath . The triple @xmath is called a Poisson dynamical system.
The Lie algebra map @xmath that assigns to each function @xmath the
associated Hamiltonian vector field @xmath is a Lie algebra
homomorphism:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Any Hamiltonian system on a symplectic manifold is a Poisson dynamical
system relative to the Poisson bracket induced by the symplectic
structure. Given a Poisson dynamical system @xmath , its conserved
quantities or integrals of motion are defined by the subalgebra @xmath
of @xmath consisting of the @xmath -invariant functions on @xmath , i.e
@xmath such that @xmath .

As mentioned above, the symmetries of a Hamiltonian system are encoded
via Lie group actions consistent with the structure of the given
dynamical system. This motivates the following definition:

###### Definition 1.2.4.

A canonical action is a map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We say that the Hamiltonian system @xmath is @xmath -symmetric when the
Lie group @xmath acts canonically on @xmath and the Hamiltonian function
@xmath is @xmath -invariant, that is @xmath .

The infinitesimal version of this concept is the canonical action of a
Lie algebra. An action of the Lie algebra @xmath on the Poisson
(respectively, symplectic) manifold @xmath is canonical if the vector
fields @xmath are infinitesimal Poisson automorphisms, that is, if
@xmath is the Poisson tensor we have that @xmath (respectively, @xmath
). We say that the Hamiltonian system @xmath is @xmath -symmetric if the
Lie algebra @xmath acts canonically on @xmath and the Hamiltonian
function @xmath is @xmath -invariant.

### 1.3 Momentum map

In the previous sections we introduced the symmetries of a Hamiltonian
systems via Lie group actions. The conservation laws of this system can
be described with a mathematical construction called the momentum map.
The definition of momentum map only requires a canonical Lie algebra
action and its existence is guaranteed when the infinitesimal generators
of the action are Hamiltonian vector fields.

###### Definition 1.3.1.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra acting canonically on the Poisson manifold
@xmath . Suppose that for any @xmath the vector field @xmath is
Hamiltonian, with Hamiltonian function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The map @xmath defined by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath , is called momentum map of the @xmath
-action.

Notice that the momentum map is not uniquely determined; indeed, @xmath
and @xmath are momentum maps for the same canonical action if and only
if for any @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a Casimir function; if @xmath is symplectic and connected, then
@xmath is determined up to a constant in @xmath .

###### Example 1.3.2 (Linear momentum).

We consider the phase space @xmath of a @xmath -particle system. The
additive group @xmath acts on it by applying spatial translation on each
factor: @xmath , with @xmath . This action is canonical and has an
associated momentum map that coincides with the classical linear
momentum

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (1.17)
              @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Example 1.3.3 (Angular momentum).

Let @xmath act on @xmath and then, by lift, on @xmath , that is, @xmath
. This action is canonical and has an associated momentum map

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
              @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is the classical angular momentum.

It can be shown that the momentum map satisfies Noether’s Theorem [ 45 ]
, as stated in the following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.3.4 ([47]).

Let @xmath be a Lie group acting canonically on the Poisson manifold
@xmath . Assume that this action admits a momentum map @xmath and that
@xmath is invariant under the action of @xmath . Then the momentum map
is an integral for the Hamiltonian vector field @xmath (i.e. if @xmath
is the flow of @xmath then @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath where @xmath
is defined).

Finally, we introduce the property of equivariance of the momentum map.
Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold and @xmath act canonically on it with a
momentum map @xmath . The map @xmath defined by @xmath , @xmath is a Lie
algebra homomorphism if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath and any @xmath . A momentum map that satisfies this
relation is called infinitesimally equivariant. When the Lie algebra
action is associated to the action of a Lie group @xmath , we say that
@xmath is @xmath -equivariant if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . A Lie algebra action with an infinitesimally
equivariant momentum map is called Hamiltonian action and a Lie group
action with an equivariant momentum map is called globally Hamiltonian.

Details about the problem of the existence of the momentum map can be
found in [ 47 ] .

### 1.4 Symplectic Reduction

In this section we describe the simplest version of symplectic reduction
that constructs a symplectic manifold out of a given symmetric one, on
which the conservation laws and degeneracies associated to the
symmetries have been eliminated. Given a symmetric Hamiltonian dynamical
system, the Marsden-Weinstein reduced system is also a Hamiltonian
system with reduced dimensionality, as proved in the following theorem:

###### Theorem 1.4.1 (Marsden-Weinstein Reduction [40]).

Let @xmath be a canonical action of the Lie group @xmath on the
connected symplectic manifold @xmath . Suppose that the action has an
associated equivariant momentum map @xmath . Let @xmath be a regular
value of @xmath and assume that the isotropy group @xmath under the
@xmath action on @xmath acts freely and properly on @xmath . Then:

1.   the space @xmath is a regular quotient manifold and there is a
    symplectic structure @xmath on @xmath uniquely determined by @xmath
    , where @xmath is the natural inclusion and @xmath is the natural
    projection of @xmath onto @xmath . The pair @xmath is called the
    symplectic reduced space .

2.   Let @xmath be a @xmath -invariant Hamiltonian. The flow @xmath of
    the Hamiltonian vector field @xmath leaves the connected components
    of @xmath invariant and commutes with the @xmath -action, so it
    induces a flow @xmath on @xmath defined by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.   The vector field generated by the flow @xmath on @xmath is
    Hamiltonian with associated reduced Hamiltonian function @xmath
    defined by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The vector fields @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -related. The triple
    @xmath is called reduced Hamiltonian system.

4.   Let @xmath be another @xmath -invariant function. Then @xmath is
    also @xmath -invariant and @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Poisson
    bracket associated to the symplectic form @xmath on @xmath .

The symplectic reduction can be rephrased in terms of algebra of
functions. In [ 51 ] , Sniatycki and Weinstein proposed a different
procedure that yields a reduced Poisson algebra; they proved that this
algebra coincides with the Poisson algebra on the reduced space @xmath .
We briefly introduce the results obtained in [ 51 ] , which we use in
the next chapters.

Consider the Hamiltonian function @xmath , with @xmath and let @xmath ,
@xmath be the components of the Hamiltonian function on the basis @xmath
of @xmath . Define the ideal @xmath in @xmath generated by the momenta
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we have:

###### Lemma 1.4.2.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra acting canonically on the Poisson manifold
@xmath with @xmath -equivariant momentum map @xmath . The the ideal
@xmath is a Poisson subalgebra of @xmath .

The action of @xmath on @xmath induces an action of @xmath on the
quotient algebra @xmath such that the projection homomorphism @xmath is
@xmath -equivariant. In [ 51 ] the authors proved that the quotient
@xmath naturally inherits a Poisson algebra structure. More precisely,
under the assumptions of Lemma 1.4.2 , we have

###### Lemma 1.4.3.

@xmath is the normalizer of @xmath and it has the structure of a Poisson
subalgebra of @xmath .

###### Corollary 1.4.4.

@xmath inherits the structure of a Poisson algebra such that @xmath
restricted to @xmath is a Poisson algebra homomorphism.

The Poisson algebra @xmath is called the reduced Poisson algebra of the
considered system. Finally, we have:

###### Theorem 1.4.5.

The Poisson algebra @xmath is canonically isomorphic to the Poisson
algebra of the reduced phase space @xmath with Poisson structure induced
by @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Momentum Map in Poisson Geometry

In this chapter we discuss the generalization of the theory of momentum
map and reduction to the Poisson geometry case. Similarly to the
previous chapter, in this formalism the description of symmetries is
implemented via Poisson actions. In order to introduce Poisson actions
we give some background about Poisson Lie groups and Lie bialgebras and
we discuss a more complete definition of Poisson manifolds with certain
properties. We introduce the generalization of momentum map given by Lu
[ 33 ] and its related Hamiltonian action. After this introductory part,
we give a new definition of the momentum map in terms of one-forms and
we study its properties. As in the symplectic case, the momentum map
here plays a fundamental role in the construction of the Poisson
reduction theory.

### 2.1 Lie bialgebras

The first object under consideration is a generalization of the notion
of Lie algebra, called Lie bialgebra. In general, given a Lie algebra
@xmath , its dual space @xmath is a vector space. In this section we see
that @xmath can be endowed with a structure which induces a Lie algebra
structure on its dual @xmath . The corresponding Lie groups carry a
Poisson structure compatible with the group multiplication. For details
on this topic see e.g. [ 28 ] . As will be seen in next chapter, the
importance of these structures relies in the fact that they admit a
standard procedure of quantization.

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional Lie algebra and @xmath a linear map
from @xmath to @xmath with transpose @xmath . Recall that a linear map
on @xmath can be identified with a bilinear map on @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.1.

A Lie bialgebra is a Lie algebra @xmath with a linear map @xmath such
that

1.  @xmath defines a Lie bracket on @xmath , and

2.  @xmath is a 1-cocycle on @xmath relative to the adjoint
    representation of @xmath on @xmath

Condition 2 means that the 2-cocycle

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any @xmath .

In the following we will adopt the notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any @xmath . Thus, by definition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath .

As discussed in the previous chapter any Lie algebra @xmath acts on
itself by the adjoint representation @xmath , defined by @xmath (see eq.
( 1.4 )).

We now introduce the definition of coadjoint representation of a Lie
algebra on the dual vector space. Let @xmath be a Lie algebra and let
@xmath be its dual vector space. For @xmath , we set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus @xmath is the endomorphism of @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The map @xmath is a representation of @xmath in @xmath , that we call
coadjoint representation. Hence, eq. ( 2.1 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is important to stress that there is a symmetry between @xmath , with
Lie bracket @xmath and @xmath , with Lie bracket @xmath , defined by
@xmath . In fact, setting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

the map @xmath is the coadjoint representation of @xmath in the dual of
@xmath , which is isomorphic to @xmath . Hence, eq. ( 2.1 ) is
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The symmetry between @xmath and @xmath then follows from the fact that
eq. ( 2.9 ) is equivalent to the condition on @xmath to be a 1-cocycle
on @xmath with values on @xmath , where @xmath acts on @xmath by the
adjoint action.

###### Proposition 2.1.2.

If @xmath is a Lie bialgebra, and @xmath is a Lie bracket on @xmath ,
then @xmath is a Lie bialgebra, where @xmath defines a Lie bracket on
@xmath .

By definition, @xmath is the dual of the Lie bialgebra @xmath . It is
easy to see that the dual of @xmath coincides with @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.1.3.

Let @xmath be a Lie bialgebra with dual @xmath . There exists a unique
Lie algebra structure on the vector space @xmath such that

1.   it restricts to the given brackets on @xmath and @xmath

2.   the scalar product @xmath on @xmath is invariant.

It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, the structure ( 2.10 ) is a Lie bracket on @xmath if and only
if @xmath is a Lie bialgebra.

###### Definition 2.1.4.

The double @xmath of the Lie bialgebra @xmath is defined by the vector
space @xmath together with the Lie bracket given by ( 2.10 ).

Note that @xmath is also the double of @xmath ·

#### 2.1.1 Classical Yang-Baxter equation and r-matrices

We now introduce a particular class of Lie bialgebra structures, given
by a coboundary of an element @xmath , called r-matrix . An @xmath
-matrix defines a cocycle @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

To each element @xmath in @xmath , we associate the map @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . When @xmath is determined by @xmath we write @xmath instead
of @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.1.5.

If @xmath is skew-symmetric, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to show when the @xmath -matrix defines a Lie bialgebra, we
introduce the Schouten bracket of an element @xmath with itself, denoted
by @xmath . It is the element of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the summation over the circular permutation of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.1.6.

The @xmath -matrix defines a Lie bracket on @xmath if and only if @xmath
is ad-invariant.

The condition for @xmath to be @xmath -invariant is sometimes called
generalized Yang-Baxter equation.

###### Definition 2.1.7.

Let @xmath be an element of @xmath , with symmetric part @xmath and
skew-symmetric part @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are ad-invariant, then
@xmath is called classical @xmath -matrix. If @xmath is skew-symmetric (
@xmath ) and if @xmath , then @xmath is called a triangular @xmath
-matrix.

Let us define the map @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

the map @xmath is identified with an element @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.8.

Let @xmath a finite dimensional Lie algebra.

1.   Let @xmath be in @xmath and skew-symmetric. Then @xmath is in
    @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.   Let @xmath be in @xmath , symmetric and ad-invariant. Then @xmath
    is an ad-invariant element in @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.   For @xmath , where @xmath is skew-symmetric and @xmath is symmetric
    and ad-invariant, @xmath is in @xmath and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

From this theorem we obtain

###### Corollary 2.1.9.

Let @xmath where @xmath is skew-symmetric and @xmath is symmetric and
ad-invariant. Then @xmath is ad-invariant if @xmath .

Thus an element @xmath in @xmath with ad-invariant symmetric part,
satisfying @xmath is an @xmath -matrix. The condition @xmath is called
classical Yang-Baxter equation.

###### Definition 2.1.10.

An @xmath -matrix satisfying the classical Yang-Baxter equation is
called quasi-triangular. If the symmetric part is invertible, then
@xmath is called factorisable.

#### 2.1.2 Tensor notation

Given @xmath , we define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as elements in the
third power tensor of the enveloping algebra of @xmath (i.e. an
associative algebra with unit such that @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath = @xmath , it is clear that @xmath , where @xmath is the unit
of the enveloping algebra.

Let us define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

in @xmath . With this notation, if the symmetric part of @xmath is
ad-invariant, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the classical Yang-Baxter equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Example 2.1.11.

Let @xmath be the 2-dimensional Lie algebra with basis @xmath , @xmath
and Lie bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath is a skew-symmetric solution of the classical Yang-Baxter
equation. As a consequence, @xmath and @xmath . In terms of dual basis
@xmath , @xmath of @xmath , @xmath .

###### Example 2.1.12.

Let @xmath and consider the Casimir element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the symmetric part of @xmath is @xmath and the skew symmetric part
is @xmath , and @xmath is a factorisable @xmath -matrix. Then @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In terms of the dual basis @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Example 2.1.13.

On @xmath we can consider also @xmath , which is a triangular @xmath
-matrix. Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.2 Poisson manifolds

As discussed in the previous chapter, it is always possible to define a
Poisson structure on a symplectic manifold, which give rise to Poisson
brackets on the space of smooth functions on the manifold. In the
following, we rephrase the definition of Poisson manifold given above in
a more convenient way [ 54 ] and we discuss the theory of symplectic
foliation [ 4 ] , [ 55 ] .

Let @xmath be a bivector on a manifold @xmath , i.e. a skew-symmetric,
contravariant 2-tensor. At each point @xmath , @xmath can be viewed as a
skew-symmetric bilinear form on @xmath , or as the skew-symmetric linear
map @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , @xmath are 1-forms on @xmath , we define @xmath to be the
function in @xmath whose value at @xmath is @xmath . Given @xmath we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is the Hamiltonian vector field defined in ( 1.10 ). It
is clear that the bracket induced by @xmath satisfies the Leibniz rule.

###### Definition 2.2.1.

A Poisson manifold @xmath is a manifold @xmath with a Poisson bivector
@xmath such that the bracket defined in eq. ( 2.31 ) satisfies the
Jacobi identity.

###### Example 2.2.2.

If @xmath , with coordinates @xmath , @xmath and if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the standard Poisson bracket of functions on the phase space. The
corresponding bivector is @xmath .

In local coordinates, a bivector @xmath is a Poisson bivector if and
only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of bivector field @xmath we have the following characterization
of a Poisson bivector:

###### Proposition 2.2.3.

The bivector field @xmath is a Poisson bivector if and only if @xmath ,
where @xmath is the Schouten-Nijenhuis bracket.

###### Definition 2.2.4.

A mapping @xmath between two Poisson manifolds is called a Poisson
mapping if @xmath one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Definition 2.2.5.

Given two Poisson manifolds @xmath and @xmath , the pair @xmath , is a
Poisson manifold, called Poisson product , with @xmath .

An interesting feature of Poisson manifolds is the existence of the
differential calculus of forms, which can be resumed in the following
result:

###### Theorem 2.2.6 ([54]).

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold. Then there exists a unique bilinear,
skew-symmetric operation @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This operation is given by the general formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, it provides @xmath with a Lie algebra structure such that
@xmath is a Lie algebra homomorphism.

#### 2.2.1 Symplectic Foliation

As mentioned above, every symplectic manifold admits a Poisson
structure, but the converse does not hold. In fact, any Poisson manifold
can be seen as a union of symplectic manifolds called symplectic leaves.

Locally, the symplectic foliation of @xmath can be described in terms of
coordinates. More precisely, the local structure of a Poisson manifold
at @xmath is described by the Splitting Theorem [ 55 ] :

###### Theorem 2.2.7 (Weinstein).

On a Poisson manifold @xmath , any point @xmath has a coordinate
neighborhood with coordinates @xmath centered at @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rank of @xmath at @xmath is @xmath . Since @xmath depends only on
the @xmath ’s, this theorem gives a decomposition of the neighborhood of
@xmath as a product of two Poisson manifolds: one with rank @xmath , and
the other with rank 0 at @xmath .

For any point @xmath of the Poisson manifold, if @xmath are normal
coordinates as in the previous theorem, then the symplectic leaf through
@xmath is given locally by the equation @xmath . Hence, for any point
@xmath , we have a symplectic leaf through it. Locally, this leaf has
canonical coordinates @xmath , where the bracket is given by canonical
symplectic relations. Notice that the symplectic leaf is well-defined,
but each choice of coordinates @xmath in Theorem 2.2.7 gives rise to a
different term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

called the transverse Poisson structure of dimension @xmath . The
transverse structures are not uniquely defined, but they are all
isomorphic. Locally, the transverse structure is determined by the
structure functions @xmath (which vanishes at @xmath ).

Given a Poisson manifold the Casimir functions are functions which are
constant on the symplectic leaves.

### 2.3 Poisson Lie groups

Poisson Lie groups are a particular class of Poisson manifolds. Namely,
a Poisson Lie group is a Poisson manifold that is also a Lie group and
its corresponding infinitesimal object is a Lie bialgebra. In particular
we discuss Poisson Lie groups defined by @xmath -matrices and some basic
examples.

Recall that, given a Lie group @xmath , the left and right translations
by an element @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

###### Definition 2.3.1.

A Poisson Lie group @xmath is a Lie group equipped with a multiplicative
Poisson structure @xmath .

In terms of the Poisson tensor @xmath , the Poisson structure is
multiplicative if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to the following condition (see [ 28 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all functions @xmath on @xmath , and for all @xmath in @xmath . This
condition means that the multiplication map @xmath is a Poisson map.
Note that a nonzero multiplicative Poisson structure is in general
neither left nor right invariant. In fact the left or right translation
by @xmath preserves @xmath if and only if @xmath .

###### Example 2.3.2.

If @xmath , it is obviously multiplicative, hence any Lie group @xmath
with the trivial Poisson structure is a Poisson Lie group. The direct
product of two Poisson Lie groups is again a Poisson Lie group.

A very important class of Poisson Lie groups arise from the @xmath
-matrix formalism. Let @xmath . Define a bivector @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that this bivector is multiplicative. In particular we have:

###### Theorem 2.3.3 (Drinfeld).

Let @xmath be a connected Lie group with Lie algebra @xmath . Let @xmath
. Define a bivector field on @xmath by eq. ( 2.44 ). Then @xmath is a
Poisson Lie group if and only if @xmath is Ad-invariant. In particular,
when @xmath satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation, it defines a
multiplicative Poisson structure on @xmath .

The Poisson structure @xmath vanishes at the identity @xmath , and its
linearization at @xmath is given by @xmath . The map @xmath is a
derivative and its dual map @xmath is given by @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath can be any 1-forms on @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

When @xmath is a Poisson bivector, @xmath satisfies the Jacobi identity,
so it makes @xmath into a Lie algebra. The Lie algebra @xmath is just
the linearization of the Poisson structure at @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.4.

A multiplicative bivector field @xmath on a connected Lie group @xmath
is Poisson if and only if its linearization at @xmath defines a Lie
bracket on @xmath .

The relation between Poisson Lie groups and Lie bialgebras is given by
the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.3.5 (Drinfeld).

If @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, then the linearization of @xmath at
@xmath defines a Lie algebra structure on @xmath such that @xmath form a
Lie bialgebra over @xmath , called the tangent Lie bialgebra to @xmath .
Conversely, if @xmath is connected and simply connected, then every Lie
bialgebra @xmath over @xmath defines a unique multiplicative Poisson
structure @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath is the tangent Lie bialgebra
to the Poisson Lie group @xmath .

It is important to emphasize that, given a connected Lie group @xmath
with Lie algebra @xmath , for an arbitrary 1-cocycle @xmath on @xmath ,
there is no general way to integrate @xmath to the 1-cocycle @xmath on
@xmath such that @xmath . In the case of a Lie bialgebra @xmath the
integration can be reduced to integrating Lie algebras to Lie groups and
Lie algebra homomorphisms to Lie groups homomorphisms.

#### 2.3.1 Examples

###### Quasi-triangular structure of @xmath

Let @xmath be the group of real @xmath matrices with determinant 1. We
consider @xmath , as seen in Example 2.1.12 , as element in @xmath ,
with skew-symmetric part @xmath . Then, given a generic element @xmath
and using ( 2.44 ) for @xmath we get the quadratic Poisson brackets,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that @xmath is a Casimir element for this Poisson
structure, which is indeed defined on @xmath .

###### Triangular structure of @xmath

Consider now the triangular @xmath -matrix defined in Example 2.1.13 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Also in this case @xmath is a Casimir function.

###### Quasi-triangular structure of @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath is a basis for @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Any
@xmath is such that @xmath is @xmath -invariant.

Let @xmath and define the Poisson structure on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, given a generic element @xmath as @xmath , the Poisson brackets
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, the Lie bracket defined by @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.2 The dual of a Poisson Lie group

In Section 2.1 we introduced the dual and the double of a Lie bialgebra,
so now we discuss the corresponding constructions at the level of the
Lie group.

Given a Poisson Lie group @xmath , we consider its Lie bialgebra @xmath
whose 1-cocycle is @xmath . Let us denote the dual Lie bialgebra by
@xmath . By Theorem 2.3.5 we know that there is a unique connected and
simply connected Poisson Lie group @xmath , called the dual of @xmath ,
associated to the Lie bialgebra @xmath . If @xmath is connected and
simply connected, then the dual of @xmath is @xmath .

When @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, its Lie bialgebra @xmath has a
double @xmath . The connected and simply connected Lie group @xmath with
Lie algebra @xmath is called the double of @xmath . Since @xmath is a
factorisable Lie bialgebra with @xmath -matrix @xmath , @xmath is a
factorisable Poisson Lie group with Poisson structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

###### Example 2.3.6.

Let @xmath be equipped with the Poisson structure given in Example 2.3.1
. Then @xmath can be identified with @xmath . The double Lie algebra
@xmath is the Lie algebra @xmath considered as a real Lie algebra. The
decomposition @xmath is the well-known Gram-Schmidt decomposition.

###### Example 2.3.7.

Consider the Lie bialgebra @xmath of Example 2.1.11 . A matrix
representation of @xmath is the Lie algebra @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subgroups @xmath and @xmath of the Lie group @xmath of matrices with
determinant @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Poisson bivector on @xmath in the coordinates @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is degenerate at points with @xmath and vanishes at @xmath .

### 2.4 Poisson actions and Momentum maps

A Poisson action is a key concept for the generalization of the theory
of momentum map, since it generalizes the canonical action discussed in
the previous chapter.

Recall, from Definition 1.2.4 , that a canonical action of a Lie group
@xmath on a Poisson manifold @xmath is defined as a group action which
preserves the Poisson structure. Instead, a Poisson action is an action
of a Poisson Lie group on a Poisson manifold satisfying a different
property of compatibility between the Poisson bivectors of both
manifolds. When the Poisson structure is trivial we recover the
canonical actions.

In the following we always assume that @xmath is connected and simply
connected, such that Theorem 2.3.5 holds.

###### Definition 2.4.1.

The action of @xmath on @xmath is called Poisson action if the map
@xmath is Poisson, where @xmath is a Poisson product with structure
@xmath

If @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, the left and right actions of @xmath
on itself are Poisson actions. From the previous chapter, we have that,
given an action @xmath of @xmath on @xmath , the infinitesimal generator
@xmath associated to @xmath is the vector field on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This defines an action of @xmath on @xmath by @xmath , in fact we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that if @xmath carries the zero Poisson structure @xmath , the
action is Poisson if and only if it preserves @xmath . In general, when
@xmath , the structure @xmath is not invariant with respect to the
action.

###### Proposition 2.4.2.

Assume that @xmath is a connected Poisson Lie group with associate
1-cocycle of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and let @xmath be a Poisson manifold. The action @xmath is a Poisson
action if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Lie derivative.

###### Definition 2.4.3.

A Lie algebra action @xmath is called an infinitesimal Poisson action of
the Lie bialgebra @xmath on @xmath if it satisfies eq. ( 2.63 ).

In this formalism the definition of momentum map reads (Lu, [ 33 ] , [
34 ] ):

###### Definition 2.4.4.

A momentum map for the Poisson action @xmath is a map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the left invariant 1-form on @xmath defined by the
element @xmath and @xmath is the cotangent lift @xmath .

If @xmath has trivial Poisson structure, then @xmath , the differential
1-form @xmath is the constant 1-form @xmath on @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, in this case, we recover the usual definition of a momentum map
for a Hamiltonian action @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, @xmath is the Hamiltonian vector field with Hamiltonian
@xmath .

When @xmath is not trivial, @xmath is a Maurer-Cartan form, hence @xmath
can not be written as a differential of a Hamiltonian function.

#### 2.4.1 Dressing Transformations

One of the most important example of Poisson action is the dressing
action of @xmath on @xmath . Consider a Poisson Lie group @xmath , its
dual @xmath and its double @xmath , with Lie algebras @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.

###### Theorem 2.4.5.

Let @xmath the vector field on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each @xmath . Here @xmath is the left invariant 1-form on @xmath
defined by @xmath . Then

1.   The map @xmath is an action of @xmath on @xmath , whose
    linearization at @xmath is the coadjoint action of @xmath on @xmath
    .

2.   The action @xmath is an infinitesimal Poisson action of the Lie
    bialgebra @xmath on the Poisson Lie group @xmath .

A proof of this theorem can be found in [ 28 ] .

The action defined in ( 2.67 ) is generally called left infinitesimal
dressing action of @xmath on @xmath . In particular, when @xmath is a
trivial Poisson Lie group, its dual group @xmath is the Abelian group
@xmath , and the left infinitesimal dressing action of @xmath on @xmath
is given by the linear vector fields @xmath , for each @xmath . It is
easy to see that @xmath is a Lie algebra homomorphism from @xmath to the
Lie algebra of linear vector fields on @xmath , in fact we find @xmath .

Similarly, the right infinitesimal dressing action of @xmath on @xmath
is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the right invariant 1-form on @xmath .

Let @xmath (resp. @xmath ) a left (resp. right) dressing vector field on
@xmath . If all the dressing vector fields are complete, we can
integrate the @xmath -action into a Poisson @xmath -action on @xmath
called the dressing action and we say that the dressing actions consist
of dressing transformations.

###### Proposition 2.4.6.

The symplectic leaves of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) are the connected
components of the orbits of the right or left dressing action of @xmath
(resp. @xmath ).

The momentum map for the dressing action of @xmath on @xmath is the
opposite of the identity map from @xmath to itself.

For the Poisson Lie group @xmath we identify @xmath with the space of
left invariant 1-forms on @xmath . Then, this space is closed under the
bracket defined by @xmath and the induced bracket on @xmath , by the
above identification, coincides with the original Lie bracket on @xmath
(see [ 56 ] ). Given @xmath , we denote by @xmath the left invariant
form on @xmath whose value at identity is @xmath . The basic property of
@xmath ’s is the Maurer-Cartan equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following proposition we prove new relations satisfied by @xmath
:

###### Proposition 2.4.7.

Let @xmath be two left invariant 1-forms on @xmath , such that @xmath ,
@xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

First, we prove that @xmath is a left-invariant 1-form. Let us consider
and element @xmath and the correspondent left invariant vector field
@xmath . We contract @xmath with the bracket @xmath to show that we
obtain a constant. More precisely, we contract @xmath term by term with
the equation ( 2.38 ) and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, substituting the relations ( 2.72 ) in ( 2.38 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , eq. ( 2.70 ) is proved. Moreover, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath . From @xmath , eq. ( 2.71 ) follows. ∎

For sake of completeness, we record an alternative way to define the
dressing action. Consider @xmath and @xmath and let @xmath be their
product. Since @xmath , elements in @xmath close to the unit can be
decomposed in a unique way as a product of an element in @xmath and an
element in @xmath . Then, there exist elements @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the action of @xmath on @xmath (resp. the action of @xmath on
@xmath ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (resp. @xmath ) denotes the @xmath -factor (resp. @xmath
-factor) of @xmath as @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath . Accordingly, the
product @xmath can be uniquely decomposed into @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . So, by definition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

This defines locally a left action of @xmath on @xmath and a right
action of @xmath on @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.8.

A multiplicative Poisson tensor @xmath on @xmath is complete if each
left (equiv. right) dressing vector field is complete on @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.4.9.

A Poisson Lie group is complete if and only if its dual Poisson Lie
group is complete.

Assume that @xmath is a complete Poisson Lie group. We denote
respectively the left (resp. right) dressing action of @xmath on its
dual @xmath by @xmath (resp. @xmath ).

###### Definition 2.4.10.

A momentum map @xmath for a left (resp. right) Poisson action @xmath is
called G-equivariant if it is such with respect to the left dressing
action of @xmath on @xmath , that is, @xmath (resp. @xmath )

A momentum map is @xmath -equivariant if and only if it is a Poisson
map, i.e. @xmath . Given this generalization of the concept of
equivariance introduced for Lie group actions, it is natural to call
Hamiltonian action a Poisson action induced by an equivariant momentum
map.

#### 2.4.2 Structure of the momentum map

In this section we introduce a weaker definition of momentum map in
infinitesimal terms. From Definition 2.4.4 , it follows that one can
associate to a momentum map a 1-form @xmath . In the following, we
discuss the properties of these forms and, using the infinitesimal
momentum map, we analyze the conditions under which the momentum map is
determined. Then, we introduce the concept of gauge equivalence for the
@xmath ’s and we show the relation of this equivalence class with a
cohomological class in @xmath .

As a direct consequence of the properties of @xmath ’s stated in Section
2.4.1 , we have the following proposition:

###### Proposition 2.4.11.

Given a Poisson action @xmath with equivariant momentum map @xmath , the
forms @xmath satisfy the following identities:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

These identities are a direct consequence of the properties of @xmath
stated in the previous section. In particular, eq. ( 2.79 ) follows from
eq. ( 2.69 ) by simply recalling that the pullback and the differential
commute. Eq. ( 2.78 ) follows from eq. ( 2.70 ), using the equivariance
of the momentum map. ∎

In the following, we give the definition of infinitesimal momentum map
that, as will be seen in the next chapter, plays a fundamental role in
the quantization of the momentum map.

###### Definition 2.4.12.

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold and @xmath a Poisson Lie group. An
infinitesimal momentum map is a morphism of Gerstenhaber algebras

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following theorem is crucial in the study of the conditions in which
an infinitesimal momentum map determines a momentum map in the usual
sense.

###### Theorem 2.4.13.

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold and @xmath a linear map. Suppose that
the following relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

are satisfied. Then:

1.  @xmath generate an involutive distribution @xmath on @xmath .

2.   Suppose, moreover, that @xmath is connected and simply connected.
    Then the leaves @xmath of @xmath coincide with graphs of maps @xmath
    satisfying @xmath and @xmath acts freely transitively on the space
    of leaves by left multiplication on the second factor.

3.   Vector fields @xmath give a homomorphism

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.82)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Suppose that they integrate to the action of @xmath on @xmath (which
    is automatically the case when @xmath is compact and @xmath simply
    connected). Then the induced action of @xmath on @xmath is a Poisson
    action of the Poisson group @xmath and @xmath is a momentum map for
    this action if and only if the functions

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.83)
      -- -------- -- --------

    satisfy

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.84)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.   Using the eqs. ( 2.69 )-( 2.79 ), the @xmath -valued form @xmath on
    @xmath satisfies

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.85)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and hence it defines a distribution on @xmath . Let @xmath be any of
    its leaves. Let @xmath , @xmath denote the projection onto the first
    (resp. second) factor in @xmath . Since the linear span of @xmath at
    any point @xmath coincides with @xmath , the restriction of the
    projection @xmath to @xmath is an immersion. Moreover, since @xmath
    , @xmath is a covering map.

2.   As we assumed that @xmath is simply connected, @xmath is a
    diffeomorphism and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.86)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is a smooth map whose graph coincides with @xmath . It is immediate,
    that @xmath .

    The statement about the action of @xmath on the space of leaves
    follows from the fact that @xmath ’s are left invariant.

3.   Suppose that the condition ( 2.84 ) is satisfied. Then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.87)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and @xmath coincides with the set of zero’s of @xmath . Hence,
    @xmath is a Poisson map and, in particular

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.88)
      -- -------- -- --------

    i.e. it is a @xmath -equivariant map.

∎

We are interested in understanding when the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied. We show that it can be solved explicitly, at least in the
case when @xmath is a Kähler manifold.

###### Definition 2.4.14.

Two solutions @xmath and @xmath of eq. ( 2.89 ) are said to be gauge
equivalent , if there exists a smooth function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Theorem 2.4.15.

Suppose that @xmath is is a Kähler manifold. The set of gauge
equivalence classes of @xmath satisfying the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

is in bijective correspondence with the set of the cohomology classes
@xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is is a Kähler manifold, @xmath is a formal CDGA
(commutative differential graded algebra) [ 20 ] . As a consequence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a formal DGLA (some elements of DGLA’s will be given in the next
chapter) and, in particular, there exists a bijection between the
equivalence classes of Maurer Cartan elements of @xmath and Maurer
Cartan elements of @xmath .

A Maurer-Cartan element in @xmath is an element @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the claim is proved. ∎

#### 2.4.3 Reconstruction problem

In this section we discuss the conditions under which the distribution
@xmath defined in Theorem 2.4.13 admits a leaf satisfying eq. ( 2.84 ).
In particular, we analyze the case where the structure on @xmath is
trivial and the Heisenberg group case. In the following we keep the
assumption that @xmath is connected and simply connected.

###### Abelian case

Suppose that @xmath is abelian. Then, the forms @xmath satisfy @xmath ,
hence @xmath (since @xmath ), for some @xmath .

Let us denote by @xmath the linear functions @xmath . Then @xmath and
the leaves of the distribution @xmath coincide with the level sets (on
@xmath ) of the functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the basic identity ( 2.38 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath . By the Jacobi identity, the constants @xmath
define a class @xmath . Suppose that this class vanishes (for example if
@xmath semisimple). Then, there exists a @xmath such that @xmath .
Hence, given a leaf @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

if and only if @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, the space of leaves of @xmath which give a momentum map
coincides with the affine space modeled on @xmath (which again vanishes
when @xmath is semisimple). This proves the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.4.16.

Suppose that @xmath is a connected and simply connected Lie group with
trivial Poisson structure and @xmath is compact. Then an infinitesimal
momentum map is a map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is a two cocycle @xmath on @xmath with values in @xmath . The
infinitesimal momentum map @xmath is generated by a momentum map @xmath
if this cocycle vanishes and, in this case, @xmath is unique.

###### Heisenberg group case

Suppose now that @xmath is the Heisenberg group. Let @xmath be a basis
for @xmath , where @xmath is central and @xmath . Let @xmath be the dual
basis of @xmath . Recall that the cocycle @xmath on @xmath dual to the
Lie algebra structure on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

There are essentially two possibilities for the Lie bialgebra structure
on @xmath , which give the following two possibilities for the Lie
algebra structure on @xmath . Either

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

or

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The result below will turn out to be independent of the choice - the
computations will be done using the second choice, which corresponds to
@xmath , with @xmath acting by rotation on @xmath . Below we use the
notation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying the Cartan formula @xmath and the identity @xmath to the basic
equation ( 2.38 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In our case it gives the following equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which are also satisfied after replacing @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath
denote the ideal generating our distribution @xmath . Then, from above,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, as before, @xmath is a leaf of @xmath . Using the relation ( 2.71
), we get

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.112)
  -- -- -- ---------

In particular, @xmath is invariant under left translations. Since @xmath
is zero at the identity, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the first equations ( 2.110 ), @xmath is leafwise constant, hence so
is @xmath . Hence we have

###### Lemma 2.4.17.

@xmath is constant on @xmath and necessary condition for existence of
the momentum map is @xmath .

Let us continue under the assumption that @xmath . Then, given a leaf
@xmath , by eq. ( 2.110 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some constants @xmath and @xmath . Setting @xmath to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Theorem 2.4.18.

Let @xmath be a Poisson Lie group acting on a Poisson manifold @xmath
with an infinitesimal momentum map @xmath and such that @xmath is the
Heisenberg group. Let @xmath denote the basis of @xmath dual to the
standard basis @xmath of @xmath (with @xmath central and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is constant on @xmath . The form @xmath lifts to a momentum map @xmath
if and only if @xmath . When @xmath the set of momentum maps with given
@xmath is one dimensional with free transitive action of @xmath .

#### 2.4.4 Infinitesimal deformations of a momentum map

In the following we study the behavior of deformations of a momentum
map, close to the identity. Indeed, we consider a deformation of @xmath
given by the map @xmath and we discuss the property of the infinitesimal
generator of the action induced by this deformed momentum map.

###### Theorem 2.4.19.

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold with a Poisson action of a Poisson Lie
group @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a differentiable path of momentum
maps for this action. Let @xmath denote the exponential map. We can
assume that @xmath is of the form @xmath for some differentiable map
@xmath . Then, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.117)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Assuming that the deformed momentum maps can be written as @xmath then
we have @xmath . We want to figure out its behavior close to the
identity so we calculate @xmath . First notice that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so we get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The differential of the exponential map @xmath is a map from the
cotangent bundle of @xmath to the cotangent bundle of @xmath . It can be
trivialized as @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath hence the map @xmath is
given by @xmath . We get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and finally

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is independent of @xmath , we get the identity ( 2.118 ).

In order to prove the relation ( 2.117 ), recall that, since @xmath is a
family of Poisson maps, one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying @xmath to both sides, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting the expression of @xmath ’s ( 2.123 ) and using the
following identity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the claimed equality follows. ∎

We consider the case of a compact and semisimple Poisson Lie group
@xmath to obtain a uniqueness condition for the momentum map. From the
relation ( 2.117 ) we can conclude that there exists a function @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using this expression we get @xmath , where @xmath . Now observe that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting these results in ( 2.118 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that there exists a vector field @xmath associated with the
deformation of the momentum map which commutes with the action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, given the momentum map @xmath , if there exists an
endomorphism on @xmath such that the associated vector field commutes
with the action, then we get another momentum map, as discussed in the
Theorem ( 2.4.19 ).

### 2.5 Poisson Reduction

Here we present the main result of this chapter. We show that, given a
Poisson action we can define a reduced manifold in terms of momentum
map. A first generalization of the Marsden-Weinstein reduction has been
given by Lu in [ 34 ] , where it is shown that, given a Poisson Lie
group acting on a symplectic manifold @xmath , the symplectic structure
on @xmath induces a symplectic structure on the leaves of @xmath
generated by the momentum map.

Given a Poisson action @xmath with momentum map @xmath , we define a
@xmath -invariant foliation @xmath of @xmath . The leaves are not
Poisson manifolds, but considering the action of @xmath on the space of
leaves, we prove that, for each leaf @xmath , the Poisson structure on
@xmath induces a Poisson structure on the orbit space @xmath , where
@xmath is the isotropic group at any point of @xmath . This shows that
we can reduce @xmath to another Poisson manifold @xmath that we call the
Poisson reduced space .

#### 2.5.1 Poisson structure on @xmath

In this section we prove that, given a Poisson Lie group @xmath acting
on a Poisson manifold @xmath , with equivariant momentum map @xmath ,
the orbit space inherits a Poisson structure from @xmath . From now on
we further assume that the Poisson Lie group @xmath is complete.

In [ 50 ] Semenov-Tian-Shansky showed that, given a Poisson action, if
the orbit space is a smooth manifold, it carries a Poisson structure
such that the natural projection @xmath is a Poisson mapping. More
precisely, given @xmath with the definitions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then @xmath inherits a Poisson structure from the Poisson structure on
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider a Poisson action @xmath with equivariant momentum map @xmath
and assume that the orbit space @xmath is a smooth manifold. Recall that
when the Poisson structure of @xmath is trivial, the infinitesimal
Poisson action @xmath is a Hamiltonian vector field, but in general this
does not hold. The first goal of this section is to provide an explicit
formulation for @xmath , in terms of local coordinates. We use the
properties of the momentum map and dressing action to obtain such a
formulation.

We observe that the Poisson Lie group @xmath can be described locally in
terms of coordinates @xmath such that @xmath is given by the Splitting
Theorem 2.2.7 . In particular, the transverse structure is determined by
the structure functions @xmath , which vanishes on the symplectic
leaves. As discussed in Section 2.4.1 the Poisson Lie group @xmath acts
on @xmath by dressing action and the dressing orbits are the same as the
symplectic leaves. Hence, the generic orbit @xmath through @xmath is a
closed submanifold of @xmath and @xmath are transversal coordinates such
that @xmath . Note that @xmath is a submersion, hence it has open image.
In particular, the image of @xmath is an open neighborhood of a generic
orbit of @xmath on @xmath .

Define the functions @xmath as the pullbacks by @xmath of the
transversal coordinates @xmath to the orbit on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath are defined locally in a @xmath -invariant open neighborhood
@xmath of the preimage @xmath . We can assume that @xmath is a regular
value of @xmath , hence @xmath is a closed @xmath -invariant submanifold
of @xmath . Since @xmath vanishes on the orbit @xmath , @xmath vanishes
on the preimage @xmath . The 1-forms @xmath are in the span of the
@xmath ’s. Since the left invariant 1-form @xmath in local coordinates
can be expressed as a linear combination of @xmath , using the
definition ( 2.135 ) we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any @xmath . As a consequence, the infinitesimal generators @xmath
of the Hamiltonian action @xmath , induced by @xmath , can be written as
a linear combination of Hamiltonian vector fields:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We use this explicit formulation to prove that @xmath inherits a Poisson
structure from @xmath :

###### Theorem 2.5.1.

Let @xmath be a Poisson action with equivariant momentum map @xmath .
The algebra @xmath of @xmath -invariant functions on @xmath is a Lie
subalgebra of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then @xmath for any @xmath . Applying the relation ( 2.137
) we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that implies @xmath for any @xmath . Then, using the Jacobi identity we
get @xmath . Since @xmath is connected we proved that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence @xmath is @xmath -invariant and the claim is proved. ∎

#### 2.5.2 Poisson structure on @xmath

Consider the @xmath -valued 1-forms @xmath defined by @xmath by eq. (
2.136 ). The distribution @xmath defines a @xmath -invariant foliation
@xmath on @xmath , the open submanifold of regular values of @xmath of
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any leaf @xmath , which is of the form @xmath . The leaf @xmath is
not a Poisson submanifold but we prove that, considering the action of
@xmath on the space of leaves, the quotient @xmath inherits a Poisson
structure by @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the stabilizer of the action of @xmath on @xmath .

In order to prove this statement we observe that, since @xmath
restricted to @xmath does not depend on the transversal coordinates
@xmath ’s, the Poisson structure @xmath on @xmath depends on the
coordinates @xmath defined in ( 2.135 ) only in the combination @xmath .
This is evident because the differential @xmath between @xmath and
@xmath is a bijective map, so using the definition ( 2.135 ) the claim
is proved.

Now consider the ideal @xmath generated by @xmath . The coordinates
@xmath are locally defined but we can show that @xmath is globally
defined. Considering a different neighborhood on the orbit of @xmath we
have transversal coordinates @xmath and their pullback to @xmath will be
@xmath . The coordinates @xmath are defined in a different open
neighborhood @xmath of @xmath , but we can see that the ideal @xmath
generated by @xmath coincides with @xmath generated by @xmath on the
intersection of @xmath and @xmath , then it is globally defined.
Moreover, since @xmath is a Poisson map we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence the ideal @xmath is closed under Poisson brackets.

###### Lemma 2.5.2.

Suppose that @xmath is an embedded submanifold of the smooth manifold
@xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on @xmath satisfying @xmath . If the
equivalence class @xmath is @xmath -invariant, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . It is clear that @xmath is @xmath -invariant and hence it
defines a smooth function @xmath . Since @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
embedded submanifold of the @xmath -dimensional smooth manifold @xmath ,
the inclusion map @xmath has local coordinates representation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are constants. Hence we can extend @xmath to a smooth
function @xmath on @xmath by setting @xmath . The pullback @xmath of
@xmath by @xmath is @xmath -invariant and satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hence @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 2.5.3.

Let @xmath be a Poisson action of @xmath on a Poisson manifold @xmath
with equivariant momentum map @xmath . For each leaf, the orbit space
@xmath has a Poisson structure induced by @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we prove that the Poisson bracket of @xmath induces a well defined
Poisson bracket on @xmath . In fact, for any @xmath and @xmath the
Poisson bracket @xmath still belongs to the ideal @xmath . Since the
ideal @xmath is closed under Poisson brackets, @xmath belongs to @xmath
. The function @xmath , by definition on the ideal @xmath , can be
written as a linear combination of @xmath , so @xmath . By the Theorem
2.5.1 , we have @xmath , hence @xmath as stated. Finally, using the
isomorphism proved in the Lemma ( 2.5.2 ) and the identifications

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the claim is proved. ∎

We refer to @xmath as the Poisson reduced space .

### 2.6 An example: @xmath action

Here we want to discuss a concrete example for the Poisson reduction.
Consider the Lie bialgebra @xmath with generators @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and cobracket given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The matrix representation of @xmath is the Lie algebra @xmath and the
subgroups @xmath and @xmath of @xmath of matrices with positive
determinant are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we remark that the Poisson bivector on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this simple case it is clear that @xmath are global coordinates on
@xmath . We analyze the orbits of the dressing action of @xmath on
@xmath for this example.

Remember that the dressing orbits @xmath through a point @xmath are the
same as the symplectic leaves, hence it is clear that they are generated
by the equation @xmath . The symplectic foliation of the manifold @xmath
is now given by two open orbit, determined by the conditions @xmath and
@xmath respectively, and a closed orbit given by @xmath and @xmath .

Consider a Poisson action of @xmath on a generic Poisson manifold @xmath
induced by the equivariant momentum map @xmath . Its pullback

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

maps the coordinates @xmath and @xmath on @xmath to @xmath and @xmath
resp. In order to simplify the notation we denote the coordinates on
@xmath only with @xmath and @xmath . It is important to underline that
we have no information on the dimension of @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath
are just a couple of the possible coordinates. Nevertheless, since
@xmath is a Poisson map, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

on @xmath . The infinitesimal action of @xmath on @xmath that we
consider can be written in terms of these coordinates @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the previous section we proved that the Poisson reduction is given
equivalently either as the Poisson algebra @xmath on the quotient @xmath
, with @xmath or as @xmath . In the following, we discuss 3 different
cases of dressing orbit.

###### Case 1: @xmath.

Consider the dressing orbit @xmath generated by the condition @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath are both positive, we can put

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since @xmath . For this reason we can claim that the preimage of the
dressing orbit can be split as @xmath and @xmath is given explicitly by
the set of functions generated by @xmath . The infinitesimal action is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is just the action of @xmath on the plane. Hence the Poisson
reduction in this case is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Case 2: @xmath.

This case is similar, with the only difference that @xmath .

###### Case 3: @xmath.

This case is slightly different. The orbit @xmath is given by fixed
points on the line @xmath , then we choose the point @xmath . Clearly,
in this case we can not define @xmath .

Consider the ideal @xmath of functions vanishing on @xmath . It is easy
to check that it is @xmath -invariant, hence the Poisson reduction in
this case is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## Chapter 3 Quantum Momentum Map

The main goal of this chapter is the definition of the quantum momentum
map as a deformation of the classical momentum map, introduced in the
previous chapter. In the first part we introduce the reader to the
theory of deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds developed by M.
Kontsevich [ 27 ] . Then we present some basic results about quantum
groups and their connection with Poisson Lie groups and Lie bialgebras [
7 ] . Finally, we discuss the quantization of the momentum map and
analyze some examples of quantum reduction.

### 3.1 Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds

We start this section with a survey of deformation quantization
sketching the physical motivations which underlie such theory. In
general, deformation quantization establishes a correspondence between
classical and quantum mechanics.

In the Hamiltonian formalism of classical mechanics, physical
observables are represented by smooth functions on a certain space,
called phase space. This generally is a symplectic or Poisson manifold
@xmath . On the other hand, a quantum system is usually described by a
Hilbert space and the observables are self-adjoint operators on it.
However, a formal correspondence between the two theories is still
missing, despite the fact that many progresses in that direction have
been done.

The problem of finding a precise mathematical procedure to associate to
a classical observable (smooth function on @xmath ) a quantum analog,
was first approached by trying to construct a correspondence between the
commutative algebra @xmath and the non-commutative algebra of operators.
Starting from the quantization of @xmath , the first result was achieved
by Groenewold [ 21 ] , which states that the Poisson algebra @xmath can
not be quantized in such a way that the Poisson bracket of two classical
observables is mapped into the Lie bracket of the correspondent
operators.

The idea of Bayen, Flato et al. [ 2 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] was a change of
perspective: instead of mapping functions to operators, the algebra of
functions can be deformed into a non-commutative one. In particular,
they proved that on the symplectic vector space @xmath , there exists a
standard deformation quantization, or star product, known as the
Moyal-Weyl product. The origins of the Moyal-Weyl product can be found
in the works of Weyl [ 57 ] and Wigner [ 58 ] , where they give an
explicit correspondence between functions and operators, and of
Groenewold [ 21 ] and Moyal [ 43 ] , where the product and the bracket
of operators defined by Weyl have been introduced. The existence of an
associative star product has been generalized to a symplectic manifold
admitting a flat connection @xmath in [ 2 ] . The first proof of the
existence of star product for any symplectic manifold was given by De
Wilde and Lecomte [ 9 ] and few years later by Fedosov [ 12 ] . In
subsequent works (e.g. [ 44 ] , [ 23 ] ) the equivalence classes of star
products on symplectic manifolds and the connection with de Rham
cohomology has been studied. It came out that the equivalence classes of
star products and elements in @xmath are in a one-to-one correspondence.

The existence and classification of star product culminated with
Kontsevich’s Formality Theorem, that was first formalized in a
conjecture in [ 26 ] and then proved in [ 27 ] . Kontsevich showed that
any finite dimensional Poisson manifold @xmath admits a canonical
deformation quantization and established a correspondence between the
set of isomorphism classes of deformations of @xmath and the set of
equivalence classes of formal Poisson structures on @xmath .

#### 3.1.1 Classification of Star Products

We start discussing the problem of the existence of a formal deformation
for an arbitrary Poisson manifold. First, we recall the basic notion of
formal deformation of an algebra @xmath and then we explain the
connection of deformations with Poisson structures.

Kontsevich in [ 27 ] solved the problem of classifying star products on
a given Poisson manifold @xmath by proving that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between equivalence classes of star products and
equivalence classes of Poisson structures.

Let @xmath be a commutative ring and @xmath a @xmath -algebra,
associative and unital. Denote by @xmath the ring of formal power series
in @xmath and by @xmath the @xmath -module of formal power series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with coefficients in @xmath . A formal deformation of the algebra @xmath
is a formal power series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are @xmath -bilinear maps such that

1.   The product @xmath is associative

2.  @xmath for any @xmath

An isomorphism of two deformations @xmath , @xmath is a formal power
series @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be a smooth manifold. It has been proven in [ 2 ] that a
deformation quantization of @xmath , or a star product , is a
deformation of @xmath such that @xmath are bidifferential operators. An
isomorphism of two star products is an isomorphism of the corresponding
deformations such that the operators @xmath are differential.

Given a star product on a smooth manifold @xmath , we can define a
Poisson bracket on @xmath by setting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall from the previous chapter that we can associate a bivector @xmath
to the Poisson bracket, putting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the associativity of @xmath we obtain that the Poisson bracket (
3.4 ) is necessarily of the form @xmath for some bivector field @xmath .

From Proposition 2.2.3 we know that a bivector @xmath is a Poisson
bivector if and only if the Schouten bracket @xmath is zero. It is easy
to show that for any star product the bivector field @xmath in eq. ( 3.5
) is a Poisson structure. Moreover, we can define a formal Poisson
structure as a formal power series @xmath such that @xmath . For any
Poisson structure @xmath it is possible to define a formal Poisson
structure @xmath . Two formal Poisson structures @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent if there is a formal power series @xmath such that @xmath .
The connection between formal Poisson structures and star products
motivates the following result:

###### Theorem 3.1.1 (Kontsevich, [27]).

There is a bijection, natural with respect to diffeomorphisms, between
the set of equivalence classes of formal Poisson structures on @xmath
and the set of isomorphism classes of deformation quantizations of
@xmath .

In other words, this theorem states that classes of star products
corresponds to classes of deformations of the Poisson structure, i.e.
any Poisson manifold admits a deformation quantization. This result
follows from a more general one, called Formality theorem.

#### 3.1.2 Formality Theory

As mentioned in the previous section, a Poisson structure is completely
defined by the choice of a bivector field satisfying certain properties;
on the other hand a star product is specified by a family of
bidifferential operators. In order to work out the correspondence
between these two objects, we introduce the two differential graded Lie
algebras they belong to: multivector fields @xmath and multidifferential
operators @xmath . In the Formality theorem, Kontsevich constructed a
@xmath quasi-isomorphism between these differential graded Lie algebras.

###### Definition 3.1.2.

A graded Lie algebra (GLA) is a graded vector space @xmath endowed with
a bilinear operation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfying the following conditions:

1.   homogeneity, @xmath

2.   skew-symmetry, @xmath

3.   Jacoby identity, @xmath

for any @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

As an example, any Lie algebra is a GLA concentrated in degree 0.

###### Definition 3.1.3.

A differential graded Lie algebra (DGLA) is a GLA @xmath together with a
differential @xmath , i.e. a linear operator of degree 1 which satisfies
the Leibniz rule

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath .

Given a DGLA we can define immediately the cohomology of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The set @xmath has a natural structure of graded Lie algebra.

The morphism @xmath of DGLA’s induces a morphism @xmath between
cohomologies. Recall that a quasi-isomorphism is a morphism of DGLA’s
inducing isomorphisms in cohomology.

###### Definition 3.1.4.

A differential graded Lie algebra @xmath is formal if it is
quasi-isomorphic to its cohomology, regarded as a DGLA with zero
differential and the induced bracket.

#### Multivector fields and Multidifferential operators

In the following, we discuss two DGLA’s which will play a fundamental
role in deformation quantization (a useful presentation can be found in
[ 6 ] ). We start with the DGLA of multidifferential operators, which is
a subalgebra of the Hochschild DGLA. In the following, we explain how
this algebra is constructed.

The Hochschild complex of an associative unital algebra @xmath is the
complex @xmath with vanishing components in degree @xmath and whose
@xmath -th component, for @xmath is the space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath , we require that @xmath consists of those maps from @xmath to
@xmath which are multi-differential. By definition, the differential of
a @xmath -cochain @xmath is the @xmath -cochain defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hochschild cohomology @xmath of @xmath is the homology associated to
the Hochschild complex. The normalized Hochschild complex is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Now we introduce a new structure on the Hochschild
complex, the Gerstenhaber bracket [ 19 ] . The Gerstenhaber product of
@xmath and @xmath is the @xmath -cochain defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is not associative in general. As a consequence, we define the
Gerstenhaber bracket as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We notice that the Hochschild differential can be expressed in terms of
the Gerstenhaber bracket and the multiplication @xmath of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that the Hochschild complex @xmath endowed with the
Gerstenhaber bracket is a DGLA [ 19 ] that we denote by @xmath . It is
well known that the embedding of @xmath into @xmath is a
quasi-isomorphism [ 5 ] .

The second DGLA we are interested in is given by the multivector fields
on @xmath . By definition, a @xmath -multivector field @xmath is a
section of the @xmath -th exterior power @xmath of the tangent space
@xmath . We define the Schouten-Nijenhuis bracket:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

1.  @xmath , @xmath ,

2.   for @xmath , @xmath ,

3.   the bracket @xmath turns @xmath into a graded Lie algebra,

4.   for any @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

The space @xmath , endowed with the Schouten-Nijenhuis bracket and with
differential @xmath , is a DGLA, which we denote by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Formality Theorem

As we mentioned above, Kontsevich’s main result is that @xmath is a
formal DGLA (see Def. 3.1.4 ). This result relies on the existence of a
previous result by Hochschild, Kostant and Rosenberg [ 25 ] which
establishes the existence of an isomorphism between the cohomology of
the algebra of multidifferential operators and the algebra of
multivector fields.

###### Theorem 3.1.5 (Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg [25]).

The formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a quasi-isomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, the cohomology groups @xmath is isomorphic to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the bracket induced by @xmath becomes the Schouten bracket @xmath
.

The last tool we need is the notion of @xmath -quasi isomorphism. Let
@xmath and @xmath be two DGLA. By definition, an @xmath - morphism
@xmath is given by a sequence of maps

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

homogeneous of degree @xmath and such that the following conditions are
satisfied:

1.   The morphism @xmath is graded antisymmetric, i.e. we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all homogeneous @xmath of @xmath .

2.   We have @xmath i.e. the map @xmath is a morphism of complexes.

3.  @xmath is compatible with the brackets up to a homology given by
    @xmath . In particular, @xmath induces a morphism of graded Lie
    algebras from @xmath to @xmath .

4.   More generally, for any homogeneous element @xmath of @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

Roughly, an @xmath -morphism is a map between DGLA which is compatible
with the brackets up to a given coherent system of higher homotopies.

An @xmath - quasi isomorphism is an @xmath -morphism whose first
components is a quasi-isomorphism.

Kontsevitch’s Formality Theorem can be stated as follows:

###### Theorem 3.1.6 (Kontsevich [27]).

There exists natural @xmath quasi-isomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The component @xmath of @xmath coincides with the quasi-isomorphism
defined in the Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg Theorem 3.1.5 .

Kontsevich’s formality map induces a one-to-one map from formal Poisson
structures on @xmath to star products on @xmath .

### 3.2 Quantization of a Poisson Lie group

The theory of Kontsevich provides a procedure to quantize a Poisson
manifold; we now introduce a theory of quantization for Poisson Lie
groups and Lie bialgebras. As defined in Section 2.3 a Poisson Lie group
is a Poisson manifold endowed with a Lie group structure. The
quantization of these structures can be done using the formalism of
quantum groups; this allows us to deform the Poisson manifold and group
structures in a compatible way. More precisely, given a Poisson Lie
group or a Lie bialgebra, an associated Hopf algebra can be defined and
deformed to obtain the correspondent quantum group. In the following we
introduce the definitions of Hopf algebra and Hopf algebra action and we
explain how to quantize them. The interested reader can consult the
standard books about quantum groups e.g. [ 7 ] and [ 37 ] for details.

#### 3.2.1 Hopf algebras

An algebra with unit over a commutative ring @xmath is a @xmath -module
@xmath with a multiplication, bilinear over @xmath and associative, and
with the unit element @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . We
reformulate this definition in terms of commutative diagrams.

###### Definition 3.2.1.

An algebra over a commutative ring @xmath is a @xmath -module @xmath
equipped with @xmath -module maps @xmath , the multiplication, and
@xmath , the unit, such that the following diagrams commute:

@xmath

@xmath

In terms of the traditional description of an algebra we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first two diagrams express the properties of the unit element and
the third the associativity of multiplication.

An algebra is commutative if the following diagram commutes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the flip map @xmath . If we set @xmath , then @xmath is
the opposite algebra of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.2.

A coalgebra over a commutative ring @xmath is a @xmath -module @xmath
equipped with @xmath -module maps @xmath , the coproduct, and @xmath ,
the counit, such that the following diagrams commute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The commutativity of the third diagram is usually referred to as the
coassociativity of @xmath . The coalgebra @xmath is called cocommutative
if the following diagram commutes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we set @xmath , then @xmath is the opposite coalgebra.

Given two coalgebras @xmath and @xmath , a @xmath -module map @xmath is
a coalgebra homomorphism if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

A Hopf algebra has compatible algebra and coalgebra structures and one
extra structure map.

###### Definition 3.2.3.

A Hopf algebra over a commutative ring @xmath is a @xmath -module @xmath
such that

1.  @xmath is both an algebra and a coalgebra over @xmath ;

2.   the coproduct @xmath and the counit @xmath are algebra
    homomorphisms;

3.   the product @xmath and the unit @xmath are coalgebra homomorphisms;

4.  @xmath is equipped with a bijective @xmath -module map @xmath called
    the antipode, such that the following diagrams commute:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath are Hopf algebras, a @xmath -module map @xmath is a
Hopf algebra homomorphism if it is a homomorphism of both the algebra
and the coalgebra structures of @xmath .

Let us consider two crucial examples.

###### Example 3.2.4.

Let @xmath be a compact topological group. Consider the space @xmath of
the continuous functions on @xmath together with the following maps:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath where @xmath for any @xmath

-   @xmath where @xmath is the unit element of @xmath

-   @xmath

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The set @xmath together with these
maps is a Hopf algebra.

###### Example 3.2.5.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra and @xmath its universal enveloping algebra,
then @xmath becomes a Hopf algebra when

-    the ordinary multiplication in @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath and zero on all the other elements

-   @xmath

where @xmath is considered as a subset of @xmath . To be precise, this
defines @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath only on the subset @xmath of
the universal enveloping algebra, but these maps can be extended
uniquely to all @xmath such that the Hopf algebra axioms are satisfied
everywhere.

These examples are in a sense dual each other. In general, suppose that
@xmath is a Hopf algebra and @xmath is its dual space; then using the
structure maps of @xmath we define the structure maps @xmath as follows:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

where @xmath an @xmath . The brackets @xmath are the pairing between
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath is also a
Hopf algebra.

Since we are interested in the quantization of Poisson Lie groups, we
need to introduce the concept of Poisson Hopf algebra. Recall that a
Poisson algebra ( 1.2.3 ) is an algebra equipped with a bilinear map
@xmath such that @xmath is a Lie algebra and @xmath is a derivation.

###### Definition 3.2.6.

A Poisson algebra @xmath is called a Poisson Hopf algebra if it is also
a Hopf algebra @xmath over @xmath such that both structure are
compatible, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Here the Poisson bracket @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath .

Given a Poisson Lie group @xmath , its Poisson algebra @xmath is a
Poisson Hopf algebra with the Hopf structure given in Example 3.2.4 .

For the quantization of the Lie bialgebras, we need the dual version of
the above definition:

###### Definition 3.2.7.

A co-Poisson Hopf algebra is a co-commutative Hopf algebra @xmath
together with a map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

1.  @xmath co-antisymmetry

2.  @xmath co-Jacobi identity

3.  @xmath co-Leibniz rule

4.  @xmath m is co-Poisson homomorphism

where @xmath is the co-Poisson structure naturally associated to the
tensor product space

The universal enveloping algebra of a Lie biagebra @xmath is a
co-Poisson Hopf algebra with Hopf structure defined in Example 3.2.5 .

#### 3.2.2 Quasi triangular Hopf algebras

In the following we discuss a particular class of Hopf algebras and, in
analogy with the classical case, the quantum Yang-Baxter equation.

As already mentioned, a Hopf algebra @xmath is cocommutative is @xmath .
Here we consider Hopf algebras that are only cocommutative up to
conjugation by an element @xmath . This element @xmath is called the
quasi triangular structure.

###### Definition 3.2.8.

A quasi triangular Hopf algebra is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a
Hopf algebra and @xmath is invertible and such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

For sake of completeness we record the following two lemmas, in analogy
with the classical case.

###### Lemma 3.2.9.

If @xmath is a quasitriangular bialgebra, then @xmath as an element of
@xmath obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is a Hopf algebra then one also has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2.10.

Let @xmath be a quasitriangular bialgebra. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the quantum Yang-Baxter equation.

#### 3.2.3 Hopf algebra actions

In this section we introduce the notion of Hopf algebra action. This
will be used in the next sections to define a quantized action and a
quantum momentum map.

###### Definition 3.2.11.

For an algebra @xmath , a (left) A-module is a @xmath -space @xmath with
a @xmath -linear map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath scalar
multiplication.

We have that @xmath acts on the @xmath -space @xmath if @xmath is a left
@xmath -module. The action is given by the map @xmath . The dual notion
is the co-action of a coalgebra:

###### Definition 3.2.12.

For a coalgebra @xmath , a (right) C-comodule is a @xmath -space @xmath
with a @xmath -linear map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath tensoring
with 1.

We say that @xmath is a coaction of @xmath with @xmath . Let us define
the maps which preserve the module and comodule structures on the
corresponding spaces.

###### Definition 3.2.13.

Let @xmath be an algebra and @xmath a coalgebra.

1.   Let @xmath and @xmath be (left) @xmath -modules with structure maps
    @xmath and @xmath respectively. A map @xmath is called an A-module
    map if @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath , @xmath be a (right) @xmath -comodules, with structure
    maps @xmath and @xmath respectively. A map @xmath is called a
    C-comodule map if @xmath .

Finally, the Hopf algebra actions are defined as follows:

###### Definition 3.2.14.

Let @xmath be a Hopf algebra. An algebra @xmath is a (left) H-module
algebra if:

1.  @xmath is a (left) @xmath -module via @xmath

2.  @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath in @xmath

3.  @xmath

In this case we have a Hopf algebra action of @xmath on @xmath if the
algebraic structures of @xmath is compatible with this action.
Similarly, a Hopf algebra co-action is defined by:

###### Definition 3.2.15.

An algebra @xmath is a (right) H-comodule algebra if

1.  @xmath is a (right) @xmath -comodule via @xmath for any @xmath and
    @xmath in @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

#### 3.2.4 Quantization of Poisson structures

In this section we discuss the quantization of a Lie bialgebra @xmath as
studied in [ 48 ] by Reshetikhin and in [ 11 ] by Etingof and Kazhdan.
We will see that the quantization of @xmath is provided by the quantum
universal enveloping algebra @xmath . Recall that, given a Poisson
algebra @xmath , its quantization is given by defining a star product as
in eq. ( 3.2 ). Then, we describe the quantization of a Poisson Hopf
algebra, obtained as deformation of the Poisson algebra and the Hopf
algebra structures.

###### Definition 3.2.16 (Quantization of Hopf algebra).

A deformation of a Hopf algebra @xmath over a field @xmath is a Hopf
algebra @xmath over the ring @xmath of formal power series such that

1.  @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath as a @xmath -module;

2.  @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath (mod @xmath ).

Next, let us define the quantization of a Poisson Hopf algebra:

###### Definition 3.2.17 (Quantization of Poisson Hopf algebra).

Let @xmath be a Poisson Hopf algebra over @xmath . A quantization of
@xmath is a Hopf algebra deformation @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the canonical quotient map @xmath and @xmath is the
usual commutator with respect to @xmath .

If @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, then the algebra of functions on
@xmath is a Hopf algebra and the two structure are compatible as in
Definition 3.2.6 . A quantization of a Poisson Lie group @xmath is a
quantization of this Poisson Hopf algebra.

###### Definition 3.2.18 (Quantization of co-Poisson Hopf algebra).

Consider the co-Poisson Hopf algebra @xmath . A quantization of @xmath
is a non-commutative Hopf algebra @xmath over @xmath such that

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath for all @xmath .

The product and coproduct need to be related by the following condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us consider the universal enveloping algebra @xmath of the Lie
bialgebra @xmath . The Poisson structure on @xmath induces a co-Poisson
structure @xmath on its Lie bialgebra @xmath , that can be easily
extended to @xmath . Using the Hopf structure discussed in Example 3.2.5
we get that @xmath is a co-Poisson structure. From Definition 3.2.18 ,
its quantization is a non-commutative Hopf algebra @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the standard commutator, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the coproduct of @xmath and the antisymmetrization of
@xmath is given by the structure @xmath .

###### Example 3.2.19 (Quantization of @xmath [53]).

Let us consider the Lie algebra @xmath with basis @xmath and commutation
relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The co-Poisson structure of @xmath is given by the extension to the
whole universal enveloping algebra of the map

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The quantized space is the set of (formal) polynomials in @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath . The coproduct @xmath on this new space is
determined by the following requirements:

1.  @xmath is co-associative

2.  @xmath

3.   In the classical limit @xmath the coproduct @xmath reduces to the
    ordinary coproduct on @xmath

The coproduct @xmath has the general form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the term @xmath for an arbitrary @xmath and the coproduct of the
quantized universal enveloping algebra is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Now, imposing the condition ( 3.35 ) we get the
commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Finally, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This Hopf algebra is called the quantum universal enveloping algebra of
@xmath and is denoted by @xmath .

### 3.3 Quantum Momentum Map

The problem of quantizing the momentum map and the theory of reduction
has been the main topic of many works, e.g. [ 13 ] and [ 35 ] . In the
following we discuss two different methods that have been proposed to
approach it.

The first one, due to Fedosov [ 13 ] , uses deformation quantization. In
this approach, given a canonical action of a Lie group @xmath on a
symplectic manifold @xmath , the quantum momentum map is defined as a
Lie algebra homomorphism @xmath from the Lie algebra @xmath into the
deformed algebra @xmath . The corresponding quantum action is given by
the quantization of the Hamiltonian vector field induced by @xmath . We
notice that in this approach there is no quantization of the group.
Fedosov defined the quantum reduced space as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of the functions in @xmath which are invariant
under the quantized action. Here @xmath is the ideal generated by the
components @xmath of the quantum momentum map @xmath . Furthermore he
proved that, under the assumptions of the Marsden-Weinstein Theorem, the
quantum reduced algebra in eq. ( 3.54 ) is isomorphic to the algebra
obtained by canonical deformation quantization of @xmath .

A different approach has been developed in [ 35 ] by Lu. In this case
the quantization procedure is carried on via quantum group techniques.
Here the author considers a Hopf algebra @xmath with dual @xmath and
assumes that @xmath is the quantization of the Poisson Lie group @xmath
. Given an action @xmath of @xmath on the algebra @xmath , then the
quantum momentum map is defined as an algebra homomorphism @xmath ,
provided that the action @xmath can be rewritten in terms of @xmath . We
stress that this approach does not guarantee that the quantum action
@xmath is the quantization of the given Poisson action.

The idea we discuss in this section is the generalization of the
deformation quantization approach to the Poisson reduction case. We use
quantum group techniques to quantize Poisson Lie groups and the quantum
momentum map is basically defined as a linear map from the quantum group
@xmath to the deformed algebra @xmath . The induced quantum action will
be a Hopf algebra action, as defined in Definition 3.2.14 . This will
allows us to discuss some examples of quantum momentum map and quantum
reduction.

#### 3.3.1 Quantization of the momentum map

The main goal of this section is the quantization of the momentum map as
defined in ( 2.4.4 ). Basically, we consider a Poisson action of @xmath
on @xmath , introduce the quantization of the structures using the
techniques discussed in the previous sections and we give a definition
of the corresponding quantum action in terms of Hopf algebra action. The
quantum momentum map will be defined as the map which factorizes such an
action.

Let @xmath be a deformation quantization of @xmath and let us denote

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

the star-product and the deformed bracket in @xmath .

As discussed in the previous section, @xmath denote the deformation
quantization of the universal enveloping algebra of @xmath and we denote
with @xmath and @xmath the deformed product and coproduct on @xmath ,
resp.

Given the quantization of all the structures, we define the quantum
action as follows:

###### Definition 3.3.1.

Given the infinitesimal generator @xmath of a Poisson action of @xmath
on @xmath , the corresponding quantum action is the linear map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

continuous with respect to @xmath -topology and such that it defines a
Hopf algebra action, i.e. such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

An example can be constructed when the deformation of @xmath comes from
a twist @xmath such that @xmath is associative and the corresponding
associator is trivial [ 60 ] . In fact, one can define a deformation
quantization of @xmath setting, for any differential operator @xmath on
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the usual coproduct on differential operators. The
@xmath -product defined by this formula is automatically consistent with
the action of deformed Hopf algebra @xmath .

In the following we define a quantum momentum map which, analogously to
the classical case, factorizes the quantum action ( 3.57 ). Let us
recall from the previous chapter the composition of Lie algebra
homomorphisms which define the momentum map:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the arguments of Section 2.4.2 , it should be clear that a quantum
momentum map can be defined as a quantization of the infinitesimal
momentum map @xmath ( 2.80 ). Recall that, in the classical
construction, the map @xmath is defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Hence, the classical construction can be rephrased as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This motivates the following definition of quantum momentum map.

###### Definition 3.3.2.

A quantum momentum map is defined to be a linear map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that it is an algebra homomorphism and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a quantized action.

To avoid cumbersome notation, we omitted the star notation @xmath in the
star-product. Moreover, we denoted the functions @xmath , @xmath simply
by @xmath and @xmath .

It is easy to see that, the classical action ( 3.64 ) can be recovered
in the limit @xmath from eq. ( 3.67 ) and using eq. ( 3.4 ). In other
words, this definition gives the quantization of the construction ( 3.64
) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, introducing the space @xmath of differential forms on
the algebra @xmath and identifying @xmath with @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can define a non commutative product on the space of differential
forms @xmath , using the map @xmath . It associates @xmath to the
product of two closed forms @xmath and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that the product @xmath on @xmath has to be defined as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

As introduced in ( 3.11 ) the space @xmath defines the Hochschild
cochain of @xmath in itself @xmath with coboundary @xmath . We notice
here that from the definition of the product ( 3.72 ), the map @xmath is
a Lie algebra homomorphism only if the differential of the unit in
@xmath does not vanish in @xmath , i.e. we work with the formal
differential forms on the unitalization @xmath of @xmath .

These observations allow us to rewrite the definition of quantum
momentum map as follows:

###### Definition 3.3.3.

A quantum momentum map for the quantum action @xmath is a linear map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that it is an algebra homomorphism and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

In Section ( 2.4.2 ) we rephrased the classical construction ( 3.61 ) in
terms of Gerstenhaber morphisms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to generalize the quantum construction ( 3.68 ) in a similar
way we first notice that the map @xmath extends naturally to the map
@xmath .

Consider the tensor algebra @xmath , where the degree of @xmath is
@xmath . The coproduct on @xmath extends naturally to @xmath , simply
putting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(i. e. @xmath is extended to an odd derivation of the tensor algebra).
Then @xmath and @xmath is a complex. The action @xmath extends to the
cochain map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

These observations motivate the following rephrasing of the definition
of quantum momentum map

###### Definition 3.3.4.

A quantum momentum map is defined to be a linear map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.2 Examples

In this section we apply the construction given above to some explicit
examples. We show that the existence of the quantum momentum map induces
the quantization of the Lie algebra. In fact, in the examples studied in
this section, the quantization of the Lie algebra is essentially
uniquely determined by existence of universal formulas for the quantum
momentum map.

##### Two-dimensional case

Consider the Lie bialgebra @xmath with generators @xmath and a
deformation quantization @xmath of a Poisson manifold @xmath . Assume
that @xmath acts by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath . Let us impose that it is an Hopf algebra action; then
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose that @xmath is invertible, then @xmath and, setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

the coproduct which satisfies the condition ( 3.2.14 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for ( 3.81 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we calculate the bracket of the generators to get the deformed
algebra structure of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 3.3.5.

One should notice that the equation ( 3.80 ) essentially says the
following. Given an element in the image of @xmath of the form @xmath ,
@xmath is invertible on the support of @xmath and, assuming universality
of our formulas, forces the image of @xmath also to contain an element
of the form @xmath . In the case when @xmath is two (or three
dimensional), this essentially forces the formulas for the deformed
coproduct in the examples below.

We obtain different algebra structures that we discuss case by case

###### Case 1: @xmath.

Under this assumption, from the relation ( 3.85 ) we obtain @xmath and
imposing that @xmath is a Lie algebra homomorphism we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the quantum group given by the universal enveloping algebra
@xmath generated by the commuting elements @xmath with coproduct

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

is the deformation quantization of the abelian Lie bialgebra @xmath ,
with cobracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding Poisson Lie group is @xmath , where the Poisson
bivector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Setting @xmath and @xmath , the quantum actions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

give the quantization of the Poisson action of @xmath on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Poisson reduction extends to the quantized version immediately.
Given @xmath with @xmath and considering the ideal @xmath of functions
generated by @xmath and @xmath , the algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a quantization of the Poisson algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Case 2: @xmath.

In this case we have hence @xmath ; using eq. ( 3.85 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the quantum group @xmath has the following structures

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.97)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and defines a deformation quantization of the Lie bialgebra @xmath
generated by @xmath and @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.99)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.100)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The action of @xmath on @xmath is factorized by the momentum map
determined by the forms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and is given by ( 3.92 ). Its quantization is given by ( 3.91 ) and it
is factorized by the quantum momentum map

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The quantum reduction is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and it is the quantization of the example discussed in Section 2.6 .

In this case it is easy to check that @xmath is still an algebra.

###### Case 3: @xmath.

This example is the direct quantization of the Poisson reduction
discussed in Section 2.6 . Similarly we discuss here the different cases
that classically give rise to different dressing orbits. First, if
@xmath we can define @xmath and @xmath , then we recover the previous
case, since we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e. the quantum plane. In this case, unfortunately @xmath is not an
algebra but we observe that we easily get a well defined algebra by
replacing it with @xmath . Hence the quantum reduction is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath we recover the result of the abelian case.

##### Three-dimensional case

The second example we discuss here is the Hopf algebra action of @xmath
on the deformed algebra @xmath . Consider @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.107)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.108)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the generators @xmath acting respectively by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.110)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.111)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then by calculating the commutation relations of these generators and
imposing the Lie algebra homomorphism of @xmath we obtain that @xmath
satisfy the commutation relations:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.113)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.114)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Checking the condition ( 3.58 ) for any generator, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.116)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.117)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

hence

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.119)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.120)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Finally, we have that @xmath and @xmath generate a Hopf algebra action
of @xmath on @xmath .

## Conclusions

The work described in this thesis suggests a number of extensions and
directions for future work. Here we collect some possibilities.

### Momentum map and Reduction in Poisson geometry

The contributions of this thesis in the theory of momentum map and
reduction in Poisson geometry have been discussed in detail in Chapter 2
. We give here a summary of the main results.

We introduced a definition of momentum map in infinitesimal terms and we
proved the theory of reconstruction of momentum map from the
infinitesimal one (Sections 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 ). The reconstruction theory
allowed us to prove the existence of the momentum map in two explicit
cases.

We studied the uniqueness of the momentum map, proving the Theorem
2.4.19 on the infinitesimal deformations of a momentum map. We analyzed
the uniqueness of the momentum map in the case of a compact and
semisimple Poisson Lie group acting on a generic Poisson manifold.
Finally, in Section 2.5 we introduced the construction of a theory of
Poisson reduction.

These results motivate the study of many open problems and we introduce
and briefly discuss in the following those we are interested in
approaching:

1.   The reconstruction problem has been discussed in the Section 2.4.3
    only for the abelian case and the Heisenberg group. An interesting
    question would be the possibility of extend our result to an
    arbitrary two-step nilpotent group @xmath . Moreover, since the
    computation performed is a kind of spectral sequence computation
    associated to the central series of a nilpotent Lie algebra, it
    seems possible to extend the above result to arbitrary nilpotent
    groups .

2.   The connection of the Poisson reduction with the Lu’s point
    reduction defined in [ 34 ] can be investigated. More precisely, the
    Poisson reduction can be regarded as an orbit reduction, hence we
    aim to generalize the Reduction diagram theorem , proved in [ 47 ]
    for canonical actions of Lie groups. This would complete the analogy
    with the symplectic theory.

3.   As suggested by Rui Loja Fernandes, Poisson reduction can be
    rephrased in terms of Dirac structures [ 8 ] . Since @xmath is a
    Poisson manifold, it is known that a Dirac structure on it can be
    defined by the graph of the map @xmath . We would like to prove that
    the reduced space, as defined in Section 2.5 , inherits an
    integrable Dirac structure from @xmath and hence, a Poisson
    structure. Explicitly, we are interested to demonstrate the
    following claim:

    Consider the Poisson action @xmath with equivariant momentum map
    @xmath . Let @xmath be a regular value of @xmath and assume that the
    action is proper and free on @xmath . Then one has a natural
    isomorphism

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (3.122)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath denotes the dressing orbit of @xmath through @xmath and
    @xmath denotes the isotropy group of @xmath . This isomorphism is a
    Poisson diffeomorphism for the unique Poisson structures on these
    quotients which arise from the diagram {diagram} & &M
    & \ruTo & & \luTo
    μ -1  (x) & & & & μ -1 ( O x )
    & \rdTo & & \ldTo
    & & μ -1 (x)/G x ≃ μ -1 ( O x )/G where the inclusions are backward
    Dirac maps and the projections are forward Dirac maps.

    This new formulation of the Poisson reduction leads to a new
    question, i.e. the relation with the theory of Dirac reduction.

### Quantum Momentum map and Quantum Reduction

The contribution of Chapter 3 is the study of a new definition of the
quantum momentum map associated to the quantized action. Some directions
for the future work are discussed below:

1.   The first open question we would approach is a formal definition of
    the quantum reduction . First we have to complete the example of the
    Hopf algebra action of @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath . Then we
    obtain

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (3.123)
                  @xmath      (3.124)
                  @xmath      (3.125)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    In particular, the ideal @xmath generated by @xmath in @xmath is
    @xmath -invariant, and

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (3.126)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    is a deformation quantization of the Poisson reduction

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (3.127)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    corresponding to the symplectic leaf @xmath in @xmath . Notice that
    the above leaf is not compact, hence the action cannot integrate to
    the action of SU(2). It would be interesting to investigate on the
    structure of the other leaves. This would help us to understand how
    to define correctly the quantum reduction.

2.   The procedure of quantization can applied to the Poisson actions
    lifted to symplectic groupoids. It is known that a Poisson action
    often does not admit a momentum map. For this reason Fernandes and
    Ponte in [ 14 ] define a symplectization functor which turns this
    action into a Hamiltonian action. Given a Poisson manifold there is
    a canonical symplectic groupoid @xmath and the action lifted to
    symplectic groupoids always admits a momentum map @xmath . It would
    be interesting to analyze the quantization of this momentum map.
    Similarly to the case of a Poisson Lie group, the quantization of
    the symplectic groupoid is given by a quantum groupoid, using the
    theories studied by Lu and Xu [ 36 ] , [ 60 ] .

3.   Another significant future direction of research aims at comparing
    other approaches to quantization different than the deformation one,
    in particular we are interested in geometrical quantization [ 59 ] .
    This is motivated by an example of the Gelfand-Cetlin system
    considered by Guillemin and Sternberg in [ 22 ] . In this example
    geometric quantization is defined via higher cohomology groups. More
    precisely, Gelfand-Cetlin system is an integrable system on @xmath
    obtained by Thimm’s method. This integrable system can be viewed as
    an integrable system on the coadjoint orbits of @xmath and therefore
    as a collection of real polarization on the symplectic leaves. There
    is a natural Hamiltonian action of a compact Lie group in this
    setting: a toric action is associated to a natural choice of action
    coordinates. In the case of geometric quantization of the
    Gelfand-Cetlin system, Guillemin and Sternberg obtain results in
    representation theory.

    We would like to apply a similar scheme to other examples in Poisson
    Lie groups which inherit real polarizations using a Thimm’s method [
    42 ] , [ 24 ] and compare the results obtained via deformation
    quantization.
