This PhD thesis is devoted to the study of supersymmetry preserving
background solutions of @xmath supergravity in @xmath dimensions. The
theories in consideration include arbitrary electric gaugings in the
vector- and hypermultiplet sectors introduced in the beginning of the
thesis. The main contents are divided into three major parts. Most of
the chapters are based on previously published results with the
exception of chapter 10 in part III , which is genuinely new.

In part I we consider vacua that can be fully analyzed by requiring
preserved supersymmetry. We determine and analyze maximally
supersymmetric configurations, preserving eight supercharges. We present
several examples of such solutions and connect some of them to vacuum
solutions of flux compactifications in string theory. We also provide a
supersymmetry preserving consistent truncation of the gauged theory by
integrating out massive supermultiplets.

The second part focuses on the topic of supersymmetric black holes.
These can be asymptotically flat or asymptotically anti-de Sitter (AdS),
and we analyze both cases in detail. We construct BPS black hole
solutions in Minkowski space with charged hypermultiplets. We find
solutions with vanishing scalar hair that resemble already known black
holes, while the genuinely new solutions with hair that we find contain
ghost modes. We also elaborate on the static magnetic supersymmetric AdS
black holes, investigating thoroughly the BPS constraints for spherical
symmetry in gauged supergravity. We find Killing spinors that preserve
two of the original eight supercharges and investigate the conditions
for genuine black holes free of naked singularities. The existence of a
horizon is intimately related with the requirement that the scalars are
not constant, but given in terms of harmonic functions in analogy to the
attractor flow in ungauged supergravity. We also briefly comment on the
toroidal and hyperbolic BPS black holes in AdS.

The third major topic of this thesis is BPS bounds, and in this context
we discuss asymptotically Minkowski and AdS solutions in full
generality. Concerning asymptotically AdS spacetimes, we find that there
exist two disconnected BPS ground states of the theory, depending on the
presence of magnetic charge. Each of these ground states comes with a
different superalgebra and a different BPS bound, which we derive. As a
byproduct, we also demonstrate how the supersymmetry algebra has a
built-in holographic renormalization method to define finite conserved
charges. We derive the general form of the charges for all
asymptotically flat, AdS, and magnetic AdS spacetimes. Some particular
black hole examples from part II are considered to explicitly
demonstrate how AdS and mAdS masses differ when solutions with
non-trivial scalar profiles are considered. Finally, chapter 10 includes
a comprehensive study of the superalgebras of the static black holes and
their near-horizon geometries in @xmath @xmath supergravity. We derive a
no-go theorem for genuine BPS black holes in AdS in the absence of
hypermultiplets and give the conditions for potential hypermultiplet
gaugings that can evade it. We briefly comment on the analogous
implications for supersymmetric non-rotating black holes and black rings
in @xmath .
