One statistically meaningful technique to estimate the unknown quantum
state based on a set of informationally complete measurement data is the
maximum-likelihood method (ML). This technique yields a unique ML
estimator for a given complete set of data. An iterative algorithm was
proposed by Jaroslav Řeháček et al. to search for a positive estimator
that maximizes the likelihood functional. We first show that this
algorithm coincides with the steepest-ascent technique and develop a new
algorithm based on the conjugate-gradient method that can be more
efficient than the steepest-ascent version. We inspect the performance
of this new algorithm with Monte Carlo numerical simulations.
In general, however, the measurement data obtained from complex quantum
systems are informationally incomplete and, as a rule, do not yield a
unique state estimator. We establish an estimation scheme where both the
likelihood and the von Neumann entropy functionals are maximized in
order to systematically select the most-likely estimator with the
largest entropy, that is, the least-bias maximum-likelihood and
maximum-entropy estimator (MLME), consistent with a given set of
measurement data. This is equivalent to the joint consideration of our
partial knowledge and of our ignorance about the source to reconstruct
its identity. The MLME technique is then applied to both experimental
and simulation data.
Next, we take a look at a recent proposal by R. Blume-Kohout — the
hedged maximum-likelihood method — for quantum state estimation and
derive an iterative scheme (HML) to look for the estimator that
maximizes the hedged likelihood functional. We then report some
interesting features of these HML estimators in the context of
informationally incomplete measurements and compare them with the MLME
estimators using numerical simulations.
Entanglement detection via witness measurements is a useful technique to
check if an unknown quantum state is an entangled one. The MLME
algorithm can also be used to increase the efficiency of entanglement
detection, using the data obtained from measuring sets of witness bases.
This is better than the conventional witness measurement strategy in
which only the expectation value of each witness is estimated and used
to infer the existence of entanglement in the unknown quantum state. In
our proposed strategies, all information from the collected data is used
to detect entanglement and when this fails, state estimation can be
performed to estimate the unknown state. Adaptive strategies to measure
these witness bases will also be presented.
Finally, we also propose a similar algorithm, as in quantum state
estimation, for incomplete quantum process estimation based on the
combined principles of maximum-likelihood and maximum-entropy, to yield
a unique estimator for an unknown quantum process when one has a set of
informationally incomplete data. We apply this iterative algorithm
adaptively to various situations in order to minimize the amount of
measurement resources required to estimate the unknown quantum process
with incomplete data.
