##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Ring Polymer Rate Theory
    -    2.1 Quantum mechanical rate theory
    -    2.2 Classical rate theory
    -    2.3 Classical transition state theory
    -    2.4 The Classical Isomorphism
    -    2.5 Ring Polymer Reaction Rate Theory
    -    2.6 Quantum Transition State Theory
    -    2.7 Previous applications of RPMD rate theory
-    3 Non-adiabatic generalization
    -    3.1 The effective potential
    -    3.2 Implementation
    -    3.3 Discussion
        -    3.3.1 The one-bead limit
        -    3.3.2 Single electronic state
        -    3.3.3 Mixed potential
    -    3.4 Summary
-    4 One-Dimensional Model
    -    4.1 Symmetric curve-crossing
        -    4.1.1 The symmetric model
        -    4.1.2 Computational Details
        -    4.1.3 Results
    -    4.2 Asymmetric curve-crossing
        -    4.2.1 The asymmetric model
        -    4.2.2 Computational details
        -    4.2.3 Results
    -    4.3 Discussion
-    5 The Spin-Boson Model
    -    5.1 The model
        -    5.1.1 The spin-boson Hamiltonian
        -    5.1.2 Debye spectral density
        -    5.1.3 The mass factor
        -    5.1.4 Exact Results
    -    5.2 Multidimensional generalization of RPMD
    -    5.3 The Bennett-Chandler method
    -    5.4 Computational details
        -    5.4.1 QTST calculation
        -    5.4.2 Transmission coefficient calculation
    -    5.5 Preliminary Results
        -    5.5.1 QTST rate
        -    5.5.2 Transmission coefficient
        -    5.5.3 Alternative factorization
        -    5.5.4 RPMD rate
    -    5.6 Discussion
-    6 Conclusions
-    A The exponential matrix
-    B Bell’s Algorithm
-    C Mass Factor Identity

### Acknowledgements

I am indebted to my supervisor, David Manolopoulos, for his insight and
instruction this year. I am also grateful to Guy, Michele and Yury for
their assistance, and for the many Aarts and Logan group members who
have provided encouragement and amusement.

Lastly I wish to thank my family and friends.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Electronically non-adiabatic effects are of fundamental importance to
numerous processes in chemistry and biology. Their diverse applicability
includes spectroscopy, pericyclic reactions, photochemistry and reaction
kinetics [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] . This study concerns the
extension of Ring Polymer Molecular Dynamics (RPMD) rate theory to
non-adiabatic systems, with application initially to two one-dimensional
barrier transmission models, and then to a multidimensional spin-boson
model.

RPMD rate theory uses the classical isomorphism [ 8 ] to model quantum
mechanical systems in an extended classical phase space [ 9 ] , whereby
multiple copies of the classical system are connected by harmonic
springs. RPMD rate theory takes this phase space literally, and uses its
real-time dynamics to evaluate chemical reaction rates. Because of its
classical nature, the theory is comparatively simple to implement, even
for systems of high dimensionality where exact quantum calculations are
prohibitively expensive. For adiabatic reactions the theory is exact in
the high-temperature limit, exact for a parabolic barrier [ 10 ] and
independent of the location that is used for the dividing surface
between reactants and products [ 9 ] . This last characteristic is
particularly important for complex systems where calculating the
location of the optimum dividing surface is highly non-trivial. Its
versatility has lead to applications both in condensed media [ 11 , 12 ]
and gas phase reactions [ 13 , 14 ] .

Furthermore, RPMD theory has been shown to be surprisingly accurate,
even in deep tunnelling where purely classical theories are in error by
many orders of magnitude [ 12 , 14 ] . A recent study by Richardson and
Althorpe [ 15 ] has shown how, in deep tunnelling, there is a connection
between RPMD rate theory and the semi-classical instanton model [ 16 ] ,
thereby explaining the success of RPMD in this regime. They have also
explained, for adiabatic reactions at low temperatures, why the RPMD
rate is underestimated for symmetric barriers and overestimated for
asymmetric barriers compared to exact quantum results.

The aim of this thesis is to extend RPMD rate theory to non-adiabatic
reactions, where the reagents move on more than one electronic potential
energy surface. The motivation for this application is the wide variety
of chemical and biological processes which are inherently non-adiabatic,
ranging from photochemical pericyclic reactions to surface chemistry [ 1
, 2 ] . For example, the F( @xmath P) + H @xmath reaction proceeds on
three coupled potential energy surfaces arising from the @xmath and
@xmath levels of the fluorine atom [ 17 ] , while photosynthesis
involves a sequence of electron transfers between protein complexes
leading to the eventual reduction of CO @xmath to form glucose [ 18 , 19
] .

In order to test the multidimensional validity of RPMD rate theory for
non-adiabatic processes, it is applied to a spin-boson model, consisting
of a spin degree of freedom bilinearly coupled to a harmonic bath. This
model of quantum dissipation has applications ranging from biological
electron transfer [ 20 ] , to describing the entanglement between a
qubit and its environment in a quantum computer [ 21 ] .

RPMD theory is derived in chapter 2 and its previous applications are
outlined. In chapter 3 the theory is extended to non-adiabatic systems,
followed by an application to two simple Landau-Zener curve crossing
models in chapter 4 . A spin-boson model with Debye spectral density is
then examined in chapter 5 , followed by a brief conclusion in chapter 6
.

## Chapter 2 Ring Polymer Rate Theory

In this chapter a variety of methods for calculating reaction rates is
explored. The exact quantum rate is initially considered, followed by
classical rate theory and classical transition state theory. The
isomorphism between a classical path integral and a quantum mechanical
partition function is derived in section 2.4 , from which Ring Polymer
Molecular Dynamics (RPMD) rate theory arises. Quantum transition state
theory (QTST) is then introduced as a limiting case of RPMD rate theory,
and the chapter concludes with a discussion of previous applications.
For simplicity, a one-dimensional barrier transmission problem is used
to illustrate the theory, although (as will be shown in section 5.2 )
the theory can easily be generalized to more complex systems.

### 2.1 Quantum mechanical rate theory

For a one-dimensional system with a Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is similar to that illustrated in Fig 2.1 , the exact
quantum mechanical reaction rate is [ 22 , 23 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the rate at temperature @xmath and @xmath is the
reactant partition function per unit length. The Kubo-transformed
flux-side correlation function, @xmath , is defined as [ 24 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath is the Boltzmann constant and @xmath is the
Hamiltonian in Eq ( 2.1 ). @xmath is the flux operator, which measures
the rate of passage through the dividing surface @xmath along the
reaction co-ordinate @xmath . Quantum mechanically, this is expressed as
the Heisenberg time derivative of the side operator @xmath , which
projects onto states which are on the product side of the dividing
surface, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

A qualitative understanding of the flux-side correlation function can be
gained by considering the contents of the trace in Eq ( 2.3 ) as a
time-evolved side operator and a Boltzmann-weighted flux operator. The
time-evolved side operator projects onto configurations which, in the
long time limit, are on the product side of the dividing surface. For
these configurations, the flux operator measures their rate of passage
through the dividing surface at time @xmath , and the Boltzmann operator
(here ‘smeared’ by an integral over @xmath ) ensures a thermal rate is
produced.

There exist other flux-side correlation functions which give the same
exact rate in the long time limit, but differ in their treatment of the
Boltzmann operator. These include no splitting [ 22 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and symmetric splitting [ 23 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

amongst others explored in Ref. [ 23 ] . All of these functions are
independent of the location of the dividing surface in the long time
limit, a consequence of the quantum mechanical continuity equation [ 9 ]
. The advantage of using the so-called ‘Kubo-transformed’ correlation
function in Eq ( 2.3 ) is its relation to the RPMD rate formula [ 10 ] ,
and that it is a real and odd function of time [ 25 ] . It is also a
continuous function of time, meaning that one cannot define a rigorous
‘Quantum Transition State Theory’ rate, as the @xmath limit of the exact
quantum mechanical reaction rate, @xmath [ 10 ] .

### 2.2 Classical rate theory

The rate coefficient is now defined as the long time limit of the
classical flux-side correlation function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

To form a classical correlation function from a quantum one, quantum
mechanical operators are converted into their classical counterparts
which commute, and the trace over states becomes an integral over the
classical phase space of positions and momenta. The flux operator, which
cannot be evaluated directly from the configuration of the system, is
now expressed as the classical time derivative of the side operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Dirac delta function, @xmath is the momentum and
@xmath the mass. Consequently,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath refer to the momentum and position at zero time,
and @xmath is the classical Hamiltonian of the system. This Hamiltonian
can be used to evolve the system to time @xmath by conventional
molecular dynamics, thereby avoiding the quantum time evolution
operators @xmath which present a greater computational challenge [ 6 ] .

The physical interpretation of the classical flux-side correlation
function in Eq ( 2.11 ) is similar to that of the exact quantum
mechanical correlation function, except for the portrayal of the flux
operator as a Dirac delta multiplied by an initial velocity, which
implies that a starting configuration is chosen from a Boltzmann
distribution that is initially constrained to the dividing surface. The
system is evolved to long time, after which the trajectory will be on
one side of the barrier or another, and the position noted. If the
position is in the product region, the side function @xmath and the
initial velocity @xmath contributes to the flux-side correlation
function. If the particle resides in the reactant region, its initial
velocity @xmath does not contribute to the overall rate.

The classical rate, like the exact quantum rate, is independent of the
location of the dividing surface, in this case owing to Liouville’s
theorem [ 22 , 26 ] . By its classical nature, no quantum effects such
as tunnelling are included in the classical rate calculation and large
deviations (many orders of magnitude) from the exact quantum rate are
commonplace at low temperatures where quantum effects are particularly
pronounced [ 14 ] .

### 2.3 Classical transition state theory

The evaluation of the classical rate in Eq ( 2.9 ) involves a long time
limit, which, for complex systems, may prove expensive to calculate. In
this section the @xmath limit is explored, where only the behaviour at
the transition state, @xmath , is required. In the exact quantum case
(section 2.1 ), the short-time limit of the flux-side correlation
function was zero, but in the classical case a finite rate is defined.
Whether the reactant will be on the product side of the dividing surface
or not, in the infinitesimal time limit, is simply a question of whether
the initial momentum is positive or negative, such that @xmath .
Consequently, the integral in Eq ( 2.11 ) can be separated into one over
momenta and one over positions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We have noted that, for a barrier transmission model, the partition
function per unit length is the inverse de Broglie thermal wavelength,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the mean magnitude of the velocity is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The result in Eq ( 2.13 ) can be interpreted as the flux through the
dividing surface, halved to account only for reactant @xmath product
motion, multiplied by the Boltzmann probability that the reagent will
reach the top of the barrier.

Classical transition state theory (classical TST) has the advantage of
ease of calculability, as it does not require any molecular dynamics.
However, Eq ( 2.13 ) suffers the major disadvantage of being
exponentially sensitive to the location of the dividing surface; from
Eq ( 2.13 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a one-dimensional barrier transmission model, the classical TST rate
will always be equal to or greater than the classical rate, and equal to
the classical rate for the optimum dividing surface (where @xmath is at
a minimum, and no recrossings occur) [ 27 ] . As such, the optimum
dividing surface may be chosen variationally. For models of higher
dimensionality, the classical TST rate with the optimum dividing surface
may still deviate from the classical rate theory result due to the
neglect of barrier recrossing.

### 2.4 The Classical Isomorphism

It has been known since the 1980s [ 8 ] that static equilibrium
properties of a quantum mechanical system (such as energy, entropy etc.)
can be calculated by an integral over a fictitious ring polymer in an
extended classical phase space. Here I sketch how this arises for a
single electronic potential, in order to prepare for the generalization
to an electronically coupled model in chapter 3 . For a more detailed
discussion of path integrals, the reader is referred to the substantial
literature on the subject [ 8 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] . In a later section
this isomorphism is applied to real time correlation functions, leading
to RPMD rate theory.

A quantum mechanical partition function, @xmath , can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the system in Eq ( 2.1 ). This
partition function can be evaluated using the Trotter discretization [
30 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , with @xmath being the number of fictitious ring polymer
beads. One can approximate (to second order in @xmath ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Noting the possibility of cyclic permutation within a trace, one can
move the final @xmath in the trace to the front without any loss of
accuracy, forming

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace can be evaluated in any basis, so choosing the co-ordinate
representation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the unit operator @xmath for @xmath between each @xmath term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

leading to an integral over @xmath similar terms. As the potential
energy is diagonal in the co-ordinate representation, i.e. @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the momentum unit operator, @xmath , and noting that @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, @xmath is the momentum eigenstate @xmath in the position
representation of a free particle [ 26 , 32 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Utilising this in Eq ( 2.25 ), and then completing the square with the
substitution @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Finally, noting that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can reinsert momentum states into Eq ( 2.28 ) [ 33 ] . Considering
the bra-ket involving the full Hamiltonian, @xmath , rather than just
the kinetic energy operator @xmath , this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partition function can therefore be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the cyclic boundary condition @xmath . Here @xmath is the
vector of bead momenta @xmath , and likewise @xmath of bead positions.
We see that in the case of a single electronic potential energy surface,
the potential arising from @xmath is a simple additive sum of
contributions from all beads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lastly, the multiple integrals in Eq ( 2.31 ) are commonly rewritten in
terms of @xmath and @xmath , leading to the neater expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only approximation in deriving Eq ( 2.34 ) is forming the symmetric
split operator in Eq ( 2.19 ), which has local error of @xmath . As
there are @xmath beads present the global error scales as @xmath .
Consequently, in the limit as @xmath and @xmath the partition function
becomes exact (at any finite temperature).

The physical interpretation of Eq ( 2.34 ) is that the quantum
mechanical partition function of a single particle can be expressed as
the classical partition function of a necklace of beads, each with the
mass of the original quantum particle and with harmonic springs between
neighbouring beads, each with the same spring constant @xmath . The
extended system exists at a virtual temperature of @xmath , and in the
high temperature limit, the spring constant stiffens until the ring
polymer collapses into a single, classical, particle.

At lower temperatures, when the spring constant slackens, the radius of
gyration of the ring polymer @xmath increases and the ring polymer
experiences a greater range of configurations, since @xmath , where
@xmath is the de Broglie thermal wavelength in Eq ( 2.14 ) [ 34 ] . This
‘swelling’ is directly analogous to quantum effects becoming more
pronounced at low temperatures, with a greater uncertainty in the
position of the particle and hence a greater variety of locations on the
potential surface that the ring polymer could be experiencing.

### 2.5 Ring Polymer Reaction Rate Theory

RPMD rate theory takes the classical isomorphism and applies it to the
quantum flux-side correlation function in Eq ( 2.3 ), producing a rate
theory which incorporates physically desirable features of the exact
quantum calculation (for example, by including some quantum mechanical
effects and independence from the dividing surface) with the comparative
computational ease of a classical dynamics calculation, albeit in an
extended phase space. The RPMD rate is defined as [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the flux-side correlation function is now expressed using the
classical isomorphism as [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is very similar to the classical rate constant in Eq ( 2.11 ),
except the integrals are over ring-polymer phase space and the positions
and momenta in the integrand are those of the centroid,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By taking the infinite-time limit recrossing is allowed to occur, and is
captured by the @xmath factor. The presence of this factor implies that
the calculation involves both sampling an initial configuration of the
system @xmath , and evolving it by classical molecular dynamics.

The resulting rate, @xmath , can be shown to be rigorously independent
of the choice of the dividing surface, @xmath , exact for a parabolic
barrier and in the high temperature limit, equal to the well-known
centroid density Quantum Transition State Theory (QTST) rate (detailed
below) in the @xmath limit, and bounded above by this QTST rate [ 9 , 10
] . The independence from the choice of dividing surface is particularly
important in complex, multidimensional systems where location of the
optimum dividing surface is typically difficult to determine, and it is
a feature absent from other approximations to quantum mechanical rate
constants, such as the Wigner model [ 35 ] or the quantum instanton (QI)
model [ 36 ] .

The ostensibly arbitrary choice of setting the bead mass equal to the
particle mass has been shown to produce greater accuracy in the short
time limit [ 37 ] than centroid molecular dynamics [ 38 ] which takes a
similar approach, but has a different choice of bead masses. Richardson
and Althorpe have also shown that this choice of fictitious bead masses
is essential for the accuracy of the resulting rate coefficient in the
deep quantum tunnelling regime [ 15 ] .

Unlike the exact quantum rate in section 2.1 , where phase information
in the @xmath operators is incorporated, this is not included in the
classical-like ring polymer rate calculation. Consequently, RPMD rate
theory is unlikely to reproduce exact quantum results in models where
there is coherent transition state recrossing dynamics, such as a
system-bath model for proton transfer at very low temperatures [ 39 ] .

### 2.6 Quantum Transition State Theory

I noted earlier that the exact quantum mechanical flux-side correlation
function tends to zero as @xmath , thereby precluding a rigorous version
of QTST. However, the classical isomorphism of a ring polymer leads
naturally to a centroid density QTST rate [ 40 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By similar arguments to those used for classical transition state theory
in Eqs ( 2.3 – 2.13 ), this can be shown to be equal to the classical
flux through the dividing surface multiplied by the ratio of quantum
mechanical dividing surface and reactant partition functions [ 9 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is precisely the Voth-Chandler-Miller formulation of QTST [ 40 ] .
By taking ring polymer phase space literally, RPMD rate theory is to
this QTST what classical rate theory is to classical TST. Here @xmath
corresponds to the partition function of a ring polymer whose centroid
is constrained to the dividing surface,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , defined in Eq ( 2.14 ), is the (quantum mechanical and
classical) partition function per unit length in the reaction region.
Like classical transition state theory, the QTST rate can be evaluated
in a classical phase space (albeit in an extended dimensionality), but
it also includes some quantum mechanical tunnelling effects by nature of
the classical isomorphism. Unfortunately QTST is exponentially sensitive
to the position of the dividing surface for the same reasons as for
classical transition state theory, as given in Eq ( 2.16 ). Because the
QTST rate is always greater than or equal to the full RPMD rate, one can
variationally optimise @xmath by choosing the value which produces the
lowest @xmath [ 27 ] . However, variational optimisation of @xmath is no
guarantee that QTST will give the correct rate if recrossing effects are
important [ 13 ] .

### 2.7 Previous applications of RPMD rate theory

The first application of RPMD (before RPMD rate theory was invented) was
to the position autocorrelation function of a one-dimensional potential
[ 25 ] , where good results were obtained if the potential was
relatively harmonic. It was also applied to quantum diffusion in liquid
para-hydrogen and water, as well as inelastic neutron scattering [ 34 ,
41 , 42 ] .

RPMD rate theory was initially applied to the one dimensional Eckart
Barrier where @xmath and its asymmetric analogue [ 9 ] . The centroid
version of QTST (section 2.6 ) gave answers close to the exact RPMD
limit for the optimized dividing surface, as would be expected for a
one-dimensional barrier transmission model with a well-defined dividing
surface and as such, minimal recrossing. There was also an application
to a standard system-bath model for proton transfer in solution [ 10 ] ,
which involved a quartic double well potential bilinearly coupled to a
harmonic bath with the Ohmic spectral density.

Since then, RPMD rate theory has been applied to more complex reactions,
such as a more sophisticated model for acid-base proton transfer in a
polar solvent [ 11 ] , and the quantum diffusion of hydrogen and muonium
atoms in liquid water and hexagonal ice [ 12 ] . This last case was
particularly successful, even at a temperature of 8 K and for very light
muonium, correctly capturing quantum mechanical (deep tunnelling)
effects in the experimental rate coefficient for intercavity hopping.

RPMD rate theory has also been applied to several gas phase reactions,
including H + H @xmath , Cl + HCl and F + H @xmath [ 14 ] . This
application compared RPMD to exact quantum results. Even in deep
tunnelling (200 K), RPMD rate theory was found to give the correct rates
to within a factor of at most three, whereas the corresponding classical
calculations underestimated the rates by a factor greater than one
thousand. More recently, RPMD has been used to calculate the rate for
the more complex reaction H + CH @xmath H @xmath + CH @xmath , producing
better results than any other approximate quantum mechanical method [ 13
] .

An interesting facet of the above investigations is that — in deep
tunnelling — RPMD rate theory has invariably been found to slightly
underestimate the rates of symmetric reactions (e.g. the H + H @xmath
reaction or symmetric Eckart barrier) and overestimate the rates of
asymmetric reactions (e.g. H + CH @xmath or the asymmetric Eckart
Barrier). Richardson and Althorpe have recently linked RPMD rate theory
with semi-classical instanton theory [ 16 ] , and in doing so have
explained this phenomenon, and justified why RPMD works so well, even at
very low temperatures [ 15 ] .

## Chapter 3 Non-adiabatic generalization

Having summarized previous applications of RPMD theory, all of which
involve the ring polymer moving over a single potential energy surface,
the theory is now extended to electronically non-adiabatic systems. The
only modification required to the theory, as we shall see, is in the
form of the ring-polymer potential. Brief calculational details are
given, followed by considering how the generalized theory behaves in the
high temperature limit, for a single electronic surface, and for a
potential which is partly independent of electronic state occupancy. For
convenience, one-dimensional notation is still used.

### 3.1 The effective potential

The Hamiltonian, which here contains more than one electronic state,
enters RPMD rate theory through the Boltzmann factor @xmath . For a
one-dimensional electronically coupled problem, the potential energy
operator, @xmath , must include contributions from all electronic
states, denoted @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we explore the effect of the non-adiabatic potential in Eq ( 3.1 )
on the partition function @xmath , which leads to a new form of the
ring-polymer Hamiltonian. This is applied to the flux-side correlation
function in Eq ( 2.36 ) to produce an RPMD rate formula which includes
electronically non-adiabatic effects.

Using the form of the partition function in Eq ( 2.21 ), and evaluating
the trace in the basis of position and electronic states,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting unit operators @xmath , @xmath , between each @xmath term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering one of these @xmath terms, and noting @xmath is independent
of the electronic state,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and that @xmath is diagonal in the co-ordinate representation (though
not in the electronic space),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the bra-kets in Eq ( 3.3 ) can be rewritten,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consequently, the partition function will be the product of @xmath and
@xmath terms. The terms involving the momentum operator can be evaluated
as in Eqs ( 2.27 – 2.31 ) producing

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

In order to incorporate the non-adiabatic potential into the
Hamiltonian, the multiple summation in Eq ( 3.7 ) is trivially rewritten
as the exponential of its logarithm, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Utilising the Hamiltonian in Eq ( 3.9 ), the reaction rate of a quantum
particle in a system with multiple electronic states can be calculated
using the flux-side correlation method outlined in section 2.5 .
Usefully, the calculation proceeds in @xmath -dimensional classical
phase space, as for reactions on a single electronic surface. A similar
expression to Eq ( 3.10 ) has been derived by Schwieters and Voth [ 43 ]
, though it was used to calculate a path-integral QTST rate and not for
evaluation of real-time dynamics nor RPMD reaction rates.

Unlike the potential for a single electronic surface in chapter 2 , the
force on one bead, @xmath , is a function of the positions of all beads,
presenting a much greater computational challenge. The form of the
potential also prevents a simple graphical picture of a non-adiabatic
potential surface. Despite the algebraic complexity, the order of
approximation in deriving Eq ( 3.10 ) is no greater than that used in
the adiabatic case, and arises solely from the symmetric splitting of
the Boltzmann operator in Eq ( 2.19 ) leading to a global error of
@xmath .

### 3.2 Implementation

Here I consider the computation of the potential in Eq ( 3.10 ) and the
calculation of the force on each bead, which is required for evolution
of the ring polymer in the extended classical phase space.

The electronic potential in Eq ( 3.1 ) can be written as a matrix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvalues of the matrix @xmath are the energies of the electronic
eigenstates for a particular value of @xmath . The bra-kets in Eq ( 3.10
) therefore correspond to elements of exponential matrices, such that
for bead @xmath with position @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The trace of the product of these exponential matrices
can then be used to evaluate the potential,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to evolve the ring polymer along a trajectory through the
extended classical phase space, the force on each bead, namely the
negative derivative of the potential, is required:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The computation of an exponential matrix and its derivative is outlined
in Appendix A . Noting the cyclic permutation permissible within a
trace, the numerator of Eq ( 3.14 ) can be rewritten,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a ‘hole’ matrix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exponential matrices @xmath do not commute, so a hole matrix must be
evaluated for each bead. From Eq ( 3.17 ) this would appear to take
@xmath matrix multiplications, but using Bell’s algorithm ¹ ¹ 1 This
algorithm, attributed to Martin Bell, is outlined in Appendix B . only
@xmath multiplications are required.

### 3.3 Discussion

Despite the complexity of the potential in Eq ( 3.10 ), a qualitative
physical interpretation is possible by considering various limits in
which the dependence of the potential on the electronic eigenstates can
be presented analytically. We shall also investigate the case of a
single electronic potential energy surface, and a ‘mixed’ potential,
only part of which is dependent on the electronic state.

#### 3.3.1 The one-bead limit

In the high temperature limit where the system can be accurately
represented by a single bead, @xmath and position is expressed as the
scalar @xmath rather than the ring polymer vector @xmath . The
non-adiabatic potential in Eq ( 3.10 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering a two-level system and evaluating the trace in the basis of
the eigenstates of @xmath , with energies @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the force,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the force on a bead solely experiencing electronic
potential surface @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the thermal probability of the bead being found on surface @xmath .
The overall force in Eq ( 3.22 ) is therefore a Boltzmann-weighted
average of the forces from the two electronic potential energy surfaces,
as would be physically expected.

Equation ( 3.19 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The advantage of the variable @xmath is that it can be set to zero in
the limit of degenerate states, and taken to infinity in the limit of
widely-separated states, which we now explore.

##### 3.3.1.1 Degenerate states

If, for some value of @xmath , the electronic eigenstates of @xmath are
of equal energy, @xmath . In this limit,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath term in Eq ( 3.29 ) can be understood as the entropy arising
from the occupation of two degenerate states, which are equally occupied
by Eq ( 3.30 ), such that the force on the bead is the average of the
forces from each electronic potential surface, as given by Eq ( 3.31 ).

##### 3.3.1.2 Widely separated states

Conversely, when state @xmath is far higher in energy than state @xmath
, @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In this regime, the physics of the system is dominated by the properties
of the lowest electronic state. This is a physically plausible,
desirable feature, as the statistical probability of occupying a
high-lying state is very low. As the states approach each other, the
mixing increases.

#### 3.3.2 Single electronic state

The derivations in section 3.1 were completely general in terms of the
number of electronic states present in the system. For a single
electronic state, Eq ( 3.1 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sums over @xmath and @xmath disappear as there is only one
electronic state, making the potential a scalar quantity. The
non-adiabatic potential in Eq ( 3.10 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which agrees exactly with the adiabatic ring polymer potential in Eq (
2.33 ), as would be expected. As all matrices associated with the
potential become scalars, the force calculation in Eq ( 3.14 )
simplifies too,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as would also be expected from the adiabatic potential presented in Eq (
2.33 ).

#### 3.3.3 Mixed potential

The potential of some systems, such as the spin-boson model explored in
chapter 5 , may be expressed as a sum of two terms, one of which, @xmath
, is electronically coupled, and the other independent of electronic
state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the electronically diagonal component of the potential,
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bra-kets in the non-adiabatic potential Eq ( 3.10 ) can be
rewritten,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the non-adiabatic potential becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath is the electronic component of the potential in Eq ( 3.43 )
treated using the electronically non-adiabatic ring polymer potential in
Eq ( 3.10 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the remaining component of the potential in Eq ( 3.43 )
treated using the adiabatic ring polymer potential in Eq ( 2.33 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that in a complicated problem, the electronically
non-adiabatic part of the potential can be calculated separately to any
part of the potential which does not depend on the electronic states,
and likewise for the forces on the ring polymer beads. The advantage of
this approach lies in computational efficiency, since the evaluation of
the simple sum for adiabatic contributions to the potential is
computationally trivial compared to the difficulties in calculating the
electronically non-adiabatic potential explained in section 3.2 and
appendices A and B .

### 3.4 Summary

In this chapter I have generalized RPMD rate theory to electronically
non-adiabatic systems. It was then shown that the ostensibly complex
formulation of the non-adiabatic ring polymer potential in Eq ( 3.10 )
produces physically plausible answers in the one-bead, high temperature
limit and reduces to the conventional adiabatic formulation of the
potential in the limit of only one electronic state. Furthermore,
contributions to the potential which do not depend on electronic state
can be considered separately to those which do.

## Chapter 4 One-Dimensional Model

Having examined conventional RPMD rate theory in chapter 2 , and
extended it to a system with multiple electronic surfaces in chapter 3 ,
the rate theory is now applied to two one-dimensional barrier
transmission models. These models are chosen due to their non-adiabatic
electronic effects and nuclear tunnelling, providing an initial test of
the generalization of RPMD to systems with more than one electronic
surface. The idea of a non-adiabatic transition between two electronic
states, whose energy changes with reaction co-ordinate, has existed
since at least the 1930s [ 44 ] , named the Landau-Zener model after its
early proponents.

A symmetric model is initially considered, followed by an asymmetric one
where the location of the optimum dividing surface cannot be inferred by
symmetry. As mentioned earlier, asymmetric and symmetric barrier
transmission systems are qualitatively different for RPMD rate theory;
previous applications to single surface reactions have observed an
underestimation of the exact rate for symmetric potentials and
overestimation of the rate for asymmetric potentials [ 13 , 14 ] , as
later explained by Richardson and Althorpe [ 15 ] .

### 4.1 Symmetric curve-crossing

#### 4.1.1 The symmetric model

Using the matrix form of the non-adiabatic potential in Eq ( 3.11 ), the
first model I shall consider is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , all in atomic units. The particle
mass is 2000 atomic units, close to that of a hydrogen atom (1837 a.u.),
ensuring tunnelling effects are present at ambient temperatures and
below. The diabatic and adiabatic curves are shown in Fig 4.1 .

Although the RPMD rate constant is independent of dividing surface
location, the convergence of the flux-side correlation function is
greatly enhanced with an appropriate choice of the dividing surface [ 13
] . By symmetry, the optimum dividing surface (where the centroid
potential of mean force is maximised) is at @xmath .

Exact quantum mechanical transmission probabilities for this symmetric
model are calculable by the log derivative method [ 45 , 46 ] , and are
illustrated in Fig ( 4.2 ).

The adiabatic reaction probability increases from zero to unity as
@xmath becomes greater than the barrier height (0.016 a.u.). By
contrast, the transmission probability for the non-adiabatic case shows
Landau-Zener-Stückelberger oscillations [ 47 ] arising from quantum
mechanical interference between competing pathways.

The exact quantum mechanical thermal rate constant can be calculated by
taking a Boltzmann average over microcanonical reaction probabilities [
26 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined in Eq ( 2.14 ). One can qualitatively infer from
Eq ( 4.2 ) and Fig 4.5 that the thermal non-adiabatic rate constant will
be lower than the adiabatic one for all temperatures, due to a lower or
equal reaction probability for all values of @xmath .

#### 4.1.2 Computational Details

As outlined in Eqs ( 2.35 ) and ( 2.36 ), the RPMD rate is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As the Landau-Zener model is a one-dimensional barrier transmission
model, the partition function @xmath can be evaluated analytically as
the inverse de Broglie thermal wavelength, given in Eq ( 2.14 ).

From Eq ( 3.9 ), the Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be expressed entirely in vector notation as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a matrix of bead spring interactions. For a free ring
polymer, where @xmath , Eq ( 4.5 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In subsection 4.1.2.1 , @xmath is diagonalised leading to the normal
modes of a free ring polymer. These are used to construct a time
evolution algorithm in subsection 4.1.2.2 , and an efficient method for
Monte Carlo sampling of initial configurations in subsection 4.1.2.3 .

##### 4.1.2.1 Normal modes of a free ring polymer

The symmetric matrix @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is similar to a Hückel Hamiltonian matrix for a cyclic polyene [ 48
] . @xmath can be diagonalised using an orthonormal matrix @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a diagonal matrix corresponding to the frequencies of
the normal modes of a free ring polymer [ 49 ] . Noting that @xmath ,
the free ring polymer Hamiltonian from Eq ( 4.6 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are vectors of the momenta and co-ordinates of a
free ring polymer’s normal modes, defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing to number the beads with @xmath , and the normal modes of a
ring polymer with @xmath , where @xmath is even, the elements of @xmath
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This corresponds to a discrete halfcomplex Fourier Transform with
appropriate normalisation ¹ ¹ 1 The transformation matrix can also be
written as a conventional Discrete Fourier Transform, but as the @xmath
th and @xmath th eigenvalues are identical, linear combinations of
degenerate normal modes can be taken to produce cosine and sine terms,
thereby keeping the transformation real-to-real and improving
computational efficiency. , performed efficiently by standard library
routines. The corresponding eigenvalues (diagonal elements of @xmath )
of the @xmath th normal mode are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the Hamiltonian for the free ring polymer is decoupled into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the normal modes of the free ring polymer can be evolved
analytically by simple harmonic motion.

##### 4.1.2.2 Time evolution

Time evolution is by a symplectic numerical integrator, where the
overall Hamiltonian @xmath is split into a free ring polymer part,
@xmath , for which evolution is analytic (as described in the section
4.1.2.1 ), and a potential part @xmath . The general procedure for time
evolution through an interval @xmath is as follows [ 49 ] :

1.  Evolve momenta under their forces for time @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  Transform to the normal modes of a free ring polymer

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  Evolve the normal modes analytically by time @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

4.  Transform to the bead representation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

5.  Evaluate forces, @xmath , with bead positions at time @xmath ,

6.  Evolve momenta under new forces for time @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

Stages 1 and 6 are evolution of the momenta under the potential @xmath .
Stages 2 and 4 involve the transformations described in the subsection
4.1.2.1 , and stage 3 is exact evolution of a free ring polymer under
@xmath , derived by analytically solving the equations of motion for a
simple harmonic oscillator. This algorithm conserves phase space volume,
satisfying Liouville’s theorem, such that @xmath [ 49 ] . Consequently,
energy drift is not observed and instead the total calculated energy of
the system fluctuates around its starting value.

The time step, @xmath , must be sufficiently small to accurately
reproduce trajectories and conserve the Hamiltonian. The time evolution
scheme can be justified as a series of exact evolutions under
approximate Hamiltonians, and possesses global error @xmath [ 49 ] . For
the dynamics of the highest frequency mode of the ring polymer not to be
washed out, the time step should be considerably less than the time
period of the highest frequency mode of the free ring polymer, i.e.
@xmath . From Eq ( 4.13 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

so a ‘safe’ time step is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the highest frequency mode of the ring polymer may not
contribute to the dynamics of the system, and in practice a converged
time step is found by decreasing @xmath until the total energy during a
trajectory is well conserved.

##### 4.1.2.3 Monte Carlo Sampling

In order to evaluate the time evolved side operator @xmath the system is
evolved by classical molecular dynamics from a starting configuration
denoted @xmath . Using biased Monte Carlo sampling, one aims to find a
sampling function which incorporates as much of the original integrand
in Eq ( 4.3 ) as possible, but whose distribution can be sampled
efficiently.

I used two similar sampling functions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which have the analytic integrals,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rate equation ( 4.3 ) can be separated into considerations of
positive and negative initial momentum centroids. Choosing to multiply
Eq ( 4.3 ) by @xmath and divide by @xmath , and choosing @xmath to
sample the initial co-ordinates and momenta of the system @xmath , the
rate equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Initial momenta and positions are sampled in the normal mode
representation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
              @xmath   @xmath            (4.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The zeroth momentum normal mode, @xmath , is sampled from the Gamma
distribution of order 2, in order to capture the @xmath distribution.
All other momentum normal modes are sampled from Gaussian deviates with
zero mean and standard deviation @xmath . The position centroid @xmath
is set equal to @xmath , and the @xmath th co-ordinate normal modes,
@xmath , are sampled from Gaussian deviates with zero mean and standard
deviation @xmath .

These normal mode co-ordinates and momenta, @xmath , are then
transformed to the bead representation @xmath , and the initial
potential of the system @xmath is calculated, along with the force on
each bead @xmath . The system is evolved to long time, @xmath , by
classical molecular dynamics (in this model, 60 fs is sufficient), and
after each time step, @xmath is evaluated. If the position centroid is
on the products side of the dividing surface, @xmath (calculated at the
start of the trajectory) is added to @xmath , scaled by @xmath .
Trajectories are run in pairs of @xmath and @xmath initial
configurations in order to sample both positive and negative initial
momentum centroids. Plots of @xmath are analysed to check for
convergence with respect to time step, number of beads, and number of
trajectories. When converged, the long time limit, @xmath is the rate.

An advantage of the sampling function in Eq ( 4.25 ) is that it produces
the exact answer analytically in the ‘classical’ one bead limit with the
optimum dividing surface. In this limit, there is no recrossing, such
that negative momentum states always end up on the reactant side of the
dividing surface (thereby contributing nothing to the rate equation),
and positive momentum states are always found on the products side. The
second part of Eq ( 4.25 ) vanishes, and the first part is analytically
calculable as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is the classical transition state theory rate introduced in
section 2.3 for a one dimensional model and a potential which tends to
zero in the reactant limit ( @xmath ). The @xmath factor means the
classical rate will appear linear on an Arrhenius plot, if @xmath is not
itself a function of temperature. ² ² 2 This is generally true on a
single electronic potential energy surface, but not for a non-adiabatic
potential, as evident from the @xmath dependence of Eq ( 3.10 ).

##### 4.1.2.4 Convergence

The parameters which required converging for this calculation were the
number of beads @xmath , the time step @xmath , the length of the
trajectories @xmath and the number of trajectories @xmath . The
calculation increases in accuracy as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Convergence is obtained by altering the parameters until the rate
remains unchanged to within graphical accuracy.

At the lowest temperature (100 K), 512 beads were sufficient to converge
the rate constant, and at 200 K, 256 beads were needed. To model this
for any temperature in the range @xmath , the number of beads was
calculated as @xmath rounded down to the nearest power of two ³ ³ 3 The
Fast Fourier Transform algorithms are particularly efficient if the
number of beads is an integer power of two. . Using the same number of
beads for all temperatures would not only be more expensive
computationally, but by Eq ( 4.21 ) would require very small time steps
at high temperatures.

To my surprise, a time step of @xmath was sufficient for convergence of
the trajectories, even though it is considerably greater than that
suggested by Eq ( 4.21 ). This implies that the dynamics of the very
high frequency modes of the ring polymer do not interact appreciably
with the external potential @xmath , and consequently do not affect the
path of the trajectory. This was checked with a test case using a time
step of 1 fs at 200 K.

By inspection of the plots of the flux-side correlation function against
time, a choice of @xmath fs was sufficient to produce a converged
plateau.

For each temperature, the number of trajectories @xmath was iterated to
convergence within a 5% error, corresponding to an error on the
logarithmic rate graph of approximately @xmath . At the highest
temperature (1000 K), 4000 trajectories sufficed, but at 100 K, @xmath
were required.

#### 4.1.3 Results

RPMD and exact quantum reaction rates for the symmetric Landau-Zener
model are illustrated in Fig ( 4.3 ) as a function of temperature. The
programs for producing exact quantum results for this graph, and the
asymmetric model, were provided by D. E. Manolopoulos.

The adiabatic rate is also given for comparison, where the ring polymer
moves solely on the lower electronic potential energy surface. The
‘classical’ @xmath ring polymer bead rate on the coupled surfaces is
shown, which is the same to within graphical accuracy as the ‘classical’
rate for a single bead moving only on the lower adiabatic surface
surface (not shown). This arises because the temperature of the energy
gap between the two electronic states is roughly 2500 K, and as such the
upper adiabatic potential surface makes hardly any contribution to the
potential a single bead experiences, in accordance with Eq ( 3.32 ).

The RPMD rate becomes exactly equal to the quantum rate in the adiabatic
case for high @xmath , as expected [ 10 ] . In this limit, the ring
polymer collapses into a single bead, for which the rate calculation
mirrors that for classical transition state theory with the optimum
dividing surface (as detailed in section 2.3 ). As the temperature
falls, the classical rate, which has an Arrhenius-like temperature
dependence, vastly underestimates the quantum rate but the RPMD rate
remains accurate roughly to within a factor of two, even in the deep
tunnelling regime at very low temperatures. For the reaction on the
coupled electronic surfaces, the RPMD rate does not tend to the exact
quantum rate for high @xmath , for reasons given in section 4.3 .

The central result is that electronically non-adiabatic RPMD rate theory
captures non-adiabatic and quantum effects, even at very low
temperatures where RPMD rate theory is expected to be less accurate.
Furthermore, the non-adiabatic RPMD rate in Fig 4.3 is just as good at
estimating the non-adiabatic quantum rate, as the adiabatic RPMD rate is
at estimating the adiabatic quantum rate.

### 4.2 Asymmetric curve-crossing

#### 4.2.1 The asymmetric model

The potential matrix for this model is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath retain their previous values and @xmath
in atomic units. The corresponding adiabatic and diabatic curves are
illustrated in Fig 4.4 .

Unlike the symmetric model, the optimum dividing surface is no longer
apparent by symmetry; although the RPMD rate constant is independent of
@xmath [ 9 ] , faster convergence is observed with the optimum dividing
surface where recrossings are minimised and the transmission coefficient
is highest [ 13 ] . As discussed in section 2.6 , the optimum @xmath can
be found by variational minimisation of the QTST rate.

Exact microcanonical transmission probabilities are calculable as
before, and are illustrated in Fig 4.5 . The transmission probabilities
are qualitatively the same, though the adiabatic curve is slightly
shifted to lower energies due to a lower barrier height for the
reaction.

#### 4.2.2 Computational details

The first step in the asymmetric case is the calculation of the QTST
rate for variational optimisation of the dividing surface. From Eq (
2.39 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The momenta can be integrated out, and using a position-only version of
the sampling function in Eq ( 4.22 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

the rate becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, for calculation of the QTST rate, momenta need not be
calculated explicitly. The same position sampling function is used as
for the symmetric reaction given in subsection 4.1.2.3 , from which
@xmath is calculated. @xmath contributions from each sampling of
co-ordinates are summed, and their average (multiplied by the @xmath
prefactor) is the QTST rate. This is calculated for a number of
different @xmath values, which, using a Golden Section Search [ 50 ] ,
converge upon the optimum value. For each value of @xmath , sampling is
iterated to convergence.

Once the optimum dividing surface is known for each temperature at which
the rate is to be calculated, the rate calculation proceeds in the same
manner as for the symmetric case, detailed in subsection 4.1.2 .

In the ‘classical’ one bead adiabatic case, the optimum dividing surface
is independent of temperature and can be calculated analytically as ⁴ ⁴
4 This is achieved by calculating the value of @xmath for which the
energy of the lower adiabatic electronic eigenstate of @xmath is
maximized.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classical rate calculation is therefore analytic for the adiabatic
surface. However, since the temperature of the energy gap between the
two adiabatic states is so large, it is a reasonable approximation to
use the adiabatic dividing surface in the one-bead non-adiabatic rate
calculation (and any deficiencies with the choice of @xmath will be
corrected by running the trajectories to sufficiently long time). As in
the symmetric case, the adiabatic and non-adiabatic one-bead rates are
identical to within graphical accuracy and so only the non-adiabatic
rate is plotted.

Convergence parameters were the same as those for the symmetric
calculation in subsection 4.1.2.4 .

#### 4.2.3 Results

Thermal reaction rates for the asymmetric model are presented in Fig 4.6
.

The RPMD rate is an even better approximation to the exact quantum rate
in the asymmetric model than for the symmetric one. The adiabatic rate
is greater than the non-adiabatic rate for the same reason as for the
symmetric case (Landau-Zener-Stückelburger oscillations), and the
classical rate again has an Arrhenius temperature dependence. Note that,
for a given temperature, the quantum exact and RPMD rates for the
asymmetric model are considerably higher than their analogues in the
symmetric model due to a lower barrier height, as visible from comparing
Figs 4.1 and 4.4 .

### 4.3 Discussion

The previous two model problems suggest that the non-adiabatic
generalization of RPMD rate theory is a good approximation to exact
quantum mechanical rates, even in deep tunnelling where classical rate
theory is in error by many orders of magnitude. The error of the
non-adiabatic RPMD theory compared to exact quantum results is similar
to that of the adiabatic theory, as shown in Figs 4.3 and 4.6 . The use
of the Hamiltonian derived in chapter 3 therefore seems to capture the
non-adiabatic inhibition of the rate, at least for these one-dimensional
curve crossing models.

In deep tunnelling (the low temperature limit) the reaction rate is
underestimated for a symmetric potential and overestimated for an
asymmetric potential, in accordance with the observations of Richardson
and Althorpe for a single potential energy surface [ 15 ] . From my
results, this appears to apply to reactions on both the adiabatic and
electronically coupled potential energy surfaces, even though Richardson
et. al. only considered an adiabatic surface.

In the high temperature limit, both the adiabatic RPMD rate and
adiabatic quantum rate tend to the (exact) classical rate, as visible in
Figs 4.3 and 4.6 and explained in Ref [ 10 ] . However, the same figures
demonstrate that this is not true for the non-adiabatic RPMD rate, which
does not become exact in the high temperature limit. As @xmath , the
number of beads required falls such that @xmath and adiabatic RPMD rate
theory reduces to classical rate theory, which (in the high temperature
regime) is exact [ 10 ] . However, there is no high-temperature
classical analogue of non-adiabatic RPMD theory, since the
non-adiabaticity is an inherently quantum mechanical effect.
Consequently, although there is a one-bead limit of non-adiabatic RPMD
theory, explored in section 3.3.1 , this does not correspond to any
exact classical or quantum rate.

The models considered so far are one-dimensional. It is known that
adiabatic RPMD rate theory can be extended easily to multidimensional
models [ 9 ] , and in the next chapter we explore the application of the
non-adiabatic generalization to a more complex multidimensional model,
the spin-boson model [ 5 ] .

## Chapter 5 The Spin-Boson Model

In this chapter non-adiabatic RPMD rate theory is extended to a
multidimensional application, the spin-boson model. This is a model for
quantum mechanical dissipative processes, where a two-level system
interacts bilinearly with a harmonic bath [ 5 ] . It has numerous
applications, from electron transfer in biomolecules and solution [ 20 ,
51 , 52 ] to quantum computing [ 21 ] and wavepacket dynamics [ 53 ] ,
and a number of approximate [ 20 , 54 ] and numerically exact [ 6 ]
methods exist for its description.

After introducing the model in section 5.1 , non-adiabatic RPMD rate
theory is generalized to multidimensional systems, followed by
introducing the Bennett-Chandler factorization [ 55 ] as a practical way
to calculate the RPMD rate. We find that the Quantum Transition State
Theory (QTST) rate is undefined for the spin-boson model with Debye
spectral density, but by using an unusual factorization of the RPMD rate
coefficient a converged RPMD rate is calculable, and preliminary
calculations are presented as a function of the coupling strength
between the spin system and the harmonic bath.

### 5.1 The model

In this section the model is defined by its Hamiltonian, followed by
exploring the spectral density and the mass of the reaction co-ordinate.
I also outline the exact results used for comparison.

#### 5.1.1 The spin-boson Hamiltonian

The spin-boson Hamiltonian for a system of @xmath bath modes consists of
three components [ 5 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the spin Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath corresponds to a bath of @xmath Harmonic oscillators,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the system-bath coupling,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the Pauli spin matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each bath mode has momentum @xmath , position @xmath , and a
characteristic frequency @xmath and weight @xmath . The parameter @xmath
controls the coupling between the diabatic states, and the mass @xmath
is taken to be unity (in atomic units). We shall consider the symmetric
model with zero energy bias, such that @xmath .

The bath is completely defined by its spectral density,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a discrete approximation to a continuous density of states
(explored in subsection 5.1.2 ). It will also prove useful to define a
reaction co-ordinate @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

simplifying the overall Hamiltonian to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This so-called ‘Marcus’ reaction co-ordinate [ 56 ] , @xmath , clearly
corresponds to (half) the energy difference between the two diabatic
states. These electronic states are mixed by an amount @xmath from
@xmath to which harmonic contributions from @xmath are added. Adiabatic
and diabatic curves for a one-dimensional spin-boson model are
illustrated in Fig 5.1 .

The mixing of the two parabolic diabats leads to a double-well
potential, the rate of transfer between the two wells being the reaction
rate. The optimum choice of dividing surface for this reaction
co-ordinate is evident by symmetry: @xmath .

#### 5.1.2 Debye spectral density

The continuous spectral density I have chosen to focus on is the
so-called Debye type for which exact reaction rates are available [ 5 ]
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the coupling strength and @xmath is the characteristic
frequency of the bath. This @xmath is linear at low frequencies, peaks
at @xmath and has a long, Lorentzian tail at high @xmath , depicting a
solvent with Debye dielectric relaxation [ 5 ] . Its only defined power
moment is @xmath , which is related to the classical reorganization
energy [ 6 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting @xmath into Eq ( 5.10 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

All sensible discretization schemes should produce the same result in
the limit of an infinite number of bath modes, but the aim is to choose
one which requires the least number of bath modes, thereby maximizing
computational efficiency [ 57 , 58 ] .

Multiplying the spectral density in Eq ( 5.9 ) by a generalised moment
which I choose to write @xmath , and integrating,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where I have substituted @xmath as in Eq ( 5.11 ). Using the midpoint
rule to approximate the integral into @xmath windows, centered on @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, if we multiply Eq ( 5.6 ) by @xmath and integrate,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Comparing equations ( 5.14 ) and ( 5.16 ) strongly suggests the
discretization scheme

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from Eq ( 5.14 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This discretization scheme exactly calculates the only defined moment of
the Debye spectral density for any number of bath modes, and reproduces
the Debye spectral density’s long frequency tail (the slow decay of
@xmath as @xmath ). This is apparent from the maximum frequency,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is roughly equal to @xmath for ten bath modes. The absence of
convergent positive moments of @xmath is a consequence of the slow
cutoff, @xmath , which is absent with the commonly used, normalizable
Ohmic spectral density, @xmath , where @xmath for 10 bath modes (using
the discretization scheme in Ref. [ 10 ] ). The Ohmic spectral density
has been applied to the spin-boson model [ 6 , 59 ] but is presented
here for comparative purposes only.

#### 5.1.3 The mass factor

As stated in subsection 5.1.1 , the mass of a particle in a particular
bath mode is chosen to be unity. However, the mass of the reaction
co-ordinate itself, @xmath , is [ 12 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Noting the intriguing identity, whose proof is detailed in appendix C ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

the mass factor has the analytic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

As such, the mass factor decays to zero as the number of bath modes
@xmath tends to infinity. This crucial result is a consequence of the
nature of the Debye spectral density, and not due to RPMD rate theory,
as the mass factor is derived independently of any ring polymer
considerations. Conversely, the Ohmic spectral density can be
discretized [ 10 ] producing a convergent mass factor @xmath . Both mass
factors are illustrated in Fig 5.2 .

#### 5.1.4 Exact Results

This version of the spin-boson model with the Debye spectral density is
used here because Wang et. al. have calculated exact quantum rates for
this model using a numerically convergent multiconfiguration
time-dependent Hartree (MCTDH) method [ 5 ] . The parameters they used,
and which are considered here, are @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ranges
from 5 to 15. Their parameters are given relative to @xmath , such that
they are dimensionless, and here (for convenience) @xmath in atomic
units. Furthermore, Wang et. al. compared their results with those of
other commonly used approximate methods for the spin-boson model,
including the Generalized Smoluchowski Equation [ 20 ] , quantum [ 60 ]
and classical golden rules [ 56 ] , and the so-called Zusman rate [ 61 ]
. Employing RPMD rate theory with these parameters allows exact results
for comparison as well as a benchmark for the accuracy of our
calculations compared to other approximate methods. The spin-boson model
should therefore be an instructive test for the first application of
electronically non-adiabatic RPMD rate theory to a multidimensional
model.

### 5.2 Multidimensional generalization of RPMD

Here I extend RPMD rate theory derived in chapters 2 and 3 to
multidimensional systems, in the context of the spin-boson model. This
has already been performed for systems with a single electronic
potential energy surface [ 9 ] , and in this section includes the
non-adiabatic generalization presented in chapter 3 .

Consider a general @xmath -dimensional Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a dividing surface @xmath , for which products are found in @xmath .

The ring-polymer flux-side correlation function of Eq ( 2.36 ) with
@xmath beads is now written in terms of the centroids of the ring
polymer in each dimension [ 9 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the delta and heaviside functions are written in terms of @xmath
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Variables @xmath and @xmath are now matrices of momenta and positions,
such that @xmath is the momentum of the @xmath th bead moving in the
@xmath th dimension of the ring polymer phase space, and likewise for a
co-ordinate @xmath . The velocity relative to the dividing surface is [
9 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the momentum centroid in the @xmath th dimension is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the mass of particle @xmath . The general multidimensional
ring polymer Hamiltonian for a single electronic potential energy
surface is [ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

As detailed in section 3.1 , an electronically non-adiabatic potential
cannot be expressed as a sum of the potentials of different beads, but
is a nonlinear function of all positions, such that @xmath becomes
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a multidimensional generalisation of the non-adiabatic
potential in Eq ( 3.10 ). Note that @xmath values refer to electronic
states, @xmath values to bead numbers. The time-evolved side operator
@xmath is calculated by evolving the ring polymer through an extended
classical phase space under the influence of the Hamiltonian in Eq (
5.31 ) with the potential in Eq ( 5.32 ).

The formulae presented in Eqs ( 5.27 ) to ( 5.32 ) are applicable to any
multidimensional system with a non-adiabatic potential. However, for the
spin-boson model, both the flux-side correlation function in Eq ( 5.27 )
and the potential in Eq ( 5.32 ) can be simplified significantly.

From the definition of a reaction co-ordinate and a dividing surface in
section 5.1.1 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the reaction co-ordinate centroid is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing to define a reaction co-ordinate momentum centroid as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of the reaction co-ordinate, and noting that
@xmath , simplifies Eq ( 5.29 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying these notational simplifications to Eq ( 5.27 ) leads to a more
succinct flux-side correlation function for the spin-boson model,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, for the spin-boson model, the potential for a single
particle is separable into an electronically non-adiabatic part and a
part which is independent of electronic state occupancy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.41)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

As seen in subsection 3.3.3 , only the electronically non-adiabatic part
of the potential @xmath need be considered using the complicated
equation ( 3.10 ), whereas @xmath can be expressed as a simple sum of
contributions from each bead. Furthermore, @xmath is only a function of
bead positions along the reaction co-ordinate @xmath allowing us to
write for a ring polymer,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total ring-polymer Hamiltonian for the spin-boson model can
therefore be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq ( 5.46 ) can be simplified by using a normal mode transform similar
to that detailed in subsection 4.1.2.1 , leading to a Hamiltonian
composed of a harmonic ring polymer and an electronic term,

  -- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath                                                                             @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
     where the harmonic ring polymer Hamiltonian in the normal mode representation is                        
                                                                                                             
     @xmath                                                                             @xmath   @xmath      (5.48)
  -- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given in Eq ( 5.44 ). The frequencies in the normal mode
representation are, from Eqs ( 4.13 ) and ( 5.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency of the @xmath th normal mode of a free
ring polymer moving in the @xmath th mode of the spin-boson bath.

This multidimensional generalization, though notationally more complex
than the one dimensional case, retains many of the desirable features
discussed in section 2.5 . In the limit of a single bath mode, @xmath
and Eqs ( 5.27 ) and ( 5.31 ) reduce to their one-dimensional
counterparts, Eqs ( 2.36 ) and ( 2.32 ). The flux-side correlation
function, from which the rate is calculated, is a classical flux-side
correlation function evaluated in @xmath dimensional phase space, and
(like the classical and one-dimensional RPMD correlation coefficients)
its long-time limit is independent of dividing surface location [ 9 ] .

### 5.3 The Bennett-Chandler method

After generalizing RPMD rate theory to a multidimensional non-adiabatic
model, we now explore how a factorization of the RPMD rate constant
facilitates its calculation in a bounded potential. Introducing the
notation @xmath to denote an (unnormalized) thermal average over phase
space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

from Eqs ( 2.35 ) and ( 5.27 ), the RPMD rate for a general
multidimensional reaction can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The presence of the harmonic bath in @xmath (Eq ( 5.3 )) means that as
the reaction co-ordinate, @xmath , the potential energy of the system
@xmath . Consequently, the reactant partition function cannot be that of
a free particle, as it is for the barrier transmission problem in
chapter 4 , and its absolute value is, in general, difficult to
determine. To circumvent this problem, the RPMD rate constant is
multiplied and divided by the thermal positive-momentum flux through the
dividing surface, @xmath , leading to [ 11 , 55 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first fraction of Eq ( 5.53 ) is, by comparison with Eq ( 2.39 ),
the Quantum Transition State Theory (QTST) rate,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.54)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The conversion of Eq ( 5.54 ) to Eq ( 5.55 ) is achieved by integrating
out the momenta. The second fraction in Eq ( 5.53 ) corresponds to the
transmission coefficient,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

This dimensionless factor accounts for recrossing of the dividing
surface [ 13 ] ; for any system and dividing surface @xmath and @xmath .

Equations ( 5.53 ) to ( 5.56 ) are general to any model, but for the
spin-boson model further simplifications are possible. The QTST rate is
calculated by noting that the probability of finding the centroid at
position @xmath in the reactant region is [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

For this model, by symmetry,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

so Eq ( 5.58 ) can be simplified further to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

One therefore performs an unconstrained, thermalized simulation to find
the probability density of centroids at the dividing surface, which is
scaled by @xmath to produce the QTST rate. The transmission coefficient
is calculated by sampling configurations of the ring polymer with the
centroid at the dividing surface, the momenta from the Boltzmann
distribution, and evolving the unconstrained ring polymer trajectory to
long time, at each time step noting on which side of the dividing
surface it lies, and accumulating contributions to the numerator and
denominator of Eq ( 5.56 ).

### 5.4 Computational details

#### 5.4.1 QTST calculation

The QTST rate in Eq ( 5.55 ) is the canonical probability density of
ring polymer position centroids at the dividing surface for a ring
polymer moving in the reactant region under the influence of the
Hamiltonian @xmath , multiplied by the mean magnitude of the velocity.
An (arbitrary) initial configuration of @xmath was chosen, and the
momenta were sampled from the Boltzmann distribution @xmath contained in
@xmath .

This configuration was time evolved under the influence of a Langevin
thermostat (discussed in subsection 5.4.1.2 ) for @xmath time units,
without contributing to the rate calculation, in order to ensure the
ring polymer was fully thermalized. The ring polymer was then evolved
for @xmath time units using a time step of @xmath . After each time
step, the position of the reaction co-ordinate centroid @xmath was
calculated, and contributed to a probability density distribution
containing @xmath windows between @xmath and @xmath position units. The
entire calculation was performed in atomic units, such that 1 time unit
@xmath , where @xmath is a Hartree, and position is measured in
multiples of the Bohr radius @xmath .

For each set of parameters, @xmath trajectories were run, though in
practice convergence was obtained much sooner. Although, for the QTST
calculation, only the probability density of finding the ring polymer
centroid at the dividing surface is required, plotting probability
densities across the whole reaction co-ordinate @xmath allows for an
easy test of convergence, since the probability density distribution
should be symmetric for a symmetric potential. Furthermore, the free
energy surface itself can be calculated as [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the free energy of a ring polymer centred at @xmath ,
and @xmath is the probability density defined in Eq ( 5.57 ). The value
of the normalized histogram at @xmath , multiplied by @xmath , is the
QTST rate.

##### 5.4.1.1 Time evolution

A numerical integration scheme similar to that detailed in subsection
4.1.2.2 is used, evolving the momenta under the influence of @xmath for
@xmath , then momenta and positions with @xmath for @xmath , and finally
with @xmath for @xmath . Each ring polymer normal mode @xmath in each
bath mode @xmath has a different evolution frequency @xmath .

Incorporating the harmonic spin-boson bath modes in @xmath leads to more
accurate trajectories and better energy conservation compared to an
algorithm with the same time step which only evolves the normal modes
analytically, and places the harmonic bath in the numerically integrated
potential.

In order to calculate the force on each bead, the reaction co-ordinate
bead positions @xmath are calculated from the positions @xmath ,
followed by the force on each reaction co-ordinate bead @xmath . This is
converted to the force on each bead @xmath in each mode @xmath by noting
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have noted that @xmath is not a function of @xmath and
evaluated it from Eq ( 5.7 ).

##### 5.4.1.2 Langevin thermostat

A variety of thermostats exist for simulating the canonical ensemble [
55 ] , which should all produce the same result but with different
levels of efficiency. As there is such a wide spectrum of frequencies in
the spin-boson model with Debye spectral density ¹ ¹ 1 For @xmath bath
modes the ratio between the highest and lowest bath frequency modes is
approximately @xmath . , a Langevin Thermostat tuned to normal modes of
the system is used, similar to the path integral Langevin Equation
thermostat advocated by Ceriotti et. al. [ 49 ] . However, instead of
using normal modes of the free ring polymer (which leads to an arbitrary
friction coefficient of the centroid mode), the harmonic modes of the
free ring polymer and bath @xmath are used, in order to calculate the
friction coefficients. Before and after the existing algorithm in
subsection 4.1.2.2 , the momenta @xmath are transformed to their
harmonic modes @xmath and then individually thermostatted [ 49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the time step, and @xmath a Gaussian deviate with zero
mean and unit variance which is different for each normal mode, each
bath mode, and each iteration of the algorithm. The thermostatted
momenta @xmath are then transformed back to the bead representation
@xmath and the algorithm continues.

##### 5.4.1.3 Convergence

To my surprise, only one bead and ten bath modes were required for
convergence of the probability density along the reaction co-ordinate
@xmath in the parameter regime @xmath ; this was checked by running
simulations with 20 and 40 bath modes, 4 and 16 beads, and noting that
the resulting probability densities were identical to within graphical
accuracy. The requirement of only one bead suggests that the parameters
used, particularly the inverse temperature @xmath , are in the
high-temperature, ‘classical’ limit where only one bead is required.

Time step convergence of @xmath was checked by a simulation with @xmath
producing the same results. An indication that this is a ‘safe’ time
step is that, from Eq ( 5.20 ), @xmath , so a time step of 0.01 is
roughly 30 times smaller than the period of the fastest bath mode
oscillation. Convergence with respect to the number of trajectories is
evident from the symmetrical probability densities. Note that the
converged probabilities do not equate to a converged @xmath , as it
omits the @xmath factor. This is discussed further in the results,
section 5.5 .

#### 5.4.2 Transmission coefficient calculation

From Eq ( 5.56 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, for the spin-boson problem, reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum centroid along the reaction co-ordinate at
time @xmath . In order to sample initial configurations where @xmath , a
thermalized, constrained ‘mother’ simulation is run, from which
configurations are randomly sampled approximately once per time unit.
From this configuration, momenta are resampled from the Boltzmann
distribution and @xmath is calculated. If @xmath , it is added to the
denominator of the transmission coefficient in Eq ( 5.67 ). An
unconstrained, unthermostatted ‘daughter’ trajectory is then run, and
after each time step @xmath is calculated. If @xmath , @xmath is added
to the numerator of the transmission coefficient @xmath . Constrained
molecular dynamics is achieved using the RATTLE algorithm [ 62 ] , with
constraints @xmath and @xmath ; time evolution and thermostatting are
the same as those used in the QTST calculation, explained in subsections
5.4.1.1 and 5.4.1.2 .

As will be elaborated in the results section, converging these
calculations presents numerous challenges, and is a matter for future
research.

### 5.5 Preliminary Results

Here I present the calculations for the QTST rate, and explain why the
QTST rate is undefined for the spin-boson model with the Debye spectral
density. The transmission coefficient is then examined, from which an
alternative factorization of the RPMD rate is proposed.

#### 5.5.1 QTST rate

The QTST rate can be expressed as a product of half the thermal
magnitude of the velocity and the probability density of centroids at
the dividing surface, as detailed in section 5.3 . It was found that the
probability density converged with respect to the number of bath modes
@xmath , and accordingly converged histograms of @xmath for the @xmath
regime are illustrated in Fig 5.3 .

As the value of the coupling parameter @xmath rises from 5 to 15, the
stronger interaction between the harmonic bath modes and spin subsystem
increases the size of the reaction barrier, thereby decreasing the
probability of finding the centroid at the barrier and moving the
probability maxima (and potential energy wells) further apart.
Nevertheless, even for a coupling parameter as low as @xmath , a
double-well potential is still observed.

However, defining a QTST rate from these histograms is impossible, as I
have so far omitted the prefactor @xmath . The QTST rate should, prima
facie , be convergent in the limit as the number of modes @xmath .
However, the histograms above are invariant to the number of modes used,
and (as illustrated in Fig 5.2 ) @xmath as @xmath . Consequently, @xmath
as @xmath and the QTST rate is undefined. Physically, the vanishing mass
of the reaction co-ordinate suggests a diffusive process (Brownian
motion) across the dividing surface [ 63 ] .

#### 5.5.2 Transmission coefficient

Transmission coefficients for the @xmath regime are presented in Fig 5.4
. In this graph, one bead is used (the ‘classical’ or ‘high-temperature’
limit), though preliminary calculations with 10 and 100 modes and a
greater number of beads suggest this is close to convergence.

As the number of bath modes rises, the transmission coefficient falls,
and the oscillations in the transmission coefficient decrease in
amplitude and increase in frequency. For a low number of bath modes, no
plateau appears, which is required to define a rate [ 27 ] .
Furthermore, it appears that the transmission coefficient does not
converge with respect to the number of bath modes, such that defining a
converged transmission coefficient is impossible.

The observed oscillations are probably due to the high frequency bath
modes, which, in this extended classical phase space, oscillate
classically in the bottom of their wells. In a true ‘quantum’
simulation, these modes would almost always be in their ground state and
probably not cause the observed fluctuations in the transmission
coefficient ² ² 2 For @xmath and the Debye spectral density, @xmath . .
If a spectral density with a faster cutoff (such as the Ohmic spectral
density) were used, there would not be as many high frequency modes and
the large oscillations would be less likely to occur.

#### 5.5.3 Alternative factorization

From subsections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2 , the QTST rate tends to infinity as
the number of bath modes rises, and the transmission coefficient tends
to zero. This suggests that, combining them, one may be able to define
an overall rate, @xmath , if — and only if — the divergence to infinity
and vanishing to zero cancel each other. From Eq ( 5.53 ), I have
defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, from Eq ( 5.55 ) one could alternatively define the rate as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Fig 5.3 , @xmath is converged with respect to the number of modes,
suggesting calculation of @xmath . This is illustrated in Fig 5.5 .

From these preliminary calculations, it appears that using this
factorization, @xmath is invariant to the number of modes used. However,
converging a calculation with 1000 bath modes to within 0.5% (which is
the error of the 1000-mode transmission coefficient in Fig 5.5 ) is
computationally challenging, especially for low @xmath where the
oscillations in the transmission coefficient are very large.

#### 5.5.4 RPMD rate

If the alternative factorization in Eq ( 5.69 ) is correct, and the two
factors converge with the number of modes, then the product of @xmath
and @xmath is the RPMD rate. Calculating the transmission coefficient as
the average of @xmath for @xmath , ³ ³ 3 It does not matter greatly
which time window is used for transmission coefficient calculation. RPMD
rates as a function of the number of bath modes are presented in Fig 5.6
. From this figure, one can infer that for @xmath , the overall rate is
broadly invariant to the number of modes used. The deviation for @xmath
is a systematic error, as the period of oscillations in the transmission
coefficient is comparable to the length of time over which @xmath is
averaged.

Using this approach, RPMD rates are calculated as a function of @xmath
in Fig 5.7 , based on the histograms in Fig 5.4 , and transmission
coefficient calculations involving one bead and 1000 bath modes, where
the plateau in the transmission coefficient is well-defined. Reasonable
agreement is observed with the numerically exact data of Wang et. al. [
5 ] . Note that 1000 bath modes were required in a similar semiclassical
study of the spin-boson model with Debye spectral density [ 58 ] .

The exact quantum rate appears to be underestimated by RPMD for low
values of @xmath and overestimated for large values of @xmath such that
the slope of the RPMD rate in Fig 5.7 is too shallow; it is not yet
apparent whether this is due to convergence or a shortcoming of RPMD
rate theory. Nevertheless, the RPMD rate deviates from the exact quantum
rate by less than a factor of two, and is more accurate than the other
approximate methods considered in Fig 5.7 for moderate coupling
strengths ( @xmath ). The error bars show there is greater uncertainty
in accuracy for low @xmath ; in the limit @xmath the model tends to a
system of uncoupled harmonic oscillators which does not decohere,
causing large oscillations in @xmath .

Ref. [ 5 ] also contained data for the @xmath regime; for low @xmath in
this regime the standard deviation in @xmath is greater than @xmath
itself and these results are consequently not presented.

### 5.6 Discussion

In this chapter I have calculated the RPMD rate in a non-adiabatic
spin-boson model with Debye spectral density. The probability
distribution of centroids is independent of the number of bath modes
(for @xmath ) and therefore independent of the mass of the reaction
co-ordinate. By an alternative factorization of the rate coefficient in
subsection 5.5.3 , the mean magnitude of the velocity of the reaction
co-ordinate compensates for the vanishing transmission coefficient,
leading to a convergent overall rate.

An understanding of the behaviour of the transmission coefficient can be
obtained from analysis of Grote-Hynes theory [ 64 , 65 ] , which takes a
very different approach to understanding the transmission coefficient.
From Eq ( 5.25 ) and as illustrated in Fig 5.2 , the mass of the
reaction co-ordinate vanishes in the limit of an infinite number of bath
modes. As the mass falls, velocity autocorrelation dies rapidly as the
ring polymer is buffeted around by a large number of bath modes.
According to Grote and Hynes, the system enters a high-friction regime
where the velocity ‘memory’ of the reactant decays rapidly compared to
the imaginary frequency at the top of the barrier, such that the
reactant diffuses over the top of the barrier, known as the Kramers
diffusion limit [ 63 ] . In this limit, the motion of the particle is
governed by Brownian forces and obeys the stochastic Langevin equation.
The Grote-Hynes transmission coefficient @xmath is given by [ 64 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the imaginary barrier frequency and @xmath is the
steady-state (zero-frequency) friction. Noting that @xmath , we find
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

so as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which is also observed in the long
time limit of the RPMD transmission coefficients in Fig 5.4 . If we
perform the unusual factorization of the rate constant seen in Eq ( 5.69
) such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

and note that, from Eq ( 5.58 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Grote-Hynes theory therefore explains why the unusual factorization
avoids dependence on the vanishing mass factor ⁴ ⁴ 4 However, converging
the numerical value of the rate using Grote-Hynes theory (particularly
@xmath ) is exceedingly challenging, and not presented here. . It is
important to note that the anomalous behaviour of the mass factor is not
a consequence of a non-adiabatic potential, nor of RPMD rate theory ⁵ ⁵
5 The discretization scheme is not a function of the methodology used to
compute the rate. See, for example,  Ref [ 57 ] . . However, it is a
matter for future research whether the deviation of RPMD theory from the
numerically exact quantum rate is a consequence of the inherent
difficulties of the Debye spectral density, or of RPMD theory itself.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

In this thesis, the RPMD formalism [ 9 , 10 ] has been extended
successfully to electronically non-adiabatic reactions, followed by
application to two one-dimensional barrier transmission models and a
multidimensional spin-boson model. After introducing RPMD rate theory in
chapter 2 , an extension to include effects arising from electronically
coupled potential energy surfaces was presented in chapter 3 . The
generalisation produces physically reasonable results in the limiting
case of widely separated electronic states, and in the limiting case of
a single electronic surface correctly reduces to the conventional
formulation of adiabatic RPMD rate theory.

Two different one-dimensional Landau-Zener models were considered in
chapter 4 , with parameters chosen to accentuate non-adiabatic and
tunnelling effects. Very good agreement with exact quantum results was
observed across a wide range of temperatures (100–1000 K), both for a
symmetric model where the dividing surface is apparent by symmetry, and
an asymmetric model where the optimum dividing surface was found
variationally using a QTST calculation.

A multidimensional spin-boson model with Debye spectral density was then
considered in chapter 5 . For this model, the parameters were chosen
such that exact quantum results and a variety of approximate
calculations were available for comparison. A Bennett-Chandler
factorization [ 55 ] of the RPMD rate coefficient was employed, where
the rate is expressed as a product of a purely static (QTST) calculation
and a dynamical (transmission coefficient) calculation. I found that the
QTST rate was undefined for the Debye spectral density, and that the
transmission coefficient vanished in the limit of an infinite number of
bath modes.

However, using an alternative factorization of the RPMD rate
coefficient, the rate could be expressed as the product of two finite
factors, such that an overall rate was obtained which was independent of
the number of bath modes. This was evaluated over a range of coupling
strengths, and agreement to within a factor of two was obtained compared
to exact quantum results, better than almost all other approximate
methods that are available for comparison. The unusual behaviour of the
QTST rate and transmission coefficient was explained by Grote-Hynes
theory [ 64 ] , which suggested that the present model is in the Kramers
diffusion limit [ 63 ] .

RPMD rate theory for electronically non-adiabatic reactions possesses
numerous desirable features, including independence from the location of
the dividing surface, and modelling recrossing dynamics and quantum
effects. Future work could include further applications to
multidimensional systems, and determining whether the deviation between
exact quantum results and RPMD rate theory for the spin-boson model
explored herein is a consequence of RPMD rate theory or attributable to
the inherent difficulties associated with the Debye spectral density.

## Appendix A The exponential matrix

The requirement from chapter 3 is to calculate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath subscripts have been dropped in this appendix for
notational convenience. The exponential matrix is defined as the
convergent power series [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, for the models explored in this thesis, the potential matrix
@xmath is real, symmetric and non-singular,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, the off-diagonal elements, @xmath , are independent of
@xmath , and the diagonal elements are analytically differentiable.

The first stage of the algorithm is to calculate the eigenvalues @xmath
and @xmath of @xmath and their derivatives, @xmath and @xmath . This is
followed by evaluating the orthonormal matrix of eigenvectors @xmath and
its derivative @xmath . Because @xmath is symmetric, it can be
diagonalised by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues. The exponential of a
diagonal matrix is easily calculated as a matrix of the exponential of
the diagonal elements, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

From Eq ( A.3 ) and the orthonormality of @xmath it can be shown that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

such that the matrix @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By applying the product rule to matrix differentiation, the derivative
of the exponential matrix is then calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Bell’s Algorithm

To evaluate the hole matrix in Eq ( 3.17 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The algorithm proceeds in
three steps:

1.  Set @xmath , then compute @xmath , @xmath recursively, noting that
    @xmath , requiring @xmath matrix multiplications.

2.  Set @xmath , then compute @xmath , @xmath recursively, noting that
    @xmath , requiring @xmath matrix multiplications.

3.  Compute @xmath for @xmath using Eq ( B.4 ). As @xmath and @xmath ,
    this only requires @xmath matrix multiplications.

This algorithm ¹ ¹ 1 This is attributed to Martin Bell, after whom it is
named. computes all hole matrices in @xmath matrix multiplications,
i.e. is @xmath . Conversely, evaluating each @xmath independently using
Eq ( B.1 ) requires @xmath matrix multiplications, so is @xmath ,
leading to far greater computational effort for large @xmath .

## Appendix C Mass Factor Identity

From Eq ( 5.24 ) on p. 5.24 , the identity to be proven is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Noting that @xmath , this identity can equivalently be stated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, for brevity, I have defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( C.2 ) is proven by analysing the coefficients of a polynomial
whose roots are @xmath . Consider the polynomial

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By expanding the left hand side of Eq ( C.4 ), we see that the term
corresponding to @xmath is the negative sum of the roots,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and as such, I need to prove that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting @xmath into the left hand side of Eq ( C.4 ), and
rearranging,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The inverse product of the roots is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and I have used the periodic properties of the cosine function to move
from Eq ( C.7 ) to Eq ( C.8 ), as @xmath . Equation ( C.8 ) leads to a
new polynomial,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

However, from Eqs ( C.4 ), ( C.8 ) and ( C.10 ), @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Examining Eq ( C.10 ), the task is now to find a polynomial with known
coefficients, whose roots are @xmath . To do this, note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all integer values of @xmath . If we write @xmath as a polynomial in
powers of @xmath , the polynomial will have roots when @xmath , and we
can therefore substitute @xmath into Eq ( C.10 ). Expanding @xmath using
De Moivre’s theorem,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (C.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

are binomial coefficients, and @xmath denotes the real part. From Eq (
C.12 ), the ratio of @xmath and @xmath are required. The part of the
expansion of Eq ( C.14 ) which is @xmath occurs when @xmath , @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The terms of Eq ( C.14 ) which are @xmath have @xmath and @xmath , or
@xmath and @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.18)
              @xmath   @xmath      (C.19)
              @xmath   @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining the results of Eqs ( C.5 ), ( C.12 ) and ( C.20 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as required ¹ ¹ 1 I would like to acknowledge assistance from Dr
N. J. B. Green with the formulation of this proof. .