In this thesis, I will present studies on the collective modes of the
fractional quantum Hall states, which are bulk neutral excitations
reflecting the incompressibility that defines the topological nature of
these states. It was first pointed out by Haldane that the
non-commutative geometry of the fractional quantum Hall effects (FQHE)
plays an important role in the intra-Landau-level dynamics. The
geometrical aspects of the FQHE will be illustrated by calculating the
linear response to a spatially varying electromagnetic field, and by a
numerical scheme for constructing model wavefunctions for the neutral
bulk excitations. Compared to early studies of the magneto-roton modes
with single mode approximation (SMA), the scheme presented in this
thesis is good not only in the long wavelength limit, but also for large
momenta where the neutral excitations evolve into
quasihole-quasiparticle pair. It is also shown that in the long
wavelength limit, the SMA scheme produces exact model wavefunctions
describing a quadrupole excitation. The same scheme can also extend to
describe the neutral fermion mode in the Moore-Read state, reflecting
its non-Abelian nature.

The numerically generated model wavefunctions are then identified with a
family of analytic wavefunctions that describe both the magneto-roton
modes and the neutral fermion modes. Like the ground state wavefunction
of the Laughlin and Moore-Read state, the family of the analytic
wavefunctions do not have any variational parameters. This set of
analytic wavefunctions unifies previous numerical works on neutral
excitations of single-component FQH states, both from the Jack
polynomial point of view presented in this thesis, and from the
composite fermion picture developed by Jain and collaborators. The
compact analytic forms also lend much insight into the nature of the
neutral excitations from the plasma analogy. In particular, the
quadrupole excitation gap is related to the free energy cost of the
fusion of charged particles in a two-dimensional plasma with a
neutralizing background.
