The main goal of this thesis has been to investigate the effects that the
macroscopic vertical velocity fields have on the scattering polarization
signals formed in the solar chromosphere. Until now, the impact of macroscopic
motions had never been considered in the treatment of the polarization signals
produced by scattering processes and the Hanle effect. This is especially
important in the quiet solar chromosphere, given its strong dynamism and
reduced magnetic field intensity. Our investigation focused in the solution of
the multilevel, non-LTE radiative problem of the generation and transfer of
polarized radiation in increasingly realistic atmosphere models
(Milne-Eddington and two-level atom atmospheres, semi-empirical models with
ad-hoc velocities, hydrodynamical time-dependent models and a snapshot of a 3D
MHD simulation) for the Ca II IR triplet lines (at 8498, 8542 and 8662 A). As a
particular result, we obtained the first synthetic tomography of a model quiet
chromosphere that includes maps of linear polarization dominated by the Hanle
effect and of circular polarization dominated by the Zeeman effect. We also
studied the relevance of dynamic and thermodynamic in the inference of the
chromospheric magnetic field orientation taking into account the 90{\deg} and
180{\deg} ambiguities and showing how velocity and temperature gradients can
affect the diagnostic process. We show that Solar-C and the European Solar
Telescope should be able to capture the dynamic effects simulated in this
thesis for the Ca II IR triplet lines. Namely, the vertical velocity gradients
are able to modulate the resulting scattering polarization amplitudes,
specially in the presence of shock waves.