Lucky imaging is a technique for high resolution astronomical imaging at
visible wavelengths, utilising medium sized ground based telescopes in
the 2â€“4m class. The technique uses high speed, low noise cameras to
record short exposures which may then be processed to minimise the
deleterious effects of atmospheric turbulence upon image quality.

The key statement of this thesis is as follows; that lucky imaging is a
technique which now benefits from sufficiently developed hardware and
analytical techniques that it may be effectively used for a wide range
of astronomical imaging purposes at medium sized ground based
telescopes. Furthermore, it has proven potential for producing extremely
high resolution imaging when coupled with adaptive optics systems on
larger telescopes. I develop this argument using new mathematical
analyses, simulations, and data from the latest Cambridge lucky imaging
instrument.

The first half of this thesis develops new models and algorithms for
general purpose reduction of lucky imaging data. Imaging of faint
astronomical objects is achieved through careful calibration and
analysis of the data, and utilisation of faint guide stars is improved.
An analytic model for predicting Strehl ratio in reduced images is
proposed.

The second half covers scientific results and applications, analysis
techniques, and implementation of simulations and the data reduction
pipeline. Results from a binarity survey of planetary transit hosts are
given, demonstrating improved detection limits compared to previous
publications. Wide field lucky images produced from the synchronised
four CCD mosaic camera are demonstrated and analysed for image quality
across the field. Preliminary investigations of hybrid lucky imaging
adaptive optics systems through simulation and experimental data are
presented. Finally, the challenges of dealing with high volumes of image
data in an accurate and timely fashion are covered and solutions
discussed.
