Millisecond Pulsars (MSPs) are fast rotating, highly magnetized neutron
stars. They are thought to form in binary systems containing a slowly
rotating neutron star that, during a phase of heavy mass accretion from
an evolving companion, is spun up to millisecond spin period. The final
stage consists in a binary made of a fast rotating Pulsar (a MSP) and a
deeply peeled or even an exhausted star (as a white dwarf). This
theoretical scenario of MSP formation is known as “canonical recycling
scenario” . However, in the last years an increasing number of systems
deviating from the expectations of the canonical recycling scenario has
been discovered and the formation and evolution of MSPs still remains
unclear.

In this framework, the identification of companion stars to MSPs is not
only useful to fully characterize the binary systems, allowing for
example, to infer the masses of the two stars, but it also represents a
powerful tool to constrain the formation and evolution of these objects.
Moreover, in dense environments such as Globular Clusters (where most
MSPs reside), the identification of the companion stars is helpful also
to understand the interplay between dynamics and the evolution of binary
systems. Despite the paramount importance of identifying the companion
stars to binary MSPs, before this Thesis work started, only six
companions were identified in 5 Globular Clusters and a few in the
Galactic Field.

This Thesis is devoted to the search for companions to MSPs in Galactic
Globular Clusters and in the Galactic Field, with the aim of shading new
light on their formation mechanism. We report on the identification of a
total of 5 new companions. The main results can be summarized as
follows:

-   We identified three new companions in two Globular Clusters (two in
    M28 and one in M5), thus increasing by 50% the number of MSP optical
    counterparts in Globular Clusters known before this work (6 in
    total). They are non-degenerate objects, in contrast with the
    prediction of the canonical recycling scenario and in support to the
    hypothesis that exchange interactions are quite efficient in
    modifying the expected evolutionary path of these objects.

-   We detected the optical counterpart to the INTEGRAL transient IGR
    J18245 @xmath 2452, both in a quiescent and in an outburst state.

-   We identified the first companion to a black widow in a Globular
    Cluster: this is the case of PSR J1518+0204C in M5.

-   We spectroscopically confirmed that the companion to PSR J1740
    @xmath 5340A in NGC 6397 is a deeply peeled star descending from a
    @xmath progenitor, which lost @xmath of its original material.

-   The two identifications in the Galactic Field concern the companion
    to a black widow recently detected by the Fermi Gamma-ray Telescope
    in the Galactic plane, and the white dwarf companion to the
    intermediate mass binary pulsar J1439-5501, suggesting that the
    spin-down age derived from radio properties could be overestimated
    by a factor of 10.

The Thesis is organized in 9 Chapters:

-   In Chapter 1, I give a brief introduction to binary MSPs and to the
    expected companions.

-   In Chapter 2, I describe the used method of data analysis and the
    adopted procedures to discover and characterize the companions to
    MSPs.

-   In Chapter 3, I report on the identification of the companion to PSR
    J1824 @xmath 2452H in the Globular Cluster M28.

-   In Chapter 4, I present the detection of the companion to IGR J18245
    @xmath 2452/PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I in the Globular Cluster M28.

-   In Chapter 5, I describe the identification of the companion to PSR
    J1518+0204C in the Globular Cluster M5.

-   In Chapter 6, I report on the main results from the spectroscopic
    follow-up of the previously identified companion to PSR J1740 @xmath
    5340A in the Globular Cluster NGC 6397.

-   In Chapter 7, I present the identification of the companion to PSR
    J0610 @xmath 2100 in the Galactic Field.

-   In Chapter 8, I discuss the detection of the companion to PSR J1439
    @xmath 5501 in the Galactic Field.

-   Finally, the Conclusions summarize the main results of this Thesis
    and future perspectives of this work.
