A large fraction of this thesis is dedicated to the study of the information
content of random fields with heavy tails, in particular the lognormal field, a
model for the matter density fluctuation field. It is well known that in the
nonlinear regime of structure formation, the matter fluctuation field develops
such large tails. It has also been suggested that fields with large tails are
not necessarily well described by the hierarchy of $N$-point functions. In this
thesis, we are able to make this last statement precise and with the help of
the lognormal model to quantify precisely its implications for inference on
cosmological parameters : we find as our main result that only a tiny fraction
of the total Fisher information of the field is still contained in the
hierarchy of $N$-point moments in the nonlinear regime, rendering parameter
inference from such moments very inefficient. We show that the hierarchy fails
to capture the information that is contained in the underdense regions, which
at the same time are found to be the most rich in information. We find further
our results to be very consistent with numerical analysis using $N$-body
simulations. We also discuss these issues with the help of explicit families of
fields with the same hierarchy of $N$-point moments defined in this work. A
similar analysis is then applied to the convergence field, the weighted
projection of the matter density fluctuation field along the line of sight,
with similar conclusions. We also show how simple mappings can correct for this
inadequacy, consistently with previous findings in the literature (Abridged) .