##### Acknowledgements. I certainly would not have come this far
without the love and support of my parents, who have always taught me to
be inquisitive, to think for myself, and to love learning. They have
encouraged me in all that I do.
I am eternally grateful to my supervisor, Eckhard Meinrenken, for his
patience, his willingness to spend hours discussing ideas (and answering
my inane questions), his attempts to keep me on track by always telling
me I was behind, and for everything he has taught me. I truly could not
have asked for a better doctoral supervisor.
I would like to thank all of my colleagues with whom I have had
interesting discussions, and have continually helped me through various
mathematical issues: Tyler Holden, Peter Crooks, David Li-Bland, Dan
Rowe, Ivan Khatchatourian, Parker Glynn-Adey, and Madeleine Jotz. I am
indebted to all of the teachers and professors who have deeply inspired
and encouraged my love of mathematics: Mr. Marzewski, Mrs. Kopach, Mr.
Evst, Dr. Yeung, Kiumars Kaveh, Peter Rosenthal, Alfonso Gracia-Saz, and
Joel Kamnitzer. I’m also very thankful for my NSERC USRA supervisor, Dr.
Neil Barnaby, who rescued me from the doldrums of undergrad and
introduced me to what research was really like; I will always carry the
tachyons with me.
I would certainly like to thank the staff of the Mathematics Department,
without whom we would surely all perish. I have received immense help
from Ida Bulat, Jemima Merisca, Donna Birch, Pamela Brittain, Patrina
Seepersaud, and Marie Bachtis. Lastly, I would like to thank Stephanie
Jones, for her support, love, and for having helped keep me sane during
this mathematical adventure.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Poisson Geometry
    -    1.2 Classifications of Drinfeld
    -    1.3 Dirac Geometry, Dirac Lie Groups
    -    1.4 Dirac Homogeneous Spaces, Results
-    2 Preliminaries
    -    2.1 Poisson Geometry
        -    2.1.1 Poisson Manifolds, Poisson Bivectors, Morphisms
        -    2.1.2 Poisson Lie Groups, Homogeneous Spaces
    -    2.2 Groupoids and Groupoid Spaces
    -    2.3 @xmath -Groupoids
        -    2.3.1 @xmath -Groupoids, Dual @xmath -Groupoids
        -    2.3.2 Dual @xmath -Modules
    -    2.4 Lie Algebroids
        -    2.4.1 Definition and Examples
        -    2.4.2 Duals and Poisson Structures
        -    2.4.3 Reduction of Lie Algebroids Over Principal Bundles
        -    2.4.4 Pullback Lie Algebroids and Their Relation to
            Reductions
    -    2.5 Courant Algebroids
        -    2.5.1 Courant Morphisms
        -    2.5.2 Coisotropic Reduction of Courant Algebroids,
            Pullbacks
        -    2.5.3 Reduction of Courant Algebroids with Isotropic
            Generators
    -    2.6 Dirac Lie Groups
        -    2.6.1 Manin Pairs
        -    2.6.2 @xmath -Groupoids, Multiplicative Manin Pairs
        -    2.6.3 Groupoids, Modules, Reductions
        -    2.6.4 Dirac Lie Group Structures
-    3 Metrized Linear Groupoids, Homogeneous Spaces
    -    3.1 Metrized Linear Groupoids
    -    3.2 Linear Groupoid Modules, Homogeneous Spaces
-    4 Vacant @xmath - and @xmath -Groupoid Modules
    -    4.1 Vacant @xmath -groupoids
    -    4.2 Vacant @xmath -Groupoid Modules over @xmath
    -    4.3 Vacant LA-groupoids, LA-Modules
        -    4.3.1 The Trivial Case @xmath
        -    4.3.2 For @xmath
-    5 Almost-Dirac Lie Groups, Homogeneous Spaces
    -    5.1 Metrized @xmath -Groupoids, Almost-Dirac Lie Groups
    -    5.2 Almost-Dirac Homogeneous Spaces
-    6 Dirac Homogeneous Spaces
    -    6.1 Preparations
        -    6.1.1 Identifications of @xmath , Preimages of Coisotropic
            Subspaces
        -    6.1.2 A Useful @xmath -Isomorphism
        -    6.1.3 Structure Maps
        -    6.1.4 Some Important Maps
    -    6.2 Dirac Homogeneous Space Construction
        -    6.2.1 From Homogeneous Spaces to @xmath
        -    6.2.2 From @xmath to Dirac Homogeneous Spaces
    -    6.3 The Classification
        -    6.3.1 Examples
    -    6.4 Coisotropic Dirac Lie Subgroups, Homogeneous Spaces
    -    6.5 General Dirac Actions

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Poisson Geometry

Poisson developed the “Poisson bracket” in 1809 [ 52 ] as a means of
solving problems in Lagrangian mechanics; the significance of the
bracket was later recognized by Jacobi, who investigated its algebraic
properties [ 28 ] . In his work on transformation groups, Lie was able
to make a connection between the Poisson bracket and Lie theory when he
discovered a canonical Poisson structure on the dual of any Lie algebra
[ 38 ] . Poisson geometry experienced a resurgence beginning in the
1970s due to such mathematicians as Lichnerowicz [ 37 ] , Weinstein [ 62
] [ 63 ] , Koszul [ 32 ] , Kirillov [ 31 ] , and others as connections
to varying areas of mathematics were discovered. Poisson geometry plays
an important role in noncommutative geometry, representation theory,
singularity theory, integrable systems, and cluster algebras to name a
few (see [ 4 ] , [ 61 ] , [ 9 ] , etc).
In modern mathematical language, a Poisson Manifold is a manifold @xmath
, together with a Lie algebra bracket @xmath on the smooth functions of
@xmath such that for any @xmath , the operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a derivation. This means @xmath is a vector field, called the
Hamiltonian vector field associated to @xmath .

With Poisson manifolds comes the notion of a Poisson morphism : a smooth
map @xmath between Poisson manifolds whose pullback is compatible with
the Poisson bracket, i.e.:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Poisson Lie groups were defined by Drinfeld in [ 18 ] , with significant
subsequent developments by Weinstein, Lu [ 41 ] [ 43 ] ,
Semenov-Tian-Shansky [ 57 ] , and others. The original motivation came
from the Drinfeld-Faddeev formulation of quantum groups [ 19 ] , which
arose as solutions to the Quantum Yang-Baxter equation, an important
equation in quantum field theory; Drinfeld and Jimbo recognized that
these quantum groups were simply Hopf algebras. Taking the “classical
limit” of a quantum group yields a Poisson Lie group (see [ 19 ] , [ 10
] ). From a purely mathematical perspective, a Poisson Lie group @xmath
is a Lie group with Poisson structure such that the multiplication map
@xmath is a Poisson morphism, with @xmath given the product Poisson
structure. A Poisson action is defined as an action of a Poisson Lie
group @xmath on a Poisson manifold @xmath such that the action map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a Poisson morphism [ 57 ] . In general, the Poisson bracket of @xmath
is not preserved (see Proposition 5 in [ 57 ] ). If a given Poisson
action is transitive, then @xmath is referred to as a Poisson
homogeneous space ; a choice of basepoint @xmath identifies @xmath ,
with @xmath being the stabiliser of @xmath .

### 1.2 Classifications of Drinfeld

A Manin triple is a triple of Lie algebras @xmath , where @xmath is a
quadratic Lie algebra, and @xmath are transverse Lagrangian subalgebras.
Drinfeld showed in [ 18 ] that Poisson Lie groups @xmath are in 1-1
correspondence with Manin triples @xmath , with @xmath the Lie algebra
of @xmath , and an action of @xmath on @xmath by Lie algebra
automorphisms integrating the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath , and
restricting to the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are each Lagrangian, we have the association @xmath in the
following manner:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The dual space @xmath inherits a Lie bracket from the Poisson structure:
since @xmath for any @xmath , we can obtain a linear Poisson structure
on @xmath , which is equivalent to a Lie algebra structure on @xmath ( [
43 ] , [ 18 ] ; see Example 2.1.2 ). The metric on @xmath is given by
the natural pairing, and the bracket is the unique one such that @xmath
and @xmath are Lagrangian and the metric is invariant. Hence, given a
Lie group @xmath , the Lie algebra structure of @xmath as well as the
vector space structure of @xmath is automatically determined; it is the
Poisson structure on @xmath which determines the Lie algebra structure
of @xmath , and by extension, @xmath .
Drinfeld later considered Poisson homogeneous spaces in [ 20 ] . He
concluded that given a Poisson Lie group @xmath and an @xmath
-homogeneous space @xmath , the Poisson structures on @xmath which make
the action into a Poisson morphism are in 1-1 correspondence with
Lagrangian, @xmath -stable subalgebras @xmath such that @xmath (where
@xmath ). ¹ ¹ 1 Drinfeld did not actually include a proof of this
theorem in [ 20 ] , a 1.5 page paper, but referred to the proof being
“more or less straightforward”. A non-Dirac geometric proof can be found
in [ 23 ]

### 1.3 Dirac Geometry, Dirac Lie Groups

An important property of Poisson manifolds is the ability to reformulate
the structure of the Poisson bracket in terms of bivector fields: a
Poisson bracket @xmath on @xmath is equivalent to a bivector field
@xmath such that the induced bracket on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfies the Jacobi identity. This, in turn, is equivalent to the
Poisson bivector @xmath satisfying the equation @xmath , for the
Schouten bracket, the natural generalization of the Lie bracket of
vector fields to higher rank tensors ( [ 56 ] , [ 50 ] ). This structure
became integral to the study of Dirac geometry.
In the 1980s, Courant’s work in [ 12 ] , and (with Weinstein) in [ 13 ]
, put Dirac’s theory of constrained Hamiltonian mechanics [ 16 ] into a
geometric perspective. Dirac developed a generalization of the Poisson
bracket, called the Dirac Bracket , on a certain subclass of functions
(usually referred to as admissible functions ) on the phase space of a
mechanical system with constraints; his analysis allowed such systems to
undergo canonical quantization [ 16 ] . Courant started by considering
the generalized tangent bundle @xmath of a manifold @xmath (also called
the Pontryagin bundle), given by @xmath , and carrying a non-degenerate
symmetric bilinear form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

He also described a bilinear bracket (called the Courant bracket, or
sometimes the Dorfman bracket in this context) on the sections of @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Lie bracket on vector fields. The Courant bracket is
not a Lie bracket since it is not anti-symmetric; it does, however,
restrict to a Lie bracket on involutive, maximally isotropic (i.e.:
Lagrangian) sub-bundles. Courant referred to such sub-bundles as “Dirac
structures”, and they were at the core of his analysis, with the key
examples being the graphs of Poisson bivectors on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

(in fact, as shown in [ 12 ] for a given manifold @xmath , the Dirac
structures in @xmath transverse to T @xmath are precisely the graphs of
Poisson bivectors on @xmath ). One of the important aspects of Courant’s
work was in the ability to restrict Dirac structures to sub-manifolds
@xmath , effectively imposing constraints. Courant showed that if one
took the restriction of the graph of a Poisson bivector on @xmath , the
inherited bracket on a certain important subclass of functions coincided
with Dirac’s bracket from [ 16 ] (for more details, see [ 33 ] , [ 13 ]
, [ 12 ] ).
Courant’s work on @xmath together with its metric and bracket structure
became the foundation for the mathematical object now known as a Courant
algebroid . His ideas were generalized by Liu, Weinstein, and Xu in [ 39
] , defining abstract Courant algebroids to be vector bundles @xmath
with a bundle metric @xmath , a map @xmath called the anchor , and a
bracket on the sections

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which satisfies certain axioms. Dirac structures are defined similar to
Courant’s case to be involutive, Lagrangian sub-bundles @xmath . Since
the Courant bracket again restricts to a Lie bracket on @xmath , these
Dirac structures turn out to be Lie algebroids (see Section 2.4 ).
Further work on Courant algebroids was done by Dorfman [ 17 ] ,
Roytenberg [ 55 ] , Severa [ 58 ] (letter no.7), Uchino [ 60 ] , and
others. With Courant algebroids come Courant morphisms : given two
Courant algebroids @xmath over @xmath , and a smooth map @xmath , a
Courant morphism @xmath is a Dirac structure in @xmath restricted to the
graph of @xmath ( [ 1 ] , [ 59 ] ). This definition allows that if any
two sets of sections are related by the morphism, then so are their
brackets. The dashed arrow is a reminder that Courant morphisms are
relations, and not always actual maps.

To construct the notion of a Lie group in Dirac geometry, extending the
definition of Poisson Lie groups, the Courant algebroids @xmath must
themselves carry a multiplicative structure. This is achieved by
requiring that @xmath has a @xmath -groupoid structure @xmath over
@xmath ( [ 48 ] , [ 36 ] ) such that the groupoid multiplication Mult:
@xmath is a Courant morphism along the group multiplication @xmath ;
such Courant algebroids are referred to as @xmath -groupoids. This gives
rise to the notion of a multiplicative Dirac structure @xmath , being a
Dirac structure which is also a sub-groupoid. For the standard Courant
algebroid @xmath , the multiplicative Dirac structures were
independently classified by Jotz [ 29 ] and Ortiz [ 51 ] ² ² 2 While
both refer to these as “Dirac Lie groups”, we reserve the term and only
refer to them as multiplicative Dirac structures. . Given a Lie group
@xmath , a Dirac Lie group structure on @xmath is a pair @xmath of a
@xmath -groupoid and Dirac structure, with the caveat that any element
of @xmath is Mult-related to a unique element of @xmath ; this type of
morphism is called a Dirac morphism . This definition, and further
analysis, is due to Li-Bland and Meinrenken in [ 34 ] ; they showed that
the Dirac Lie group structures on @xmath are in 1-1 correspondence with
so-called H-equivariant Dirac Manin triples @xmath , with the
ad-invariant @xmath determining a (possibly degenerate) bilinear form,
and @xmath acting on @xmath by Lie automorphisms, integrating the
adjoint action of @xmath and restricting to the adjoint action of @xmath
on @xmath . Unlike the Poisson case, the transverse subalgebras @xmath
are not necessarily Lagrangian; the only condition is that @xmath is
@xmath -coisotropic, meaning @xmath restricted to @xmath is 0.
Every Poisson Lie group can be regarded as a Dirac Lie group: @xmath
gives rise to @xmath , with the groupoid structure of @xmath being the
direct sum of the tangent group @xmath , and the standard symplectic
groupoid @xmath . In fact, all of the Dirac Lie group structures for
@xmath arise from Poisson structures on @xmath , though considering more
general Courant algebroids @xmath give many more interesting examples.
One of the convenient properties of Dirac Lie group structures is that
they carry a natural trivialization @xmath , where @xmath is constructed
from the classifying triple @xmath ; the trivialization arises from the
groupoid multiplication of @xmath , together with the fact that @xmath
is vacant in the sense that @xmath [ 34 ] .
A powerful aspect of Dirac geometry, and Dirac Lie groups in particular,
is it allows for short and straightforward proofs of various theorems in
Poisson geometry. As an example in outline, we look at Drinfeld’s
classification of Poisson homogeneous spaces: for a given Poisson Lie
group @xmath , begin with a Poisson homogeneous space @xmath . The
Poisson action @xmath lifts to a Dirac morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

making @xmath and the Dirac structure into a groupoid space. Taking the
backwards image along the Courant morphism @xmath induced by the natural
projection @xmath , we obtain the Dirac morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that @xmath is an @xmath -module, giving us a
trivialization @xmath . Since the backwards image of a Dirac structure
is again a Dirac structure [ 35 ] , we get that @xmath must be a
Lagrangian subalgebra of @xmath . By the definition of the backwards
image, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, in particular, means @xmath . For the second half of the
statement, taking some Lagrangian subalgebra @xmath with @xmath , first
we form @xmath and take its forward image via @xmath . (As a note,
forwards images do not always yield smooth sub-bundles; a “niceness”
condition must be met, that @xmath , which is true in this case.)
Denoting @xmath , one can show that @xmath . Since @xmath is a Dirac
structure, this means it must be the graph of some Poisson bivector on
@xmath . Pushing the map @xmath forward under @xmath , we obtain the
Dirac morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which yields the Poisson action of @xmath on @xmath .

### 1.4 Dirac Homogeneous Spaces, Results

It is the goal of this thesis to classify Dirac homogeneous spaces, with
initial data similar to Drinfeld’s theorem of Poisson homogeneous
spaces. One of the main initial challenges in doing so is deciding on
the proper definition of homogeneous space for the Dirac case: since
@xmath are @xmath -groupoids (over @xmath ), it is natural to choose a
pair @xmath of Courant algebroid and Dirac structure over a group
homogeneous space @xmath which are @xmath -modules. There is no
reasonable notion of transitive groupoid action, however, so this
definition falls short. Looking to the Poisson case, we obtain the Dirac
morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

as in the previous section. We also note that if we take the quotient
@xmath , we obtain the group T @xmath , as well as an induced action on
the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed, this action is transitive since it is the tangent lift of the
transitive action of @xmath on @xmath .
Even in the more general Dirac Lie group setting, the quotient @xmath
always yields a group. This allows us to define a Dirac homogeneous
space as a @xmath -groupoid module and Dirac structure @xmath over
@xmath , such that the induced group action @xmath is transitive. Just
as the groupoid multiplication of @xmath trivialises @xmath , so too
does the groupoid action of @xmath affect the structure of @xmath ,
giving the modules the structure of associated bundles. This allows for
significant analysis to be done at the level of the fibres, and is where
we begin in chapter 3 with quadratic linear groupoids . In chapter 4, we
look at the groupoid modules for vacant vector bundle- and Lie
algebroid-groupoids, as the Dirac structures in Dirac Lie groups are
vacant. The vacant condition means that for the @xmath -groupoid @xmath
over the group @xmath , @xmath . We extend this analysis in chapter 5 to
metrized @xmath -groupoids @xmath : we take a quadratic VB-groupoid
@xmath over @xmath , together with a vacant, Lagrangian subgroupoid
@xmath , to approximate the Dirac structure in this more general
setting. We once again get a trivialization @xmath . Considering modules
@xmath over @xmath , with a transitive group action @xmath , we are able
to write @xmath . It turns out the global action and structure are
determined by that at the identity fibres, giving the classification of
such homogeneous spaces in terms of @xmath -coisotropic subspaces @xmath
which are invariant under an action of the subgroup @xmath .
Lastly, in chapter 6, we combine all of the previous results to classify
the full Dirac case. While the metrized linear- and @xmath -groupoid
cases give us the global bundle structure of @xmath , as well as the
formulae for the groupoid actions, we need to use reduction to help
recover the Courant structure: in [ 34 ] , the CA-groupoid @xmath is
obtained as a reduction @xmath , with @xmath being a particular
coisotropic sub-groupoid of @xmath ; since there is a natural Dirac
action of @xmath on @xmath , we take a certain coisotropic @xmath on
which @xmath acts, and obtain @xmath as a reduction @xmath .
Ultimately, the analysis yields the following classification,
effectively extending Drinfeld’s Poisson theorem:

###### Theorem.

( Classification of Dirac Homogeneous Spaces ) Given a Dirac Lie group
@xmath classified by @xmath , the Dirac homogeneous spaces on @xmath are
classified by @xmath -invariant @xmath -coisotropic subalgebras @xmath
such that @xmath .

We give a number of examples for various Dirac Lie groups, in addition
to giving an overview of how to recover the Lagrangian @xmath in the
Poisson case using Dirac geometry. Lastly, we extend a previous result
of Lu [ 42 ] for producing Poisson homogeneous spaces from certain
Poisson Lie subgroups to the Dirac case, and discuss some ideas
regarding general Dirac actions.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

### 2.1 Poisson Geometry

#### 2.1.1 Poisson Manifolds, Poisson Bivectors, Morphisms

We recall the definition of the graph of a smooth map @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 2.1.1.

Given a smooth manifold @xmath , a Poisson structure on @xmath is a Lie
bracket @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath is a derivation. This bracket
is referred to as a Poisson bracket , and a manifold @xmath together
with such a bracket is called a Poisson manifold .

###### Example 2.1.1.

Every manifold @xmath carries the trivial Poisson structure, @xmath for
all @xmath .

A linear Poisson structure on a finite dimensional @xmath -vector space
@xmath is a Poisson structure such that the Poisson bracket of any two
linear functions yields another linear function. In this case, the map
@xmath , restricted to linear functions gives a Lie bracket structure on
@xmath . Conversely, Lie algebras give rise to linear Poisson structures
on their duals.

###### Example 2.1.2.

Given a Lie algebra @xmath , a linear Poisson structure is obtained on
@xmath in the following way: given two linear functions @xmath , the
Poisson bracket is defined to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each @xmath . This is referred to as the Lie-Poisson structure .

With Poisson manifolds come the notion of morphisms.

###### Definition 2.1.2.

If @xmath are two Poisson manifolds, then a smooth map @xmath is a
Poisson morphism if the pullback @xmath is a Lie algebra morphism for
the Poisson structures.

###### Example 2.1.3.

Give a Lie algebra morphism @xmath , the dual map @xmath is a Poisson
morphism for the natural linear Poisson structures.

The derivation property of the bracket means @xmath depends only on the
differential, and hence defines a bivector field @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proposition 2.1.1.

A given bivector field @xmath on @xmath defines a Poisson structure if
and only if @xmath , where @xmath is the Schouten bracket , the natural
generalisation of the Lie bracket of vector fields to higher rank
tensors ( [ 56 ] , [ 50 ] ).

###### Proof.

The proof follows from writing formulae in local coordinates. See
section 1.8.1 of [ 21 ] . ∎

#### 2.1.2 Poisson Lie Groups, Homogeneous Spaces

The notion of Poisson manifolds can be extended to Lie groups.

###### Definition 2.1.3.

A Lie group @xmath with a Poisson structure @xmath is called a Poisson
Lie group if the multiplication map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a Poisson morphism. Equivalently, @xmath is a Poisson Lie structure
on @xmath if and only if it is a multiplicative Poisson tensor. i.e.:
for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 2.1.4.

( [ 57 ] ) Let @xmath be a Poisson Lie group, and @xmath a Poisson
manifold. A Poisson action of @xmath on @xmath is a group action such
that the action map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a Poisson morphism. If the action is transitive, then @xmath is
called a Poisson homogeneous space .

###### Example 2.1.4.

The left and right multiplication of any Poisson Lie group are Poisson
actions.

As a result of the definition, if @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, then
@xmath . Hence, we obtain a linear Poisson structure on @xmath , and so
a Lie bracket @xmath on @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.2.

( [ 19 ] ) If @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, then there is a natural Lie
algebra structure on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This Lie algebra is often denoted @xmath , and has a non-degenerate,
ad-invariant scalar product

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for which both @xmath and @xmath are Lagrangian subalgebras of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.5.

Let @xmath be a Lie group, with Lie @xmath . An H-equivariant Lie
algebra triple @xmath is a Lie algebra @xmath , with two transverse
subalgebras @xmath , and an action of @xmath on @xmath by Lie
automorphisms, integrating the adjoint action of @xmath , restricting to
the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath . If @xmath is a quadratic Lie
algebra, such that @xmath are Lagrangian, then @xmath with the @xmath
action is called an H-equivariant Manin triple .

Drinfeld classified Poisson Lie group structures on a given Lie group
@xmath via this Lie algebraic data.

###### Theorem 2.1.3.

( [ 18 ] ) If @xmath is a Lie group, then Poisson structures on @xmath
making it a Poisson Lie Group are classified by @xmath -equivariant
Manin triples @xmath .

Since both @xmath and @xmath are Lagrangian, we can associate @xmath via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

So for a given @xmath , both the vector space structure of @xmath and
the Lie algebra structure of @xmath remain the same regardless of the
Poisson structure @xmath ; it is the Lie algebra structure of @xmath
which depends on @xmath . Drinfeld classified Poisson homogeneous spaces
for @xmath using data related to the Manin triples.

###### Theorem 2.1.4.

( [ 20 ] ) Let @xmath be a Poisson Lie group with associated @xmath
-equivariant Manin triple @xmath , and let @xmath be a closed Lie
subgroup. There is a 1-1 correspondence between Poisson structures on
@xmath which make the action map a Poisson morphism, and Lagrangian
@xmath -stable subalgebras @xmath with @xmath .

### 2.2 Groupoids and Groupoid Spaces

###### Definition 2.2.1.

A Lie groupoid @xmath is a manifold @xmath , and a closed submanifold
@xmath , together with:

1.  Two submersions @xmath called the source and target maps.

2.  A smooth product map @xmath , @xmath where

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The product map satisfies @xmath , @xmath , and is associative for
    all compatible triples.

3.  An embedding @xmath , with the image called the units or identities
    , which satisfy

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    For brevity, we will usually identify @xmath with @xmath .

4.  A smooth map, called the inversion map @xmath , such that for all
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    We will denote @xmath by @xmath .

###### Example 2.2.1.

For any manifold @xmath , we can form the pair groupoid @xmath , with
@xmath , @xmath , and the multiplication given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The units are embedded as @xmath , and the inversion map is given by
@xmath .

###### Example 2.2.2.

If @xmath is a Lie group, and @xmath is a manifold with a @xmath
-action, then we can define the action groupoid @xmath by the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The identity at @xmath is @xmath , and the inversion map is given by
@xmath .

###### Example 2.2.3.

A group @xmath is a groupoid with a single object, @xmath .

There is a notion of a groupoid action on a set which while analogous to
a group action, requires slightly more information.

###### Definition 2.2.2.

Let @xmath be a Lie groupoid. A groupoid space for @xmath (also called
an @xmath -space, or an @xmath -module) is a manifold @xmath together
with a smooth structure map @xmath , and a smooth action map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , such that the following compatibility conditions are
satisfied for all composable @xmath , @xmath :

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

The structure map @xmath is sometimes referred to as a “moment map”.

###### Example 2.2.4.

@xmath is trivially an @xmath -space via the groupoid multiplication,
with @xmath .

###### Example 2.2.5.

Any Lie groupoid @xmath acts on its object space @xmath with @xmath ,
the unit embedding.

### 2.3 @xmath-Groupoids

#### 2.3.1 @xmath-Groupoids, Dual @xmath-Groupoids

###### Definition 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a Lie groupoid. A @xmath -groupoid over @xmath is a vector
bundle @xmath with a Lie groupoid structure @xmath such that @xmath is a
vector sub-bundle along the graph of the groupoid multiplication of
@xmath . A @xmath -groupoid is often denoted by the diagram:

[]

###### Example 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be any Lie groupoid. Then

[]

with @xmath , etc., is a @xmath -groupoid, sometimes known as the
tangent prolongation groupoid .

###### Definition 2.3.2.

Let @xmath be @xmath -groupoids over @xmath . A @xmath -groupoid
morphism is a Lie groupoid morphism @xmath such that the induced map
@xmath is a vector bundle morphism.

###### Proposition 2.3.1.

If @xmath are @xmath -groupoids, then a vector bundle map @xmath is a
@xmath -groupoid morphism if and only if the induced map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes @xmath to @xmath

###### Proof.

Suppose the induced map, which we will call @xmath , takes @xmath to
@xmath . In other words,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with appropriate basepoints. Taking @xmath shows @xmath is compatible
with the source maps; with @xmath , we have the compatibility with the
targets. Equation 2.17 shows @xmath respects the groupoid
multiplications, and so we can conclude that @xmath is a Lie groupoid
morphism.
The other direction follows from the definition. ∎

###### Definition 2.3.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -groupoid over @xmath . A @xmath -module for
@xmath is a vector bundle @xmath with a groupoid action of @xmath such
that the graph of the groupoid action inside @xmath is a vector
sub-bundle.

###### Example 2.3.2.

The standard symplectic groupoid @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid over the
Lie group @xmath . Given an @xmath -homogeneous space @xmath , the
cotangent bundle @xmath becomes a @xmath -module for @xmath in the
following way: in left-trivialisation, we have @xmath , and @xmath .
Since @xmath , the moment map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

makes @xmath into a @xmath -module for @xmath with action defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.3.4.

Given a @xmath -groupoid @xmath over @xmath , the vector bundle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the core of @xmath ; the core can be identified with both
@xmath and @xmath as both are complements to @xmath inside @xmath .
These isomorphisms are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 2.3.5.

If @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid over @xmath such that @xmath , then
@xmath is called a vacant @xmath -groupoid. In other words, @xmath
satisfies the property @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.2.

There are canonical isomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

View @xmath . The groupoid @xmath acts on @xmath by translation from the
right:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, for @xmath , @xmath , and so the translation induces an
isomorphism @xmath .
The second isomorphism follows similarly, using left translation. ∎

This gives us two short exact sequences:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Along @xmath , these sequences have canonical splittings via the
projection @xmath . The inclusions in the sequences 2.20 are given by:

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

###### Theorem 2.3.3.

( [ 54 ] ) The dual vector bundle to @xmath becomes a @xmath -groupoid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(Outline) Dualising the short exact sequences 2.20 , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The surjections in 2.22 define the target and source for @xmath .
Explicitly, for any @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For the multiplication, if @xmath and @xmath are composable elements,
then for any composable @xmath , and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For full details, see [ 25 ] , [ 54 ] . ∎

###### Remark 2.3.1.

Note that even if @xmath is a group (i.e.: @xmath over @xmath pt), the
dual bundle is only a groupoid in general. As an example, any tangent
group @xmath for @xmath a Lie group yields the standard symplectic
groupoid @xmath upon dualising.

###### Remark 2.3.2.

From the definition, the graph of the groupoid multiplication in @xmath
is the annihilator of the graph of the groupoid multiplication on @xmath
.

###### Proposition 2.3.4.

If @xmath is a morphism of @xmath -groupoids over a common base @xmath ,
then @xmath is a morphism of @xmath -groupoids.

###### Proof.

We recall from Proposition 2.3.1 that if @xmath are @xmath -groupoids,
then a vector bundle map @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid morphism if and
only if the induced map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes @xmath to @xmath . Dualising @xmath , we get a map from the
annihilator of @xmath to the annihilator of @xmath . Via Remark 2.3.2 ,
this means @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid morphism from @xmath .

∎

#### 2.3.2 Dual @xmath-Modules

Let @xmath be a @xmath -groupoid over @xmath , and let @xmath be a
@xmath -module for @xmath , with moment maps @xmath , @xmath . We will
show that @xmath has the structure of a module for @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.5.

There is a natural bundle map @xmath .

###### Proof.

The action of @xmath on @xmath defines linear maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath with @xmath . Taking @xmath , and restricting to @xmath
elements in @xmath , this becomes a map whose domain is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus, the map is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Dualising gives us a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This map is, in fact, a moment map for a groupoid action of @xmath on
@xmath .

###### Proposition 2.3.6.

If @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid module for @xmath with moment maps
@xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid module for @xmath
with moment map @xmath .

###### Proof.

Using @xmath from Lemma 2.3.5 , let @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath . Then @xmath is described as follows: for any @xmath , there
exists @xmath , @xmath with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is independent of decomposition: if @xmath is another
decomposition, define @xmath and @xmath . It’s clear that @xmath is
defined, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath , and so there exists a @xmath such that @xmath .
We get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , then by definition, @xmath . As @xmath , and @xmath ,
this implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Cancelling and rearranging, this gives us that @xmath and hence @xmath .
Since @xmath was arbitrary, this means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any choice of decomposition.
Lastly, we show that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath was arbitrary, the result follows. ∎

###### Proposition 2.3.7.

If @xmath is a morphism of @xmath -groupoids over a common base @xmath ,
together with a corresponding morphism of groupoid modules @xmath over a
common base @xmath , then the dual map @xmath is a module morphism for
@xmath .

###### Proof.

First, let @xmath . Then for every @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as well as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . As @xmath was arbitrary, we conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Secondly, with @xmath as above, let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
defined. Then for all @xmath , decomposed as @xmath for @xmath , @xmath
, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

So, @xmath for all composable @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 2.3.8.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -groupoid over @xmath , and let @xmath be a
@xmath -subgroupoid. The quotient of @xmath by @xmath is a groupoid
@xmath , with core

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient map is a groupoid morphism. The annihilator, @xmath is a
subgroupoid of @xmath , with units

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, if @xmath is a @xmath -module, and @xmath is a submodule
with respect to @xmath , then @xmath is a module over @xmath , and
@xmath is a module over @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part is a special case of Lemma 5.9 in [ 49 ] . The core is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . If two elements in ann @xmath are composable, then their
product must also be in @xmath , by the definition of the multiplication
in @xmath .
Since range @xmath , @xmath descends to a map @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath , then the composition is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any composable lifts @xmath . If @xmath is another lift of @xmath ,
and @xmath another lift of @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath
and are composable, so we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means @xmath since @xmath .
Lastly, @xmath being a module over @xmath follows from the definition of
the groupoid action, and that @xmath is a @xmath -module. Its set of
units is the dual of the core of @xmath , and hence @xmath . ∎

### 2.4 Lie Algebroids

#### 2.4.1 Definition and Examples

The notion of a Lie algebroid was introduced by Pradines in [ 53 ] as
the infinitesimal version of Lie groupoids.

###### Definition 2.4.1.

A Lie algebroid @xmath is a vector bundle over a manifold @xmath ,
together with a Lie bracket @xmath on the sections @xmath , and a linear
bundle map @xmath called the anchor such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , and functions @xmath on @xmath .

While this definition is sensible in many categories, we will mainly
concern ourselves with smooth objects.

###### Proposition 2.4.1.

Given a Lie algebroid @xmath , the anchor map @xmath is an homomorphism
of Lie algebras:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from the Jacobi identity and the Leibniz rule. See Lemma
8.1.4 in [ 21 ] . ∎

###### Example 2.4.1.

Let @xmath be a manifold. The tangent bundle T @xmath is a Lie algebroid
over @xmath with the anchor map being the identity, and bracket being
the normal Lie bracket of vector fields.

###### Example 2.4.2.

A Lie algebra is a Lie algebroid over a point.

###### Example 2.4.3.

Let @xmath be a manifold, and @xmath a Lie algebra together with an
action @xmath . We can associate to this data an action Lie algebroid as
follows: the vector bundle @xmath , with anchor map defined as @xmath ,
and a bracket on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Definition 2.4.2.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebroid, and @xmath a submanifold. A sub-Lie
algebroid of @xmath is a vector sub-bundle @xmath such that @xmath , and
for all @xmath , if @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.3.

Given Lie algebroids @xmath over @xmath , a morphism of Lie algebroids
is a vector bundle morphism

[]

whose graph in @xmath is a sub-Lie algebroid. A comorphism of Lie
algebroids

[]

is a vector bundle comorphism @xmath whose graph is a sub-Lie algebroid.

#### 2.4.2 Duals and Poisson Structures

###### Theorem 2.4.2.

(See [ 21 ] , Section 8.2) Let @xmath be a Lie algebroid. The dual
bundle @xmath is a Poisson manifold, with fibrewise linear bracket
defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath , and @xmath viewed as fibre-wise linear functions on @xmath
. This bracket can be extended to other functions on @xmath via the
Leibniz rule.

###### Theorem 2.4.3.

There is a 1-1 correspondence between comorphisms of Lie algebroids
@xmath and Poisson morphisms @xmath .

See [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 11 ] .

#### 2.4.3 Reduction of Lie Algebroids Over Principal Bundles

Let @xmath be a Lie group with Lie algebra @xmath , and @xmath a
manifold on which @xmath acts. Let @xmath be a Lie Algebroid, such that
@xmath acts on @xmath by Lie algebroid automorphisms. This action gives
us a Lie algebra homomorphism @xmath , @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an action of @xmath on @xmath by Lie algebroid derivations.
The vertical bundle of @xmath is @xmath , which inherits a natural Lie
algebroid structure: the anchor is the inclusion map @xmath , and the
bracket is obtained by extending the Lie bracket on the constant
sections of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.4.

A @xmath -equivariant bundle map @xmath is said to “define generators
for the @xmath -action on E” if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

as operators on @xmath , using @xmath to denote both @xmath , and @xmath
.

If one differentiates the @xmath -equivariance property @xmath , it
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The image of the generators via the anchor are the generating vector
fields on @xmath : let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

But @xmath , so equating both sides, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we suppose that the @xmath action on @xmath is principal, equation
2.34 implies @xmath is injective, and so @xmath must be injective.
Hence, we get the commuting diagram

[]

###### Lemma 2.4.4.

Identify @xmath as a Lie sub-algebroid of @xmath via the injection
@xmath . The space of @xmath -invariant sections of @xmath is a Lie
ideal of the @xmath -invariant sections of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -invariant, we need only
show that it lies in @xmath . Let @xmath be a basis for @xmath . Then
@xmath can be written as @xmath , and we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The first term vanishes, owing to the @xmath -invariance of @xmath . The
term @xmath lies in @xmath as required. It is @xmath -invariant since
@xmath is closed under the bracket. Hence, for any @xmath , we have
@xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 2.4.5.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebroid with an action @xmath by Lie algebroid
automorphisms such that the @xmath action on @xmath is a principal
action, and let @xmath define generators for the @xmath action. Then the
space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a Lie algebroid over @xmath with the induced bracket and anchor map.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the natural projection. The sections of @xmath are
characterised as @xmath . The kernel of the vector bundle map @xmath is
@xmath , with @xmath . Hence, the anchor map @xmath descends to a map
@xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

or more concisely, @xmath , where the overline denotes the image in the
respective quotients. This gives us the following commuting diagram:

[]

By the Lemma 2.4.4 , @xmath is an ideal in @xmath , and hence we get a
Lie bracket on @xmath . Let @xmath , and let @xmath be any lifts of
them. Then we see, for any @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, @xmath is an anchor map for @xmath and its descending bracket,
meaning @xmath is a Lie algebroid. ∎

#### 2.4.4 Pullback Lie Algebroids and Their Relation to Reductions

###### Definition 2.4.5.

( [ 26 ] ) Let @xmath be a Lie algebroid over a manifold @xmath , and
let @xmath be a smooth map such that @xmath is transverse to the anchor
of @xmath . The pullback Lie algebroid of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we identify @xmath . @xmath is a sub-Lie algebroid of T @xmath ,
and by the transversality condition, @xmath .

###### Example 2.4.4.

Let @xmath be a submersion. Then the pullback @xmath is the vertical
bundle @xmath , since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a Lie algebroid @xmath over a principal @xmath -bundle @xmath ,
and a Lie algebroid @xmath over @xmath , two natural questions to ask
include “Is @xmath ?”, and “Is @xmath ?”. For the latter, see Corollary
2.5.5 . For the former, we begin by noting that rk @xmath , and by
construction @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 2.4.6.

Let @xmath be a Lie algebroid over @xmath carrying a @xmath action as in
Theorem 2.4.5 , and let @xmath be the Lie algebroid morphism taking
@xmath to its reduction. The natural map @xmath given by @xmath is an
injective Lie algebroid automorphism. Hence, the image of @xmath under
@xmath is @xmath , and thus they are isomorphic as Lie algebroids.

###### Proof.

Both the anchor map @xmath and the reduction map @xmath are Lie
algebroid morphisms, and hence @xmath must be. If @xmath for @xmath ,
then @xmath , which occurs if and only if @xmath . Then @xmath at @xmath
, but @xmath , and since the @xmath action is principal, the generating
vector fields cannot vanish. Thus, @xmath .
Since @xmath , this means @xmath . Thus, since the map @xmath is an
injective Lie algebroid morphism between two algebroids of the same
rank, we conclude @xmath :

[]

∎

### 2.5 Courant Algebroids

###### Definition 2.5.1.

( [ 39 ] ) A Courant algebroid over a manifold @xmath is a vector bundle
@xmath , with a bundle map @xmath called the anchor , a non-degenerate
symmetric bilinear form (referred to as an inner product or metric )
@xmath on the fibres of @xmath , and a bilinear Courant bracket @xmath
on the sections @xmath , such that the following are satisfied for every
@xmath :

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

where @xmath is the map dual to the anchor.

From these, a number of other properties may be discerned, including:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath

for @xmath . Given a Courant algebroid @xmath , a Lagrangian sub-bundle
@xmath whose space of sections @xmath is closed under the Courant
bracket is called a Dirac structure . It follows that @xmath , with the
restrictions of the anchor map and the Courant bracket, is a Lie
algebroid.

###### Example 2.5.1.

[ 12 ] For any manifold @xmath , the bundle @xmath is a Courant
algebroid under the following metric and bracket:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all vector fields @xmath , and for @xmath . The anchor map @xmath is
given by projection along T @xmath . This example is called the standard
Courant algebroid over @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are examples of
Dirac structures in this case.

###### Example 2.5.2.

Given a quadratic Lie algebra @xmath together with Lie algebra action
@xmath , the bundle @xmath becomes a Courant algebroid if and only if
the stabilizers @xmath are coisotropic in @xmath [ 35 ] . In this case,
the anchor map is given by @xmath , and the bracket extends the Lie
bracket of constant sections via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the pointwise Lie bracket. This is called the action
Courant algebroid .

#### 2.5.1 Courant Morphisms

The notion of Courant morphism is due to A.Alekseev and P.Xu [ 1 ] (see
also [ 7 ] ).

###### Definition 2.5.2.

Suppose @xmath are Courant algebroids over @xmath . A Courant morphism
@xmath is a smooth map @xmath , together with a sub-bundle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath denotes the Courant algebroid @xmath with the opposite
metric) which satisfies the following properties:

1.  @xmath is Lagrangian,

2.  @xmath is tangent to the graph of @xmath ,

3.  If @xmath restrict to sections of @xmath , then so does @xmath .

For a given Courant morphism @xmath with elements @xmath , we denote
@xmath if @xmath . For any sections @xmath , @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Example 2.5.3.

Given any smooth map @xmath , there is the associated standard morphism
@xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.5.2 Coisotropic Reduction of Courant Algebroids, Pullbacks

One of the best ways of producing Courant algebroids is by reducing
existing ones via some compatible quotienting process.

###### Proposition 2.5.1.

(Coisotropic Reduction) Let @xmath be a Courant algebroid, @xmath be a
submanifold, and let @xmath be subbundle such that

1.  @xmath is coisotropic,

2.  @xmath , @xmath ,

3.  if @xmath restrict to sections of @xmath , then so does @xmath .

Then the bracket, anchor map, and inner product on @xmath descend to
@xmath , making it a Courant algebroid over @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Proposition 2.1 in [ 35 ] . Two important aspects of the proof are
that @xmath is involutive, and that for any @xmath , and @xmath , we
have @xmath , both of which stem from the Courant axiom

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 2.5.2.

(Reduction in Stages) Let @xmath be a metrized vector space, @xmath a
coisotropic subspace, and @xmath the quotient map. Given another
coisotropic subspace @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, in this case,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

@xmath is coisotropic if and only if @xmath , which is true if and only
if @xmath and @xmath . The two conditions @xmath and @xmath , however,
are equivalent. By definition of the induced metric on @xmath , for all
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.5.1.

If @xmath is the quotient map, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.5.3.

(Pullbacks) Given a Courant algebroid @xmath over @xmath , and a smooth
map @xmath whose differential is transverse to @xmath , one can define
the pullback of @xmath as the quotient @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The rank of the pullback is given by @xmath . The shriek notation @xmath
is used to distinguish it from the pullback as a vector bundle, @xmath .

###### Example 2.5.4.

(Proposition 2.9 in [ 35 ] ) For any smooth @xmath , one has a canonical
isomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.5.3 Reduction of Courant Algebroids with Isotropic Generators

The second sense of Courant reduction comes from [ 6 ] , analogous to
Section 2.4.3 for Lie algebroids.

###### Definition 2.5.4.

Let @xmath be a Courant algebroid, and let @xmath be a Lie group which
acts on @xmath by Courant automorphisms. A @xmath -equivariant bundle
map @xmath is said to define generators for the K-action if @xmath as
operators on @xmath . These generators are isotropic if @xmath for all
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.5.3.

( @xmath -Reduction with Isotropic Generators) Let @xmath be a manifold
with a principal @xmath action, @xmath be a Courant algebroid such that
@xmath acts on @xmath by Courant automorphisms, and let @xmath define
generators for the @xmath action which are isotropic. Then @xmath is an
ideal in @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the induced bracket, anchor map, and inner product is a Courant
algebroid over @xmath . If @xmath is a @xmath -invariant Dirac structure
such that @xmath has constant rank, then the reduced bundle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a Dirac structure of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 6 ] . ∎

Pullbacks and reductions interact well in the Courant case as well.

###### Proposition 2.5.4.

Let @xmath be a Courant algebroid over @xmath . Then with @xmath , the
pullback @xmath has a natural @xmath action with isotropic generators,
and @xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition, @xmath , with @xmath being the fibre product along @xmath
and T @xmath . Let @xmath act on @xmath via the natural action on @xmath
and the trivial action on @xmath . This action preserves @xmath (and
thus @xmath ), and has isotropic generators given by the inclusion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since T @xmath , the generators descend to the quotient @xmath , and
hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath injects into @xmath as elements @xmath , and so @xmath giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the subset of elements with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Quotienting by @xmath , we obtain @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 2.5.5.

If @xmath is a Dirac structure, then @xmath .

### 2.6 Dirac Lie Groups

#### 2.6.1 Manin Pairs

A Manin pair @xmath is a Courant algebroid @xmath and a Dirac structure
@xmath . A morphism of Manin pairs (also called a Dirac morphism )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a Courant morphism with underlying map @xmath , and the additional
property that for every @xmath , any element of @xmath is @xmath
-related to a unique element of @xmath .

###### Example 2.6.1.

For any Manin pair @xmath , there is a morphism of Manin pairs

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Example 2.6.2.

Suppose @xmath are Poisson manifolds, and @xmath is a smooth map. Then
the standard morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a morphism of Manin pairs @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
Poisson morphism.

#### 2.6.2 @xmath-Groupoids, Multiplicative Manin Pairs

###### Definition 2.6.1.

Let @xmath be a Lie groupoid.

1.  An @xmath -groupoid over @xmath is a Lie algebroid @xmath , together
    with a groupoid structure such that Gr(Mult @xmath is a Lie
    sub-algebroid along Gr(Mult @xmath ).

2.  A @xmath -groupoid over @xmath is a Courant algebroid @xmath ,
    together with a groupoid structure such that Gr(Mult @xmath is a
    Dirac structure along Gr(Mult @xmath ).

As with the @xmath -groupoid case, it is common to indicate @xmath - and
@xmath -groupoids via a diagram such as

[]

###### Definition 2.6.2.

Given two @xmath -groupoids @xmath over @xmath , a morphism of
CA-groupoids @xmath consists of a Lie groupoid morphism @xmath , and a
Courant morphism @xmath which is a Lie sub-groupoid along the graph of
@xmath .

One can similarly define morphisms of @xmath -groupoids.

###### Definition 2.6.3.

A multiplicative Manin pair @xmath is a Manin pair where @xmath is a
@xmath -groupoid over @xmath , and @xmath is an Dirac structure and
subgroupoid of @xmath . A morphism of multiplicative Manin pairs @xmath
is a morphism of Manin pairs which is also a morphism of @xmath
-groupoids @xmath .

When @xmath is a group (so @xmath , the main case we are concerned
with), the groupoid multiplication defines a Courant morphism @xmath
covering the group multiplication

[]

#### 2.6.3 Groupoids, Modules, Reductions

We will briefly link previous sections on @xmath -groupoids, modules,
and reductions of Courant algebroids, to yield an important result about
reductions of groupoid actions as restrictions of @xmath -groupoid
actions.
Suppose that @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid over @xmath with a
non-degenerate fibre metric which is multiplicative:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for appropriately composable elements. The metric allows us to identify
@xmath , and since the metric is compatible with the multiplication,
this is an isomorphism of groupoids. If @xmath is a sub-groupoid with
@xmath , then @xmath is a sub-groupoid of @xmath with @xmath . Hence, if
@xmath is coisotropic, then @xmath becomes a groupoid over

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 2.6.1.

Suppose @xmath is an @xmath -module, with a non-degenerate fibre metric
which is compatible with the groupoid action. Suppose @xmath is a
coisotropic submodule for @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath submodule,
and @xmath is a module for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be arbitrary, then @xmath can be written as @xmath for @xmath
. If @xmath , and @xmath with @xmath , then by the compatibility of the
groupoid action with the metric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that @xmath , which implies @xmath . If @xmath is any element
of @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath , and so @xmath is a @xmath -module.
Let @xmath , @xmath be composable elements. Choose composable lifts
@xmath ; if @xmath are another set of composable lifts, then @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

meaning @xmath . ∎

###### Example 2.6.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -groupoid, with a @xmath -module @xmath . The
base groupoid of @xmath , @xmath , acts on the base manifold @xmath of
@xmath . Suppose @xmath also acts on another manifold @xmath , and let
@xmath be an equivariant submersion ( @xmath ). Then there is an action
of @xmath on @xmath .
Let @xmath be the pre-image of the diagonal embedding of T @xmath in
@xmath (via projection and anchor), and let @xmath be the pre-image of
the diagonal embedding of T @xmath in @xmath (via @xmath and anchor). In
other words,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Both @xmath and @xmath are coisotropic (see [ 35 ] , Prop 2.7), and the
module action restricts to an action of @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Hence we get a @xmath -groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath
, but @xmath , and @xmath . Thus, if @xmath is an @xmath -module such
that the groupoid action is a Courant morphism, then @xmath is a @xmath
-module for @xmath as well.

#### 2.6.4 Dirac Lie Group Structures

###### Definition 2.6.4.

( [ 34 ] ) A Dirac Lie group structure on a Lie group @xmath is a
multiplicative Manin pair @xmath over @xmath such that the
multiplication morphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a morphism of Manin pairs.

This definition differs from Jotz [ 29 ] and Ortiz [ 51 ] , as these
sources take arbitrary multiplicative Manin pairs over @xmath , and only
look at the case @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.6.2.

A multiplicative Manin pair @xmath over @xmath defines a Dirac Lie group
structure if and only if @xmath (Proposition 2.7, [ 34 ] ).

###### Example 2.6.4.

If @xmath , so @xmath is a quadratic Lie algebra @xmath , the diagonal
@xmath defines a Dirac Lie group structure on @xmath .

###### Example 2.6.5.

For any Lie group @xmath , the standard Courant algebroid @xmath is a
@xmath -groupoid, given as the direct sum of the tangent group @xmath
and the standard symplectic groupoid @xmath . The only Dirac Lie group
structures for @xmath are @xmath for Poisson Lie group structures @xmath
on @xmath ( [ 29 ] , [ 51 ] ).

###### Theorem 2.6.3.

( [ 34 ] ) Given a Lie group @xmath , the Dirac Lie group structures on
@xmath are classified by @xmath -equivariant Dirac Manin triples @xmath
. Here @xmath is a Lie algebra with @xmath and @xmath transverse
subalgebras, @xmath is a (possibly degenerate) invariant element of
@xmath , @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic in @xmath , and @xmath acts on
@xmath as by Lie automorphisms integrating the adjoint action of @xmath
and restricting to the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath (denoted “Ad”
on all of @xmath ).

If @xmath is degenerate, or @xmath is not Lagrangian, we can use @xmath
to construct a new triple @xmath which does have a non-degenerate form,
and for which @xmath is Lagrangian. The first step is constructing the
groupoid @xmath , where as a quadratic vector space @xmath with pairing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and with source, target, and multiplication given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Chapter 3 for details and analysis of groupoids of this type).
Next, we construct a new triple

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the source map @xmath , and @xmath is the descent of the
target map to the quotient; @xmath is obtained as the dual metric on
@xmath , and is non-degenerate. The subalgebra @xmath is Lagrangian in
@xmath .
Since @xmath is a fibrewise isomorphism, it can be used to trivialise
@xmath . The groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath gives a trivialisation
in the following manner: if @xmath is the projection along @xmath , then
the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a trivialisation @xmath compatible with the metric.

###### Proposition 2.6.4.

(5.1, [ 34 ] ) Let @xmath be the Dirac Lie group structure on @xmath
associated to the @xmath -equivariant Dirac Manin triple @xmath . The
Lie algebra action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the left Maurer-Cartan form, defines the anchor map for
@xmath as action Courant/Lie algebroids. The groupoid structure is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath , @xmath is the projection to @xmath along
@xmath , and @xmath is the projection to @xmath along @xmath . The map
@xmath isomorphically takes @xmath to @xmath , and so allows us to
define an action of @xmath on @xmath , also denoted @xmath via:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given composable elements, the groupoid multiplication is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 3 Metrized Linear Groupoids, Homogeneous Spaces

For any Dirac Lie group structure @xmath , the identity fibre @xmath
inherits a groupoid structure by restricting the groupoid multiplication
to @xmath . As we shall see in Chapter 5, the global structure of any
Dirac homogeneous space being given @xmath gives a ( @xmath
-equivariant) module structure to the identity coset fibres @xmath .
Hence, the most reasonable place to begin the analysis is with linear
groupoids @xmath having metrics compatible with the groupoid structure,
and their homogeneous spaces.

### 3.1 Metrized Linear Groupoids

###### Definition 3.1.1.

A groupoid @xmath is called a linear groupoid if @xmath and @xmath are
vector spaces, and all associated structure and multiplication maps are
linear.

###### Remark 3.1.1.

In particular, linear groupoids are a special case of @xmath -groupoids,
over @xmath . Additionally, linear groupoids are a special case of
Baez-Crans 2-vector spaces , being a category inside the category of
vector spaces; see [ 2 ] , [ 54 ] , [ 25 ] .

###### Lemma 3.1.1.

(See Lemma 6, [ 2 ] ) The groupoid multiplication of a linear groupoid
@xmath is determined by the source and target maps, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given such a @xmath , let @xmath such that @xmath . The term @xmath is
defined since @xmath is in the kernel of the source map; it equals
@xmath since @xmath is a unit for the groupoid multiplication. Hence:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

( [ 2 ] ) Linear groupoids @xmath are classified by a vector space
@xmath , a subspace @xmath , and two projections @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given a linear groupoid, the data @xmath is recovered automatically.
Since the multiplication is determined by @xmath , it follows that each
linear groupoid produces a set of this data unique to it (i.e.: no two
linear groupoids produce the same set of data).
Given any set of data @xmath , we construct the groupoid @xmath with
@xmath as the source and target maps, and multiplication defined by
Equation ( 3.1 ). This is associative, as for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 3.1.2.

A metrized linear groupoid @xmath is a linear groupoid @xmath , with a
metric @xmath on @xmath compatible with the groupoid multiplication, in
the sense that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all composable @xmath . Such a metric is called a multiplicative
metric .

In keeping with the notation in [ 34 ] for the Dirac Manin triples, we
will use @xmath to denote @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1.3.

Let @xmath be a metrized linear groupoid. Then @xmath is Lagrangian in
@xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any @xmath , we have the identity @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

meaning @xmath is isotropic @xmath .
For all @xmath , and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath , meaning @xmath . Thus, we conclude @xmath .
If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Taking inner products,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows @xmath . Equality follows since @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.1.4.

Metrized linear groupoids @xmath are classified by a choice of vector
space @xmath together with a element @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a metrized linear groupoid. The metric on @xmath can be
identified with an element of @xmath . Let @xmath be its image under the
target map @xmath . Hence for any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we conclude @xmath .
As @xmath is surjective, @xmath is injective, with image @xmath
(Proposition 3.1.3 ) and so we identify @xmath with @xmath . In the
resulting decomposition @xmath , the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we will use the notation @xmath to denote @xmath with this metric.
Since @xmath , elements of @xmath are of the form @xmath for @xmath .
The source and targets are uniquely determined by the fact that they are
the identity on @xmath , and their kernels are @xmath and @xmath
respectively. From this, together with the result of Lemma 3.1.1 , the
groupoid structure is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . From this we can conclude that each metrized linear
groupoid @xmath determines a pair @xmath unique to it amongst metrized
linear groupoids.
All that remains is to show that every @xmath arises this way. Given any
@xmath and @xmath , construct @xmath with groupoid structure maps for
@xmath given in Equation ( 3.3 ), and metric given by Equation ( 3.2 ).
Thus, the only thing left to show is that this metric is multiplicative.
By direct computation, for any @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.1.5.

If @xmath is a metrized linear groupoid, then @xmath is a group, with
group multiplication defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for lifts @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is any lift of @xmath , then there is a unique lift @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath . If @xmath is another lift, we can write @xmath .
The associated lift is then @xmath , and we compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this means that @xmath , and so the multiplication is
well defined. It is associative since the groupoid multiplication is,
the identity is 0, and the inverses are given by @xmath .
Since @xmath , and considering Equation ( 3.3 ), this group is just
@xmath viewed as a vector space. ∎

### 3.2 Linear Groupoid Modules, Homogeneous Spaces

###### Definition 3.2.1.

Given a linear groupoid @xmath , a @xmath -module is a groupoid module
@xmath (Section 2.2 ) such that @xmath is a vector space, with @xmath
and the groupoid action being linear maps.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

The @xmath -modules for a given linear groupoid @xmath are classified by
a vector space @xmath , and a pair of maps @xmath , and @xmath such that
the following diagram commutes

[]

For any @xmath with @xmath , the action is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module. For any @xmath such that @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence the groupoid action is determined by the action of @xmath on
@xmath , i.e.: the induced linear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , the @xmath map must satisfy the composition relation
@xmath . The groupoid action can then be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the ability to compose relies only on @xmath , and the action
depends only on @xmath , it is clear that distinct @xmath -modules give
distinct data @xmath .
Given any set of data @xmath , we define a @xmath -module structure on
@xmath with moment map @xmath , and groupoid action defined in Equation
( 3.5 ). This is a groupoid action, as it satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is associative

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

using Equation ( 3.1 ), as @xmath . ∎

###### Definition 3.2.2.

Given a metrized linear groupoid @xmath , a metrized @xmath -module is a
metrized vector space @xmath together with a linear moment map @xmath
which makes @xmath into a groupoid space for @xmath . The groupoid
action is compatible with the metrics in the sense that for any
composable @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be a metrized linear groupoid, and let @xmath be a metrized
@xmath -module. Then the groupoid action is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . The moment map satisfies @xmath .

###### Proof.

Elements @xmath are composable if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case, we can compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, the groupoid action is determined by how @xmath acts on @xmath .
If @xmath , then we must have that @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since this is true for every @xmath , we conclude that @xmath , and
hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lastly, as @xmath , and @xmath , we get @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.2.3.

For a given metrized linear groupoid @xmath , the metrized @xmath
-modules are classified by a metrized vector space @xmath together with
a linear map @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given a metrized @xmath -module, we obtain the unique data @xmath by
Theorem 3.2.1 ; Proposition 3.2.2 gives @xmath which satisfies the
requirement @xmath , coming from the compatibility of the groupoid
action with the metrics.
Given any such set of data @xmath with @xmath , we construct the
metrized @xmath -module @xmath with groupoid action defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . This is a groupoid action by Theorem 3.2.1 ; all that
remains is to show that this action is compatible with the metrics:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.2.4.

If @xmath is a metrized linear groupoid, and @xmath is a metrized @xmath
-module together with a subspace @xmath , then the group @xmath acts on
@xmath via the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for lifts @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is a lift of @xmath , then there is a
unique lift @xmath of @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be another lift of
@xmath . As we can write @xmath , the associated lift of @xmath becomes
@xmath . Thus, we see

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and since @xmath , this means @xmath is well defined. Given @xmath , and
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . Since the identity element of @xmath is the coset @xmath
, it clearly acts trivially. ∎

Since @xmath , then by Proposition 3.2.2 we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any lift @xmath of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be a vector space, and @xmath . A subspace @xmath is called
@xmath -coisotropic if @xmath restricted to @xmath is identically @xmath
. Equivalently, @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.2.5.

Suppose there is a metrized linear groupoid action @xmath . Then the
induced group action @xmath is transitive if and only if the map @xmath
is an injection @xmath . If the action is transitive, then @xmath is a
@xmath -coisotropic subspace.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the restriction. By Equation ( 3.7 ), the action of @xmath
on @xmath is by translation via @xmath . Hence, the group action is
transitive if and only if @xmath is surjective, or equivalently, if and
only if @xmath is injective.
If @xmath is injective, we have that for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is Lagrangian, this means @xmath for all @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e.: @xmath , meaning @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic.

∎

###### Definition 3.2.4.

Given a metrized linear groupoid @xmath , an homogeneous space for
@xmath is defined to be a metrized @xmath -module @xmath with @xmath
Lagrangian, such that @xmath transitively.

###### Theorem 3.2.6.

For a metrized linear groupoid @xmath with corresponding @xmath , the
homogeneous spaces for @xmath are classified by a choice of a @xmath
-coisotropic subspace @xmath .
The homogeneous spaces have the normal form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath given by the descent of the target map on @xmath to the
quotient.

###### Proof.

Given any @xmath -coisotropic @xmath , we construct an homogeneous space
in the following way: define @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , and @xmath . For all @xmath , @xmath since @xmath is @xmath
-coisotropic, and thus @xmath . Taking the quotient, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and since @xmath , we can conclude that @xmath is Lagrangian. Since
@xmath , this implies @xmath , and so the target map @xmath descends to
a map @xmath . As the target map is a moment map for the action of
@xmath on itself by left multiplication, we conclude from Proposition
3.2.2 that @xmath . Since @xmath restricted to @xmath is the identity,
we conclude from Theorem 3.2.3 and Proposition 3.2.5 that @xmath is an
homogeneous space for @xmath , and hence each @xmath -coisotropic @xmath
determines an homogeneous space @xmath .
Take any homogeneous space @xmath for @xmath . From the groupoid action,
we get the vector space @xmath and the map @xmath such that @xmath
(Theorem 3.2.3 ). From the transitive group action, we get – via
Proposition 3.2.5 – that @xmath embeds @xmath as a @xmath -coisotropic
subspace of @xmath . To show that this @xmath is unique to @xmath ,
construct the homogeneous space @xmath for @xmath . Consider the map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , thus @xmath , and since any complement to @xmath in
@xmath is identified with @xmath , this means that the image of @xmath
in Equation ( 3.8 ) is all of @xmath . The map @xmath also preserves
inner products as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence the kernel of @xmath must be @xmath . This gives us the short
exact sequence:

@xmath

Thus, @xmath , and by Theorem 3.2.3 , the module actions coincide. ∎

###### Remark 3.2.1.

This theorem holds “ @xmath -equivariantly”: if a Lie group @xmath acts
on @xmath by groupoid automorphisms, and on @xmath such that @xmath is
@xmath -equivariant, and the action preserves the metrics of each, then
the homogeneous spaces are classified by @xmath -coisotropic subspaces
@xmath which are @xmath -stable. For a given @xmath -homogeneous space
@xmath in this set-up, @xmath being Lagrangian means it must be @xmath
-stable, since the metric is @xmath -invariant. The map @xmath defined
by @xmath is @xmath -invariant, with kernel @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, @xmath is equivariantly isomorphic to @xmath .

## Chapter 4 Vacant @xmath- and @xmath-Groupoid Modules

Given any Dirac Lie group @xmath , the Dirac structure @xmath is a
vacant @xmath -groupoid (Lemma 3.1, [ 34 ] ). In this chapter, we
classify the vacant groupoids modules over @xmath -homogeneous spaces
@xmath as a preliminary step to classifying the Dirac homogeneous
spaces.

### 4.1 Vacant @xmath-groupoids

Let @xmath denote a Lie group. As in Definition 2.3.5 , a @xmath
-groupoid over @xmath

[]

is called vacant if it has the property that @xmath (i.e.: @xmath ).
Following the Dirac convention in [ 34 ] , let @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.1.1.

The vacant @xmath -groupoid @xmath is the trivial vector bundle @xmath ,
trivialised via the source map.

###### Proof.

Consider the map @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is fibrewise
surjective, this means for any @xmath , @xmath must be a bijection, as
@xmath by the vacant condition. Hence, @xmath is a bundle isomorphism. ∎

Using this trivialisation, we have @xmath for any @xmath . The groupoid
multiplication, along the multiplication of @xmath , is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.1.2.

The target map is a group action of @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Consider the groupoid multiplication @xmath . Comparing the targets of
each side, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath can be viewed as an element of @xmath , we have @xmath . In
other words, if we define @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, the target map is a group action of @xmath on @xmath . ∎

From now on, we will use @xmath to denote the action defined by the
target.

###### Theorem 4.1.3.

Vacant @xmath -groupoids @xmath over a Lie group @xmath are classified
by a choice of vector space @xmath , and an action of @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is just a special case of Mackenzie’s classification of vacant
@xmath -groupoids in [ 45 ] , with @xmath , @xmath .

[]

with source given by projection to @xmath , target given by the @xmath
action, and composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yielding the desired @xmath . ∎

### 4.2 Vacant @xmath-Groupoid Modules over @xmath

###### Definition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid, for @xmath over @xmath . An
@xmath -module is a vector bundle @xmath , with an @xmath -action on
@xmath , a bundle map @xmath , and groupoid action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the graph of the action is a vector sub-bundle of @xmath .
This action is represented by the diagram:

[]

For this section, we will be concerned with the case that @xmath , an
@xmath -homogeneous space.

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid over @xmath , and let @xmath be
an @xmath -module over @xmath for some closed Lie subgroup @xmath . The
groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath induces a group action of @xmath on
@xmath , via:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This restricts to a group action of @xmath on @xmath , identifying
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Given any @xmath and @xmath , there is a unique element of @xmath
composable with @xmath , namely @xmath , and so the proposed action is
well defined. For brevity, we will denote @xmath by @xmath where
appropriate. First, we note that given any @xmath , @xmath , since
@xmath is the unit at the point @xmath . So to conclude it is an action,
we will need to show that @xmath . Computing, we see

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

via the formula for the groupoid multiplication in @xmath , Equation (
4.2 ).
From the construction, if @xmath , then for any @xmath , we have @xmath
, and hence @xmath under this action. So with @xmath , we have an action
@xmath , giving us @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 4.2.2.

Given @xmath and @xmath as in Proposition 4.2.1 , @xmath , @xmath , the
groupoid action is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , and the moment map given by @xmath for the @xmath
-equivariant induced linear map @xmath .

###### Proof.

For the groupoid action, we directly compute:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Our map @xmath restricts to a linear map @xmath via @xmath for @xmath ;
since @xmath is @xmath -equivariant, @xmath is @xmath -equivariant.
Using the formula that @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

∎

###### Theorem 4.2.3.

Given a vacant @xmath -groupoid @xmath over a Lie group @xmath , and an
@xmath -homogeneous space @xmath , the @xmath -modules @xmath are
classified by a vector space @xmath , a @xmath -action @xmath , and a
@xmath -equivariant linear map @xmath .

###### Proof.

Beginning with such a @xmath , we obtain the data @xmath and @xmath with
the @xmath action from the previous analysis in Propositions 4.2.1 and
4.2.2 . Now using this data, construct @xmath , and extend @xmath to
@xmath by @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -equivariant, this is well
defined: picking another representative @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Define the groupoid action to be @xmath if @xmath . This is clearly the
@xmath with which we began, @xmath .
Conversely, starting with @xmath and constructing @xmath with the
extension of @xmath in Equation ( 4.5 ) and action in Equation ( 4.4 ),
the recovery of the initial @xmath is automatic. ∎

### 4.3 Vacant LA-groupoids, LA-Modules

Let @xmath be a Lie group, and @xmath be an @xmath -groupoid (Definition
2.6.1 ) over @xmath , which is vacant.

###### Theorem 4.3.1.

( [ 45 ] , [ 46 ] ) There is a 1-1 correspondence between @xmath
-equivariant Lie algebra triples @xmath (Definition 2.1.5 ), and vacant
@xmath -groupoids over @xmath .

Similar to the @xmath -case Proposition 4.1.1 , we have @xmath , with
formulae

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the latter is a group action of @xmath on @xmath . Indeed, this
group action is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

(Proposition B.3, [ 34 ] ). The groupoid multiplication is given by
Equation ( 4.1 ), and the anchor (for left-trivialisation of the tangent
bundle) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid over a Lie group @xmath . An
@xmath -module is a Lie algebroid @xmath over an @xmath -manifold @xmath
, with a groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath (with moment map @xmath )
along the group action @xmath such that the graph of the groupoid action
is a Lie subalgebroid of @xmath . This is represented by the diagram

[]

As in the previous section, we will concern ourselves with the case
where @xmath , an homogeneous space. This gives us @xmath , for @xmath
via Proposition 4.2.1 .

###### Proposition 4.3.2.

Let @xmath , @xmath be as in Definition 4.3.1 . The moment map @xmath is
a Lie algebroid morphism.

###### Proof.

The inclusion @xmath is covered by an @xmath -morphism @xmath ; the
diagonal inclusion of @xmath into @xmath is covered by an @xmath
morphism @xmath . Taken together, we have a @xmath -morphism @xmath .
The graph of the groupoid action @xmath is a Lie subalgebroid of @xmath
. Over elements of the form @xmath , it restricts to a section of @xmath
, which is precisely the set of elements @xmath , which is thus a Lie
subalgebroid of @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 4.3.3.

The anchor map of @xmath is entirely determined by its value at the
identity coset.

###### Proof.

The anchor of the graph of the groupoid action is tangent to the graph
of the group action on @xmath (Definition 4.3.1 ). Using the groupoid
action formula from Equation ( 4.4 ) when @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and applying the anchor maps (in left-trivialisation), we
get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for the group action of @xmath on @xmath (here the overline denotes the
image in @xmath ). ∎

#### 4.3.1 The Trivial Case @xmath

When the homogeneous space @xmath is just @xmath , we get the
trivialisation @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.3.4.

For the @xmath -module @xmath over @xmath , @xmath has a Lie algebra
structure.

###### Proof.

(See [ 34 ] , Proposition 3.9 for a similar argument.) As a note, the
@xmath -action given by @xmath is not by @xmath -automorphisms. We
identify @xmath with the space of @xmath -invariant sections @xmath ,
i.e.: the constant sections relative to the trivialisation of @xmath by
@xmath . Let @xmath be @xmath -morphism defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath be the groupoid action. By definition, a section @xmath is
@xmath -invariant if and only if there exists @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , with associated sections @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since both are Lie algebroid morphisms. Thus, @xmath is a Lie
subalgebra. ∎

@xmath comes with the linear maps @xmath , and @xmath , both determined
by the values of the bundle maps at the identity (Propositions 4.2.2 ,
4.3.3 ).

###### Proposition 4.3.5.

The map @xmath is a Lie algebra morphism.

###### Proof.

We will check @xmath for all @xmath .

1.  For the right hand side:

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
      -- -------- -------- --

2.  For the left hand side, consider @xmath , constant sections of
    @xmath corresponding to @xmath . Using Equation ( 4.7 ) for the
    anchor, and viewing the tangent bundle @xmath as an action Lie
    algebroid (Example 2.4.3 ) for @xmath , we compute

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                           
                           
      -- -------- -------- --

    We therefore get

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
      -- -------- -------- --

Hence we conclude @xmath .
∎

###### Theorem 4.3.6.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid over the Lie group @xmath , with
associated @xmath -equivariant Lie algebra triple @xmath . The @xmath
-modules over @xmath , with @xmath -action given by left multiplication,
are classified by a choice of Lie algebra @xmath , and a Lie algebra
morphism @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given an LA-groupoid module @xmath , from the above we get a Lie algebra
@xmath and the Lie algebra morphism @xmath .
Now start with any Lie algebra @xmath and a @xmath . Define @xmath as a
vector bundle over @xmath , and let @xmath , and @xmath . Define the
structure map @xmath to be @xmath , and the anchor @xmath to be the
bundle map induced from the map @xmath above. Define a bracket on the
sections of @xmath which extends the Lie bracket on the constant
sections of @xmath (induced by the bracket of @xmath ), making @xmath
into an action Lie algebroid. The groupoid action formula is the same
from the VB case: @xmath . Taking this @xmath now, we clearly get the
same Lie algebra @xmath and Lie algebra morphism @xmath we started with.
∎

#### 4.3.2 For @xmath

For the non-trivial case @xmath , we know from Proposition 4.2.1 that
the @xmath -module @xmath will be @xmath for some vector space @xmath .
This time, however, there is no Lie algebra structure on @xmath . For
this case, we consider the pullback Lie algebroid of @xmath (Definition
2.4.5 ) under the quotient map @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.3.7.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid over @xmath , and @xmath an
@xmath -module over @xmath with moment map @xmath . For this
Proposition, let @xmath denote the anchors of @xmath , respectively. If
@xmath is the natural projection, then @xmath is an @xmath -module; by
Proposition 4.2.1 , it trivialises as @xmath .

###### Proof.

The direct product groupoid @xmath acts on @xmath with the structure map
@xmath defined as @xmath . Diagrammatically:

[]

The @xmath -groupoid @xmath injects into the direct sum groupoid @xmath
via the map @xmath . This is clearly injective, and retains the groupoid
structure with the maps @xmath , @xmath , and for @xmath such that
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This copy of @xmath acts as a groupoid on @xmath : if @xmath , and
@xmath such that @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is equivariant for the @xmath actions, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

meaning @xmath . Thus @xmath with @xmath a Lie algebra. There is also a
clear injection of @xmath , since @xmath is the fibrewise kernel of
@xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 4.3.8.

For a vacant LA-groupoid @xmath , and a @xmath -homogeneous space @xmath
, the @xmath -modules @xmath over @xmath are classified by the choice of
a Lie algebra @xmath with an injection @xmath as a Lie subalgebra, an
action of @xmath on @xmath by Lie algebra automorphisms, and a
K-equivariant Lie algebra homomorphism @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

First, let @xmath with @xmath be an @xmath -module, and @xmath . Then
@xmath via Proposition 4.2.1 , with @xmath a vector space. By Example
2.6.3 , the pullback Lie algebroid @xmath carries the trivialisation
@xmath , with @xmath a Lie algebra. Since @xmath , we have an inclusion
of Lie algebras @xmath , @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 4.3.5 , this is a @xmath -equivariant Lie algebra
morphism for which @xmath for all @xmath , since the anchor of @xmath is
the projection to the @xmath component.
Each such @xmath produces data unique to it: suppose @xmath yield the
same @xmath ; then by Proposition 2.5.4 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All that remains to be shown is that each @xmath arises from some @xmath
. Form @xmath as an action Lie algebroid for the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath in left trivialisation. The map @xmath is a moment map,
making @xmath into an @xmath -module. The Lie group @xmath acts on
@xmath with generators @xmath , allowing for the reduction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map @xmath descends to @xmath , since it is @xmath on @xmath , and
so defines a moment map for an @xmath action on @xmath . Hence, @xmath
is an @xmath -module which produces @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Proposition 2.4.6 . ∎

For the vacant @xmath -groupoid @xmath , Theorem 2.3.3 gives us that
@xmath is a groupoid over @xmath . The Lie algebroid structure of @xmath
makes @xmath a Poisson manifold by Theorem 2.4.2 , and since the
groupoid multiplication @xmath is a comorphism of Lie algebroids, this
means the group multiplication @xmath is a Poisson morphism, making
@xmath a Poisson Lie group. We recall that vacant @xmath -groupoids over
@xmath are classified by @xmath -equivariant Lie algebra triples @xmath
( [ 45 ] ); since @xmath is a Poisson Lie group, it is classified by a
Manin triple, given ( [ 36 ] ) by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If @xmath is an @xmath -module such that the groupoid action is a
comorphism of Lie algebroids, then the dual group action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Poisson action. This allows us to define vacant @xmath homogeneous
spaces.

###### Definition 4.3.2.

Let @xmath be an @xmath -groupoid over @xmath . An @xmath homogeneous
space for @xmath is a Lie algebroid @xmath , which is an @xmath -module
such that @xmath is a Poisson homogeneous space for @xmath .

As a note: we omit the condition that the action of @xmath on @xmath is
a comorphism, as Equation ( 4.4 ) ensures this for the case that @xmath
.

###### Theorem 4.3.9.

Let @xmath be a vacant @xmath -groupoid over @xmath , classified by the
@xmath -equivariant Lie algebra triple @xmath . The @xmath homogeneous
spaces @xmath are classified by @xmath -invariant subalgebras @xmath
such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 4.3.8 , any @xmath module @xmath for @xmath is classified by
a Lie algebra @xmath with @xmath , an action of @xmath on @xmath by Lie
automorphisms, and a @xmath -equivariant Lie algebra morphism @xmath
such that @xmath . The group action of @xmath on @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

via Equation ( 2.25 ). Thus, the action of @xmath on @xmath is
transitive if and only if @xmath is surjective, if and only if @xmath is
injective. For any @xmath , @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any lift @xmath . So @xmath if and only if @xmath ; we conclude that
@xmath is injective if and only if @xmath . We also conclude that if
@xmath is injective, then @xmath is injective: since @xmath for any
@xmath , if @xmath is injective and @xmath , then @xmath must be in
@xmath , but @xmath is the identity on @xmath , and hence if @xmath ,
then @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a @xmath -invariant subalgebra, since @xmath is a @xmath
-equivariant Lie al It is clear that each data set @xmath produces a
@xmath unique to it.
Given a @xmath -invariant @xmath with @xmath , define @xmath , and
@xmath . This gives an @xmath -module @xmath for @xmath by Theorem 4.3.8
; since @xmath , this means @xmath is injective, and hence the action of
@xmath on @xmath is transitive. So @xmath is the @xmath homogeneous
space for @xmath which gives @xmath . ∎

## Chapter 5 Almost-Dirac Lie Groups, Homogeneous Spaces

In the next step towards the Dirac Lie group case, we consider @xmath
-groupoids @xmath over @xmath with a multiplicative bundle metric,
containing a vacant Lagrangian sub-groupoid @xmath . In essence, this is
the Dirac case, but “forgetting” the Courant bracket structure, which we
will add in later.

### 5.1 Metrized @xmath-Groupoids, Almost-Dirac Lie Groups

###### Definition 5.1.1.

An almost-Dirac structure on a manifold @xmath is a pair @xmath , with
@xmath being a metrized vector bundle, and @xmath a Lagrangian
sub-bundle. A morphism of almost-Dirac structures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with underlying map @xmath is a Lagrangian relation @xmath along the
graph of @xmath with the property that with the property that each
element of @xmath is @xmath -related to a unique element of @xmath .

###### Definition 5.1.2.

A metrized VB-groupoid is a @xmath -groupoid (Definition 2.3.1 ) @xmath
over a Lie group @xmath

[]

with a multiplicative bundle metric @xmath (Definition 3.1.2 ).

###### Definition 5.1.3.

Let @xmath be a Lie group. An almost-Dirac Lie group is a triple @xmath
, with @xmath an almost-Dirac structure such that @xmath is a metrized
@xmath -groupoid, @xmath is a vacant @xmath -subgroupoid, and the
groupoid multiplication Mult: @xmath is a morphism of almost-Dirac
structures. A morphism of almost-Dirac Lie group structures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with underlying Lie group morphism @xmath is a morphism of almost-Dirac
structures such that the bundle morphism @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid
morphism.

As a note, the condition that Mult: @xmath is a Lagrangian relation is
equivalent to the metric on @xmath being multiplicative.
Let @xmath be an almost-Dirac Lie group. By Proposition 4.1.1 and
Equation 4.1 , @xmath equipped with an @xmath -action on @xmath denoted
by @xmath ; we have the formulae

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath such that @xmath . Since the source and target maps @xmath
are fibrewise isomorphisms, we have the following equalities as vector
bundles:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the projection along @xmath , and let @xmath . Via
Proposition 3.9 in [ 34 ] , the trivialisation of @xmath extends to a
trivialisation @xmath defined by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a direct consequence of this trivialisation, any element @xmath can
be uniquely written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath also denote the source and target at the identity of @xmath ,
i.e.: the projection maps @xmath . We have the vector space
decompositions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given any @xmath , and decomposing as in Equation ( 5.1 ), we have
@xmath , meaning that @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given an element @xmath , there exist unique elements @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath respectively such that @xmath and @xmath are defined.
Specifically, @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.1.1.

Given any @xmath , there is an associated map @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a group action @xmath by groupoid automorphisms, which extends
the @xmath action on @xmath , and preserves the metric.

###### Proof.

For a given @xmath , denote the map in Equation ( 5.2 ) by @xmath , with
@xmath , @xmath . For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath , and @xmath . It is clear that @xmath for any @xmath .
Hence, this is a group action.
Given any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

So the action restricted to @xmath is just @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, given two composable elements @xmath , and @xmath , it’s clear
that @xmath are again composable: @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath . From this, it is clear that @xmath . Hence, this
is an action of @xmath on @xmath by groupoid automorphisms which extends
the @xmath action on @xmath , given by the target map.
The inner product is invariant under the action, as if @xmath and @xmath
, then:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the first and third term vanish since @xmath is Lagrangian, and
@xmath is @xmath -stable under the @xmath action. ∎

We will denote the full action as @xmath for the remainder. This action
allows us to determine an exact formula for the groupoid multiplication
in @xmath based on that in @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.1.2.

Let @xmath be an almost-Dirac Lie group. Let @xmath such that @xmath .
Then the groupoid multiplication is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Given an element @xmath , we can use the action to decompose it in two
different ways as the product of something in @xmath and something in
@xmath , as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now @xmath such that @xmath , i.e.: @xmath . The multiplication
is then given as:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the identity fibre is a metrized linear groupoid, @xmath , we use
Equation ( 3.1 ) to deduce:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Remembering via Theorem 3.1.4 that metrized linear groupoids @xmath are
classified by a choice of vector space @xmath , and @xmath , we now have
sufficient data to classify the almost-Dirac Lie group case.

###### Theorem 5.1.3.

Almost-Dirac Lie groups

[]

are classified by the data: a vector space @xmath together with an
element @xmath (yielding a metrized linear groupoid @xmath by Theorem
3.1.4 ) and a Lie group action @xmath by groupoid automorphisms
compatible with the metric.

###### Proof.

Start with such an almost-Dirac Lie group @xmath . By the trivialisation
induced by Equation ( 5.1 ), @xmath , and the classification of Theorem
3.1.4 , @xmath yields @xmath with @xmath . By Proposition 5.1.1 , @xmath
acts on @xmath by groupoid automorphisms, denoted @xmath , and this
action is compatible with the metric. Theorem 3.1.4 and Equation ( 5.3 )
guarantee that no two distinct almost-Dirac Lie groups yield the same
@xmath .
Let @xmath be any set of such data. The first two data together uniquely
determine a metrized linear groupoid @xmath ; let @xmath denote its
source and target, and @xmath the groupoid multiplication. We can form
the @xmath -groupoid @xmath with structure maps

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , and with a bundle metric induced by the metric on @xmath ,
@xmath . These structure maps ensure that @xmath is an almost-Dirac Lie
group: @xmath is vacant, and must be Lagrangian by Proposition 3.1.3 .
Since @xmath is a metrized linear groupoid whose metric is @xmath
invariant, this means the metric induced on @xmath is multiplicative.
Finally the groupoid multiplication guarantees that for any @xmath ,
there is a unique element of @xmath which is Mult-related to it, namely
@xmath . Therefore, this @xmath clearly yields the desired data @xmath .
∎

Given an almost-Dirac Lie group @xmath , the quotient @xmath is a group:
since @xmath is Lagrangian, @xmath , which by Theorem 2.3.3 is a
groupoid over @xmath . The multiplication in @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath ; by Remark 2.3.2 , the graph of the groupoid multiplication
in @xmath must be the annihilator of the graph of the groupoid
multiplication in @xmath . By Equation ( 4.1 ), the graph of the
multiplication in @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , which annihilates the graph given by Equation (
5.4 ).

### 5.2 Almost-Dirac Homogeneous Spaces

###### Definition 5.2.1.

Let @xmath be a metrized @xmath -groupoid over a Lie group @xmath . A
metrized @xmath -module is a metrized vector bundle @xmath over an
@xmath -manifold @xmath , with a @xmath -groupoid action by @xmath with
moment map @xmath

[]

along the group action @xmath , which is compatible with the metrics in
the sense that for any composable @xmath in appropriate fibres:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may also represent this type of action with the diagram

[]

###### Definition 5.2.2.

Let @xmath be an almost-Dirac Lie group. If @xmath is an almost-Dirac
structure on an @xmath -manifold @xmath , such that @xmath is a metrized
@xmath -module, and @xmath is a Lagrangian sub-bundle, the action of
@xmath on @xmath is called an almost-Dirac Lie group action if every
element of @xmath is uniquely related by the groupoid action to an
element of @xmath , i.e.: the action map Act: @xmath is a morphism of
almost-Dirac structures. We call @xmath an almost-Dirac module for
@xmath .

From the definition, we see that @xmath acts on @xmath . For any @xmath
, let @xmath such that @xmath is defined. From the definition, any
@xmath can be uniquely written as @xmath for @xmath , @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath is Lagrangian, this means @xmath .
We concern ourselves with the case that @xmath . Let @xmath be an
almost-Dirac module for @xmath . Specifically, this makes @xmath an
@xmath -module, and so by Proposition 4.2.1 we have @xmath for some
vector space @xmath . Since @xmath acts on @xmath , Proposition 4.2.1
gives @xmath for a Lagrangian @xmath . The map @xmath takes the form
@xmath for the linear map @xmath . Given any @xmath , we can decompose
@xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.1.

The action of @xmath on @xmath is determined by the action of @xmath on
@xmath , with formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

For brevity, write @xmath . Let @xmath , and @xmath such that @xmath .
Using the formula for the @xmath action on @xmath from Equation ( 4.4 ),
and the formula for the @xmath action on @xmath by Equation ( 3.6 ), we
have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath , @xmath , and hence Equation ( 5.5 ) follows. ∎

###### Theorem 5.2.2.

Given an almost-Dirac Lie group @xmath , its almost-Dirac modules @xmath
are classified by the following data:

1.  A choice of metrized vector space @xmath with a @xmath -action
    preserving the metric;

2.  A Lagrangian subspace @xmath stable under this @xmath -action;

3.  A @xmath -equivariant map @xmath such that @xmath (with @xmath
    classifying @xmath ).

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.1.3 , @xmath with @xmath for @xmath . Begin with an @xmath
- module @xmath . As @xmath are @xmath -modules, Theorem 4.2.3 gives the
structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a vector space with a @xmath action, @xmath subspace, and
@xmath -equivariant moment map @xmath . By Proposition 5.2.1 , the
action of @xmath on @xmath determines an action of @xmath on @xmath , so
with Theorem 3.2.3 , we conclude that @xmath is a metrized vector space
with @xmath Lagrangian, @xmath , and the induced metric on @xmath is
@xmath -invariant. It is clear that this set of data is unique to @xmath
.
Suppose @xmath are given. We construct

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath defined by @xmath . Theorem 3.2.3 gives us that @xmath is a
metrized module for @xmath , and then we define the full groupoid action
via Equation ( 5.5 ). This is compatible with the metrics, as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Lastly, any element @xmath is uniquely Act-related to an element of
@xmath , namely @xmath . Hence, @xmath is an almost Dirac module
associated to the data @xmath .

∎

###### Proposition 5.2.3.

Let @xmath be an almost-Dirac Lie group, and let @xmath be an @xmath -
module. The group @xmath acts on @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the bar denotes the image of an element of @xmath in the quotient
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The action follows from Lemma 2.3.8 . For any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

This allows us to define homogeneous spaces for @xmath analogously to
the metrized linear groupoid case.

###### Definition 5.2.3.

If @xmath is an almost-Dirac Lie group, then an homogeneous space for
@xmath is an almost-Dirac module @xmath such that @xmath transitively.

###### Proposition 5.2.4.

A @xmath -group (i.e.: @xmath ) acts transitively on a vector bundle
over an @xmath -homogeneous space

[]

if and only if @xmath acts transitively on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The action @xmath is transitive if and only if the bundle map @xmath ,
@xmath is surjective, if and only if the map @xmath , @xmath is
surjective, if and only if @xmath is transitive. ∎

###### Remark 5.2.1.

In particular, if @xmath is an almost-Dirac Lie group, and @xmath is an
almost-Dirac module, then @xmath transitively if and only if @xmath
transitively.

Now we have all the pieces required to classify our full homogeneous
spaces.

###### Lemma 5.2.5.

Let @xmath be an almost-Dirac Lie group, classified by a vector space
@xmath together with an element @xmath (giving a metrized linear
groupoid @xmath ), and an action of @xmath on @xmath by groupoid
automorphisms. The homogeneous spaces @xmath for @xmath are classified
by @xmath -coisotropic subspaces @xmath which are stable under the
induced @xmath action. As such, they have the normal form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Begin with such an homogeneous space @xmath . Since @xmath is an
almost-Dirac module for @xmath , Theorem 5.2.2 gives a unique pair
@xmath with @xmath a metrized vector space, and @xmath a Lagrangian
subspace. In addition, the theorem yields a @xmath action on @xmath ,
and a @xmath -equivariant map @xmath . @xmath acting transitively on
@xmath means @xmath transitively (Proposition 5.2.4 ), and so by Remark
3.2.1 , @xmath injects @xmath into @xmath as a @xmath -stable @xmath
-coisotropic subspace. By Theorem 3.2.6 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To show that every @xmath -stable @xmath -coisotropic @xmath arises in
this way, we construct the bundle pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , with bundle metric induced by that on @xmath and with
moment map @xmath given by the target map descending to the quotient
(making it @xmath equivariant as the bullet action is by groupoid
automorphisms). The full moment map is then defined by @xmath , and
hence @xmath is an almost-Dirac module by Theorem 5.2.2 ; it is an
homogeneous space as @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic, by Remark 3.2.1 . ∎

## Chapter 6 Dirac Homogeneous Spaces

In this section, we give the classification of homogeneous spaces for
the Dirac case; given a Dirac Lie group @xmath , and an @xmath
-homogeneous space @xmath , the classification is given in terms of
@xmath -invariant coisotropic subalgebras @xmath , with @xmath .

### 6.1 Preparations

#### 6.1.1 Identifications of @xmath, Preimages of Coisotropic Subspaces

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group with associated @xmath -equivariant
Dirac Manin triple @xmath , with @xmath . Let @xmath be the Dirac Manin
triple constructed from @xmath (Section 2.6.4 ) such that @xmath is
Lagrangian, and @xmath is non-degenerate, with Lie algebra morphism
@xmath . From the construction, we have @xmath , and @xmath .
The identity fibre of @xmath is a metrized linear groupoid @xmath , with
@xmath defined as the image of @xmath under @xmath , (where @xmath is
the projection along @xmath ), i.e.: @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.1.1.

Let @xmath be the projection along @xmath , and (for this lemma only)
let @xmath denote the projection @xmath along @xmath . If @xmath , then
also @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , and @xmath , we also have @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 6.1.2.

Let @xmath be vector spaces with bilinear forms @xmath , and let @xmath
be a linear map such that @xmath .

1.  A subspace @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic if and only if @xmath is
    @xmath -coisotropic.

2.  If @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic, this implies @xmath is @xmath
    -coisotropic.

###### Proof.

1.  Since @xmath , we have @xmath for any @xmath . We also have @xmath ,
    since @xmath if and only if @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if and only if @xmath .
    Hence

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

2.  We have @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic if and only if @xmath is
    @xmath -coisotropic, by Part 1. But @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic. ∎

###### Corollary 6.1.3.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic if and only if @xmath is
@xmath -coisotropic. Furthermore, if @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic, then
@xmath is @xmath -coisotropic.

#### 6.1.2 A Useful @xmath-Isomorphism

###### Proposition 6.1.4.

Let @xmath be a Lie group, let @xmath be an @xmath -equivariant Lie
algebra triple (Definition 2.1.5 ), and let @xmath be the action Lie
algebroid for the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined for any @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

(in left trivialisation, T @xmath ). Then @xmath and @xmath are
isomorphic as Lie algebroids.
Here, @xmath is given the Lie algebroid structure determined by the
bracket

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , with anchor map as the projection to the first factor.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the map given by @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in left-trivialisation, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which is invertible, meaning @xmath is an isomorphism of vector bundles.
For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To compute the last two terms, we note

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , and @xmath , thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we can compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 6.1.3 Structure Maps

In this section we look at compositions of specific structure maps for
@xmath -groupoids and modules; this leads towards Proposition 6.2.2 ,
producing a map @xmath which becomes an important module moment map for
the pullbacks of Dirac homogeneous space @xmath .
Suppose @xmath is a @xmath -groupoid (Definition 2.6.1 ) over a group
@xmath , and let @xmath be a @xmath -module for @xmath with moment map
@xmath . From this we obtain maps @xmath , and @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are orthogonal by Proposition 3.1.3 , we have @xmath . Thus
@xmath , implying that for all @xmath , @xmath is defined.

###### Lemma 6.1.5.

If @xmath is a @xmath -module for the @xmath -groupoid @xmath over
@xmath , with moment map @xmath , then for any @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath is orthogonal to the graph of the action map. But
the latter is Lagrangian by assumption, which proves the claim. ∎

#### 6.1.4 Some Important Maps

Let @xmath over @xmath be the action Lie algebroid for the action @xmath
given by Equation ( 6.1 ). Let @xmath over @xmath be the action Lie
algebroid for the action @xmath , given by @xmath . Define maps

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These maps are integral to the construction of the homogeneous spaces,
so we will begin by proving a number of properties they have.

###### Proposition 6.1.6.

The induced maps @xmath , @xmath are Lie algebra maps.

###### Proof.

The result for @xmath follows from Proposition 6.1.4 .
Secondly, for @xmath : let @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The 0 arises since @xmath are constant sections of @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 6.1.7.

Let @xmath , and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Computing, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We see first that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We note that @xmath . Secondly we see

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Corollary 6.1.8.

If @xmath , then @xmath , and hence @xmath .

###### Corollary 6.1.9.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -coisotropic subalgebra. Then the sub-bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is involutive.

###### Proof.

The images of @xmath and @xmath do not intersect, as the @xmath
component of the image of @xmath is solely in @xmath , whereas the image
of @xmath is solely in @xmath . The previous propositions show that
@xmath is involutive: checking the images of constant sections, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

### 6.2 Dirac Homogeneous Space Construction

In this section, we will look at both deriving the classifying data for
Dirac homogeneous spaces, and then reconstructing homogeneous spaces
from this data.

###### Definition 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group. A Dirac module @xmath for @xmath is a
Manin Pair @xmath over an @xmath -manifold @xmath , with @xmath a @xmath
-module for @xmath such that the groupoid action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Dirac morphism. A Dirac homogeneous space @xmath for @xmath is a
Dirac module over an @xmath -homogeneous space @xmath , such that the
group @xmath acts transitively on @xmath .

###### Remark 6.2.1.

This definition differs from the notion of “Dirac homogeneous space”
presented in [ 29 ] , being a Dirac structure in @xmath such that @xmath
acts on it via a forward Dirac map. For details and classification of
this type of object, see Section 4 in [ 29 ] .

The main result of this chapter will be Theorem 6.3.1 , giving a
classification of Dirac homogeneous spaces in terms of @xmath -invariant
@xmath -coisotropic subalgebras @xmath such that @xmath . This follows
closely from Theorem 4.3.9 : since @xmath , and @xmath , the condition
that @xmath transitively is equivalent to @xmath being an @xmath
homogeneous space for @xmath , which are classified by subalgebras
@xmath with @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group, and let @xmath be a Manin Pair over
@xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -module for @xmath , and @xmath acts
on @xmath . Then the groupoid action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Dirac morphism.

###### Proof.

All that remains to show is that for every @xmath , there exists a
unique @xmath such that @xmath . By Proposition 4.2.1 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence by Equation ( 4.4 ), any @xmath is uniquely Act-related to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath is a Dirac module for @xmath , and let @xmath be the
natural projection. Then @xmath is a module for @xmath as shown in
Example 2.6.3 .

###### Proposition 6.2.2.

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group , and @xmath the pullback of the Dirac
homogeneous space @xmath along the projection @xmath . Then the map
@xmath , given by @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.2.2 and Lemma 6.1.1 , we have @xmath . Next, we compute
@xmath and @xmath .
For this computation, let @xmath and @xmath denote the anchors of @xmath
and @xmath respectively. For any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Next, for any @xmath , we see

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used that @xmath is the inclusion. Since @xmath takes @xmath to
@xmath , and @xmath was arbitrary, this gives us @xmath .
Finally, let @xmath , and decompose as @xmath ; then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

#### 6.2.1 From Homogeneous Spaces to @xmath

Let @xmath be the Dirac Lie group associated to the Dirac Manin triple
@xmath . Let @xmath be a closed Lie subgroup of @xmath , and let @xmath
be a Dirac homogeneous space for @xmath , with moment map @xmath . Let
@xmath , and @xmath so that @xmath is @xmath -invariant a metrized
vector space with @xmath a @xmath -invariant Lagrangian subspace. From
Proposition 4.2.1 , we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The moment map @xmath injects @xmath into @xmath by Proposition 3.2.5 .
If @xmath is the natural projection, we consider the pullback Courant
and Lie algebroids @xmath . As these are also modules for @xmath by
Example 2.6.3 , they must be of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a result of Theorem 5.2.2 . By Proposition 4.3.4 , @xmath is a Lie
algebra; indeed, the same argument shows that @xmath , viewed as @xmath
-invariant sections of @xmath , is closed under the Courant bracket. As
these are the sections which are constant relative to the trivialisation
of @xmath by @xmath , we can conclude from property 3. in Definition
2.5.1 that the Courant bracket restricted to @xmath is a Lie bracket,
and hence @xmath is a Lie algebra. Let @xmath ; by Proposition 4.3.5 ,
it is a Lie algebra morphism, and by Proposition 6.2.2 , @xmath . Recall
the formula for the pullback Lie algebroid:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath ; the maps @xmath and @xmath
are injective, we conclude that @xmath injects @xmath into @xmath as a
Lie subalgebra. Hence, by Theorem 3.2.6 , @xmath is a linear homogeneous
space for the metrized linear groupoid @xmath . In particular, this
means @xmath injects @xmath as a @xmath -coisotropic subalgebra of
@xmath . We can see that @xmath , since the anchor map on @xmath is the
projection to the T @xmath factor, and the kernel of of @xmath is
precisely @xmath . Since @xmath has a @xmath -action, @xmath inherits a
@xmath -action; since @xmath is @xmath -equivariant, we conclude @xmath
is @xmath -invariant.
We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 6.2.2 From @xmath to Dirac Homogeneous Spaces

We now use @xmath -invariant @xmath -coisotropic subalgebras @xmath with
@xmath to construct Dirac homogeneous spaces @xmath . We proceed by a
reduction in stages: parallel to the construction of @xmath as the
coisotropic reduction @xmath , we construct a Courant algebroid of the
form @xmath from @xmath , and then further reduce to @xmath for @xmath
defined as @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath is the homogeneous space
associated to @xmath , and if @xmath is nontrivial then @xmath is the
homogeneous space. In this section, we will use the identifications

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group, with associated Dirac Manin triple
@xmath . Let @xmath be a closed Lie subgroup of @xmath with Lie algebra
@xmath , and let @xmath a @xmath -invariant @xmath -coisotropic
subalgebra such that @xmath . By Proposition 3.8 in [ 34 ] , @xmath is
constructed by considering the @xmath -groupoid

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and taking the quotient @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is an involutive, coisotropic subgroupoid, with @xmath . The orthogonal
@xmath is a subgroupoid with @xmath , embedded by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath is a groupoid over @xmath as required. The reduction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Dirac structure in @xmath , making @xmath a Dirac Lie group.
The Courant algebroid @xmath is a @xmath -module for @xmath by the
moment map @xmath for @xmath . @xmath contains an isomorphic ¹ ¹ 1 Using
a restriction of the isomorphism @xmath from Proposition 6.1.4 copy of
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be written as @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

since we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.2.3.

@xmath is a coisotropic, involutive sub-bundle of @xmath , of rank
@xmath . It is a @xmath -module over @xmath with @xmath , and it follows
@xmath is a @xmath -module over @xmath , of rank @xmath . The reduction
of @xmath with respect to @xmath is Dirac structure @xmath , canonically
isomorphic to @xmath , which is an @xmath -module for the Dirac
structure @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  First, we will show that @xmath is coisotropic. By Equation ( 6.5 ),
    we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Furthermore, @xmath contains a copy of T @xmath as elements @xmath ,
    as well as a copy of @xmath with @xmath embedded as elements @xmath
    with @xmath and @xmath . Since every element of @xmath can be
    decomposed uniquely as a sum of elements in each of these subsets,
    we can write @xmath as a direct sum

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    and so @xmath is a sub-bundle of rank @xmath . Hence, @xmath has
    rank @xmath . We claim it is described by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Indeed, for any @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Furthermore, the right hand side of Equation ( 6.7 ) is the correct
    rank as @xmath if and only if @xmath , and hence @xmath . The map
    @xmath , however, restricts to an isomorphism @xmath , so

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is injective, and rk @xmath as required. We have @xmath since @xmath
    is @xmath -coisotropic, and @xmath is @xmath -equivariant:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Next, we’ll show that @xmath is a module for the groupoid action of
    @xmath : let @xmath and @xmath be composable. Thus, we must have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Using left trivialisation, the composition is

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    To verify that this is in @xmath , we note (using @xmath by
    definition of @xmath )

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    We also notice that @xmath as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Consequently, @xmath is a @xmath module (by Lemma 2.3.8 ).

3.  To show that @xmath is involutive, we note by Equation ( 6.6 ) that
    the space of sections of @xmath is spanned by sections of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath , sections of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath , and sections @xmath . As shown in Proposition 6.1.7 ,
    both @xmath are bracket preserving. In @xmath , the bracket of any
    section of @xmath with any other section is again a section of
    @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and hence, we only need consider the Courant brackets of the form
    @xmath . But by Proposition 6.1.7 , this is

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Similarly, @xmath , since @xmath contains the range of @xmath .
    Hence @xmath is involutive, and so @xmath is a Courant algebroid by
    Proposition 2.5.1 . The graph of the groupoid action of @xmath on
    @xmath is obtained by reduction from the graph of the groupoid
    action of @xmath on @xmath , and hence it is a @xmath -morphism
    @xmath .

4.  Lastly, we consider the reduction of @xmath . The map @xmath injects
    @xmath into @xmath , and the sum of the sub-bundles gives

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Thus, we have @xmath , which gives us @xmath . But the intersection
    of @xmath with @xmath is @xmath . This means that the reduction of T
    @xmath is @xmath , embedded as a Dirac structure of @xmath . @xmath
    carries an @xmath -action, as if @xmath , @xmath , then in left
    trivialisation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    this is in @xmath by a similar computation to Equation ( 6.8 ), and
    hence the reduction yields an action of @xmath on @xmath .

∎

###### Corollary 6.2.4.

The module @xmath is a Dirac module for @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Lemma 6.2.1 since the action @xmath is a @xmath
-morphism, and @xmath acts on @xmath . ∎

We will now use the action of the subgroup @xmath to further reduce:
@xmath acts on @xmath , lifting the action @xmath on @xmath , and the
trivial action on @xmath . The generators for this action come from the
inclusion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and are clearly isotropic. Using this action, we can consider the
reduction of @xmath . Since, in left trivialisation, @xmath , we can
conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Considering the reduction of @xmath , we notice that
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the reduction gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, by virtue of the reduction, is an involutive sub-bundle. As a
note, the subscript @xmath denotes the image under the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 6.2.5.

@xmath is a coisotropic subbundle of @xmath of rank @xmath . Its
perpendicular is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and satisfies @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  The rank and coisotropicity of @xmath follows from the reduction:
    @xmath is coisotropic, and since @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence,

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and so we conclude that @xmath . Since @xmath is coisotropic, @xmath
    must be coisotropic by reduction.

2.  Next, we give a description of @xmath . Since rk @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    Let @xmath , and @xmath the quotient map. We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    With the description

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    from Equation ( 6.7 ), we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  Finally, since the anchor map on @xmath is the projection to the
    tangent bundle factor, it is clear that @xmath .

∎

###### Proposition 6.2.6.

Given @xmath in Equation ( 6.4 ), with @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For brevity, define @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the natural
projections. We have @xmath , and @xmath , and so by Lemma 2.5.2 we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 6.2.7.

The coisotropic reduction @xmath contains @xmath as a Dirac structure,
characterised as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Since the Dirac structure @xmath contains @xmath , its reduction @xmath
is a Dirac structure in @xmath by [ 8 ] . Since @xmath as Lie
algebroids, this gives us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which embeds into @xmath via Equation ( 6.11 ), since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Proposition 6.2.8.

The Manin pair @xmath over @xmath is a Dirac module for @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Corollary 6.2.4 , @xmath is a Dirac module for @xmath . The graph of
the groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath is obtained by the reduction of
the groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath , hence defining a @xmath
-action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Alternatively, since @xmath , the action of @xmath on @xmath is obtained
by reduction of the graph of the groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath :
@xmath acts on @xmath by Proposition 6.2.3 , and so the reduction yields
an action of @xmath on @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

using the identifications in Equation ( 6.2 ). Since @xmath satisfies
@xmath , and @xmath , it follows that @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way, parallel to Proposition 6.2.3 , we get an action of @xmath
on @xmath , and an action of @xmath on @xmath . The result then follows
from Lemma 6.2.1 . ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.9.

Consider the conditions in Proposition 6.2.8 . Then @xmath is a Dirac
homogeneous space for the Dirac Lie group @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , and @xmath . Since @xmath with @xmath , this means @xmath
acts on @xmath transitively (Proposition 3.2.5 ), and so @xmath is acted
upon transitively by @xmath (Proposition 5.2.4 ). Hence, @xmath is a
Dirac homogeneous space for @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 6.2.10.

If @xmath , and thus @xmath , the Dirac module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an homogeneous space for @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the construction of @xmath in Proposition 6.2.3 , the moment map on
@xmath at the identity is given by @xmath , the projection to @xmath
along @xmath . If @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence, @xmath is an injection of @xmath into @xmath , and satisfies
@xmath . Thus, by Proposition 3.2.5 @xmath is an homogeneous space for
@xmath , and so @xmath acts transitively on @xmath (Proposition 5.2.4 ).
∎

###### Proposition 6.2.11.

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group, with Dirac Manin triple @xmath , and
let @xmath be a @xmath -module for @xmath such that @xmath is injective
on @xmath . If @xmath , and @xmath defined in Equation ( 6.4 ), then
@xmath and @xmath are isomorphic as action Courant/Lie algebroids.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is an @xmath -module, then @xmath as an action Lie
algebroid whose action is determined by its value at the identity via
the groupoid action of @xmath . The map @xmath is an injective Lie
algebra morphism (Proposition 4.3.5 ), and hence @xmath as action Lie
algebroids via the map @xmath .
The @xmath action trivialises the Courant algebroid @xmath as @xmath by
Proposition 4.2.1 . Since @xmath with @xmath , the pair @xmath must be a
linear homogeneous space for the metrized linear groupoid @xmath ,
meaning

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We obtain a moment map @xmath via @xmath ; we know that on @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , meaning this new moment map on @xmath is just the
inclusion into @xmath . By the same token with @xmath , we obtain a
groupoid action of @xmath on @xmath . Since @xmath , and @xmath is
injective on @xmath , this makes @xmath a homogeneous space, and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for @xmath the image of @xmath in the quotient, and with the
anchor being recovered as the projection to @xmath . Hence, @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent as bundles, and share the same anchor map at the
identity fibres; since the anchor map is determined completely by the
value at the identity for these action Courant modules, this means that
@xmath as Courant algebroids. ∎

### 6.3 The Classification

We now have all of the pieces to classify the Dirac homogeneous spaces.

###### Theorem 6.3.1.

Let @xmath be the Dirac Lie group associated to the @xmath -equivariant
Dirac Manin triple @xmath , and let @xmath be an @xmath -homogeneous
space. The Dirac homogeneous spaces @xmath for @xmath are classified by
@xmath -invariant @xmath -coisotropic subalgebras @xmath such that
@xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  When @xmath : start with such a Dirac homogeneous space @xmath over
    @xmath ; as in Proposition 4.2.1 , the action of @xmath trivialises
    @xmath , with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    From Proposition 4.3.5 the map @xmath is an injective Lie algebra
    morphism of @xmath into @xmath , which satisfies @xmath . This
    defines a moment map for an action of the groupoid @xmath on @xmath
    , and by Proposition 3.2.5 , @xmath acts transitively on @xmath ,
    which implies @xmath must be a @xmath -coisotropic subalgebra of
    @xmath . Since @xmath is an injection of @xmath into @xmath , this
    means @xmath . Taking this @xmath , and constructing the action Lie
    algebroid @xmath , and @xmath (via Equation ( 6.4 )), Proposition
    6.2.11 gives @xmath , the homogeneous space we started with.
    Every such @xmath arises in this way by Lemma 6.2.10 , coming from
    the homogeneous space @xmath .

2.  When @xmath is nontrivial: Start with a Dirac homogeneous space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and consider the algebroid pullbacks @xmath over @xmath , for @xmath
    . By Example 2.6.3 , @xmath is a Dirac module for @xmath , and so by
    Proposition 4.2.1 trivialises as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath . The map @xmath injects @xmath as a @xmath -invariant
    @xmath -coisotropic subalgebra of @xmath by Proposition 6.2.2 , with
    @xmath . Define @xmath . With @xmath from Equation ( 6.4 ) we have
    @xmath , by Proposition 6.2.11 . We know that the reduction by
    @xmath gives

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    by Proposition 6.2.8 , and gives an homogeneous space by Lemma 6.2.9
    . Reducing @xmath yields:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    via Proposition 2.5.4 . Hence, @xmath , the homogeneous space we
    began with.
    Every such @xmath arises from the homogeneous space @xmath by Lemma
    6.2.9 .

∎

In the statement of Theorem 6.3.1 , we have implicitly chosen a
basepoint of the @xmath -homogeneous space @xmath , identifying @xmath .
We thus get a map from @xmath to the variety of coisotropic subalgebras

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the classifying subalgebra from Theorem 6.3.1 under
the identification @xmath with @xmath ; this map is the analogue to the
Drinfeld map @xmath in the Poisson case [ 20 ] .

###### Theorem 6.3.2.

Let @xmath be a Dirac homogeneous space for @xmath . For any point
@xmath with corresponding classifying subalgebra @xmath from Equation (
6.12 ), and any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, the isomorphism class of classifying subalgebras for @xmath is
the orbit @xmath .

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath , and so @xmath defines a Dirac
homogeneous space on @xmath . Define the action Lie algebroids @xmath
and @xmath with the action for each given by Equation ( 6.1 ) in
left-trivialisation; i.e.: for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly for @xmath . Define @xmath by @xmath ; since @xmath in
left trivialisation, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving an isomorphism of action Lie algebroids @xmath , as @xmath is a
Lie automorphism of @xmath . The groups @xmath and @xmath act on @xmath
and @xmath respectively; since the generators for this action are the
inclusions of @xmath and @xmath , the map @xmath clearly intertwines the
generators, giving us the Lie algebroid isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, defining @xmath via @xmath in left-trivialisation, and
recalling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(with @xmath defined similarly for @xmath ), we have @xmath . As the
inner product is @xmath -invariant, and the generators for the @xmath
action on @xmath are the inclusion of @xmath , we again conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . ∎

#### 6.3.1 Examples

In this section we will consider examples of Theorem 6.3.1 for specific
Dirac Lie groups.

###### Example 6.3.1.

Poisson Lie Groups (adapted from Section 4, [ 40 ] ). (Let @xmath be a
Poisson Lie group with associated @xmath -equivariant Dirac Manin triple
@xmath , where @xmath is given by the pairing. Let @xmath be a Poisson
homogeneous space with corresponding Manin pair @xmath . The Poisson
action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

lifts to a Dirac morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Considering pullbacks @xmath , which by Example 2.6.3 trivialises to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, the @xmath we recover is @xmath , which is necessarily Lagrangian
in @xmath as @xmath is Lagrangian in @xmath . This coincides with
Drinfeld’s theorem.

###### Example 6.3.2.

The Standard Dirac Lie Group (Example 5.2.1, [ 34 ] ). For any Lie group
@xmath , we have the @xmath -equivariant Dirac Manin triple @xmath ,
with @xmath given by the pairing; in essence, this is the Poisson case
for @xmath . Let @xmath be a closed Lie subgroup of @xmath , with Lie
algebra @xmath .

1.  The Lie subalgebra @xmath is Lagrangian in @xmath and satisfies
    @xmath , and so generates the homogeneous space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Since @xmath is an abelian Lie algebra, the coadjoint action of
    @xmath on @xmath is trivial, and hence @xmath is a subalgebra of
    @xmath . It is coisotropic because it contains the Lagrangian
    subalgebra @xmath , and it satisfies @xmath . This gives rise to the
    homogeneous space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  If @xmath is an ideal (in @xmath ), then @xmath is a subalgebra of
    @xmath . It contains the Lagrangian subalgebra @xmath , and
    satisfies @xmath , generating the homogeneous space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Example 6.3.3.

The Cartan-Dirac structure (Example 5.2.2, [ 34 ] ). Let @xmath be a Lie
group with an invariant metric on @xmath . The Dirac Manin triple

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath given by the metric on @xmath gives rise to a Dirac Lie
group structure on @xmath .

1.  Let @xmath be a semi-simple Lie algebra with the Killing form, and
    let @xmath be an ideal. Then the subalgebra

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is coisotropic as it contains the Lagrangian subalgebra @xmath .
    Then we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and exponentiating @xmath gives us a closed, connected Lie subgroup
    @xmath . Hence, we get a Dirac homogeneous space over @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Let @xmath be a complex, semi-simple Lie algebra with the Killing
    form. Decompose @xmath as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath the root spaces. Take @xmath to be

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then @xmath is a subalgebra, since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and similarly

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    It is also Lagrangian, since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath . Then @xmath , exponentiating to @xmath . Hence, @xmath
    , giving us the Dirac homogeneous space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath , and @xmath .

3.  In fact, Evens and Lu – together with work by Karolinsky in [ 30 ] –
    provided a classification of all Lagrangian subalgebras of @xmath in
    [ 24 ] . Given any such Lagrangian subalgebra @xmath , define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and exponentiate it to the connected, closed Lie subgroup @xmath .
    This @xmath then gives a Dirac homogeneous space on @xmath .

4.  Let @xmath be a real semi-simple Lie algebra with complexification
    @xmath . The Iwasawa decomposition gives us

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a compact real form of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
    is nilpotent; define @xmath . Lu and Weinstein showed in [ 43 ] that
    the triple @xmath forms a Manin triple, with the imaginary part of
    the Killing form as the metric. Hence, @xmath is Lagrangian in
    @xmath , meaning @xmath must be coisotropic in @xmath . Defining

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we obtain a Dirac homogeneous space on @xmath with @xmath .

### 6.4 Coisotropic Dirac Lie Subgroups, Homogeneous Spaces

Lu gave a method in [ 42 ] for producing Poisson homogeneous spaces from
certain Poisson Lie subgroups. Let @xmath be a connected Poisson Lie
group, and @xmath a closed, connected Poisson Lie-subgroup with Lie
algebra @xmath such that @xmath is a subalgebra ² ² 2 Such subgroups are
referred to as “coisotropic”, perhaps a little confusingly. . Then there
exists a unique Poisson structure on @xmath making @xmath a Poisson map,
and the left action of @xmath on @xmath a Poisson action. Indeed, this
is the Poisson homogeneous space for @xmath corresponding to the
Lagrangian subalgebra @xmath .
This construction generalises to the Dirac case as well.

###### Definition 6.4.1.

Let @xmath be a Dirac Lie group with associated Dirac Manin triple
@xmath . A Dirac Lie subgroup of @xmath is a Dirac Lie group @xmath with
associated Dirac Manin triple @xmath , and a Dirac morphism (Chapter 4
in [ 34 ] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the associated group morphism @xmath is an injective
immersion. @xmath is called a closed Dirac Lie subgroup if @xmath is
closed in @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -coisotropic, then we call @xmath
a coisotropic Dirac Lie subgroup .

###### Proposition 6.4.1.

Let @xmath be a coisotropic, closed Dirac Lie subgroup of @xmath . Then
@xmath generates a Dirac homogeneous space for @xmath over @xmath
associated to @xmath , for @xmath coming from the Dirac morphism.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.2 in [ 34 ] , the Dirac morphism @xmath is the direct sum of
the graphs of @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is a coisotropic relation of algebras, and @xmath is a
@xmath -coisotropic, it follows that the forwards image @xmath is a
@xmath -coistropic subalgebra of @xmath . By Equation ( 6.13 ), @xmath
if and only if @xmath . Since @xmath as algebras, we have @xmath . By
Theorem 6.3.1 , this gives the @xmath -homogeneous space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 6.4.1.

If @xmath is a Poisson Lie group with corresponding Dirac Lie group
@xmath , and @xmath is a coisotropic, closed Poisson Lie subgroup with
corresponding Dirac Lie subgroup @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as well as @xmath by Remark 4.3 in [ 34 ] . Since @xmath is injective,
@xmath is surjective, and @xmath . This gives @xmath , as in [ 42 ] .

###### Example 6.4.1.

Let @xmath be a Lie group, and @xmath the standard Dirac Lie group
structure, associated to @xmath . Let @xmath be any closed Lie subgroup
of @xmath , with @xmath the standard Dirac Lie group structure
associated to it, with triple @xmath . The inclusion map @xmath gives
rise to a Dirac morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(by Proposition 2.10 in [ 34 ] ). As in the Poisson case, the resulting
@xmath is the inclusion, making @xmath surjective, yielding the @xmath
-invariant Lagrangian subalgebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.5 General Dirac Actions

In the general case of Dirac modules @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath is
simply an @xmath -manifold, we no longer necessarily have
trivialisations of @xmath . The groupoid action @xmath does still induce
a group action defined by Equation ( 4.3 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We refer to this action as @xmath . Once this group action (i.e.: the
action of @xmath on @xmath ) is defined, we can defined the full action
of @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This group action does not, in general, preserve the Courant structure
of @xmath ; it does, however, preserve the bracket structure of the
@xmath -invariant sections of @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.5.1.

Let @xmath be a Dirac module for the Dirac Lie group @xmath . For the
@xmath action on @xmath defined by Equation ( 4.3 ), the @xmath
-invariant sections @xmath are closed under the Courant bracket.

###### Proof.

Let Act denote the @xmath -morphism given by the groupoid action of
@xmath on @xmath , and let @xmath ; then by @xmath -invariance, @xmath
for @xmath composable with @xmath along the graph of the @xmath action
on @xmath . Hence, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the first term, @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath , meaning @xmath . ∎

In certain cases, the @xmath action from Equation ( 4.3 ) allows us to
generate new Manin Pairs.

###### Proposition 6.5.2.

Let @xmath be a Dirac module for the Dirac Lie group @xmath such that
@xmath is a principal @xmath -bundle. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Manin pair.

###### Proof.

The metric, being multiplicative, is @xmath -invariant, and thus
descends to the quotient @xmath . By Proposition 6.5.1 , the @xmath
-invariant sections of @xmath are closed under the Courant bracket, and
hence the bracket descends to @xmath . The anchor map @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for composable @xmath . Let @xmath in left-trivialisation of @xmath ; we
have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where in the first term, the dot denotes the tangent lift of the action
of @xmath on @xmath . Since the second term is tangent to the @xmath
-orbit directions, we conclude that the anchor descends to the quotient.
∎