# I Introduction

This contribution to the volume dedicated to Michel Hénon is a comment
and amplification of a theme he introduced in his PhD thesis, defended
in 1961 at the University of Paris theseMH . Evry Schatzman was his
advisor, and André Danjon (by this time, an old man, born in 1880)
chaired the committee. Shortly afterwards, Michel Hénon went to
Princeton University, being invited by Lyman Spitzer. There he invented
the famous ”Hénon-Heiles” model, introduced as a student 3-month project
for Carl Heiles. Coming back to the PhD thesis, it concerned a problem
of astrodynamics, the dynamics of globular clusters. In the words of
Michel Hénon (this is an extract of a CV): ” In my thesis (1961), I
proposed that the evolution of a cluster under the effect of binary
encounters leads to the formation of an infinite density cusp at the
center…Later (1966), I suggested the use of a Monte Carlo approach in
order to speed up the numerical computation of cluster evolution…This
allowed me in particular to simulate what is now called the
”post-collapse evolution” of a cluster and to show that it is
characterized by a general expansion of the cluster, fed by a flow of
energy out of the central binary star.”

What makes globular clusters interesting and challenging is, among other
things, their high central density and their spherical shape. They are
local bound states of approximately ten thousand to one million stars,
spread over a volume of several tens to about 200 light years in
diameter. For example Terzan 5, see figure 1 , which is located deep
within our Galaxy and slightly above the galactic plan, has the highest
density of stars of all known globular clusters, about @xmath times the
average concentration of stars in the Milky Way; moreover it contains
the largest number of millisecond radio pulsars (rapidly rotating binary
neutron stars).

Compared to other physical ”many body” systems, globular clusters have
the enormous advantage for theoreticians to depend on Newton’s
attraction, a very well defined interaction law. But, from the point of
view of statistical mechanics, the long range character of the
gravitation potential makes impossible a study by Gibbs-Boltzmann
statistical mechanics and one has to turn to other methods. This is what
Hénon did in his PhD work. He mixed two approaches. At the time (early
nineteen sixties), numerical computation was in a very early stage but
Hénon tried nevertheless to compare results of his numerical approach
with those of his analytic work.

He discovered that globular clusters, seen as an initial value problem
with many interacting stars, tend to form, after a finite time, what he
called an ”infinite density cusp” at their center (the word ”cusp” is in
his resumé, not in the original text of his thesis). This cusp is only a
mathematical idealization valid in the limit of a continuous density,
instead of a gas of discrete point masses. He understood as well that,
once the cusp is formed, in the real physical system of discrete masses,
this center is actually a place where binaries form. He considered those
pairs as a sink of negative energy, so that the singularity at the
center is a source of positive energy for the rest of the cluster.

In this contribution we comment on these results, after many others who
have investigated after Hénon’s work the theory of self-gravitating
systems (see the recent papers mouhot and PHC-2013-kyn and references
herein). In the next section we comment on the fact that statistical
mechanics of self-gravitating systems is an out-of-equilibrium problem,
and we illustrate the role of pair formation in the simple 3-body case
of Jupiter-Saturn orbiting around the Sun. In section III we present the
kinetic approach to the @xmath body self-gravitating problem, restricted
to the collisionless (mean-field) case which is described by
Vlasov-Newton (also named Vlasov-Poisson throughout this paper,
JeansVlasov ) equation and explain how it can be solved by adding some
conditions. We discuss more specifically the existence and properties of
cusp-core steady-state solutions with finite mass and energy, obtained
within the frame of isotropic distribution of both velocity and
position. The solution we consider have singular potential @xmath (and
density @xmath ) at the center of the cluster. The potential obeys a
modified Lane-Emden equation (modified to ensure convergence of the
total mass and energy of the cluster).

We show in subsection III.3 that a one parameter family of cusp-like
solutions exists besides the steady solutions, with same mass. They
display an oscillating behavior around the steady cusp-core solution,
the amplitude of the oscillations increasing towards the center of the
cluster as @xmath , namely periodic versus the variable @xmath . In
subsection III.4 we comment on the way to treat the problem close to the
center where a continuous Vlasov-type description is not valid. We
define a region @xmath where the graininess of the density must be taken
into account (where Vlasov-Poisson equation is not valid). This requires
to solve the full dynamical problem of interacting point masses, and
suggests to use a matching method for connecting this solution to the
outer Valsov-Poisson one. In section IV we discuss the role of the
angular momentum. We point out the irrelevance of the isotropic velocity
hypothesis in a dynamical problem starting with zero angular momentum,
nevertheless we show that in this case a steady cusp-core solution
exists if a pure radial motion is assumed, i.e. with zero angular
momentum. This conclusion leads us to reconsider in section V the
gravitational collapse of a dust gas where initially masses are
immobile. Such a dust gas has been treated by Mestel, Larson and Penston
Penston shortly after Hénon’s defense. They give an explicit analytical
solution for its dynamics up to a finite time, at which the core density
becomes singular . We suggest to search an after-collapse solution for
this dust gas case which differs drastically from the fluid case where
the matter accumulates at the center without crossing it. In the case of
a dust gas, the flux of particles with negative velocity (inward motion)
may cross the central part of the medium and continue their way with
positive velocity (outward motion). This yields a multivalued velocity
field, which is impossible in dense matter, but allowed in a dust gas.
Somehow the dust gas represents a prototype for the study of evolution
of a globular cluster or more generally of a system of self-gravitating
point masses.

## Ii Self gravitating systems as out of equilibrium systems

Gibbs-Boltzmann equilibrium theory cannot be applied to globular
clusters because there is no well defined microcanonical ensemble. For a
finite number @xmath of an isolated set of masses @xmath located in a
finite domain, the thermodynamical quantities are well defined: assuming
that all microstates are equiprobable (a postulate for Hamiltonian
systems), one can show that the most probable distribution @xmath of a
macrostate ( specified by the number @xmath of particles contained in
the @xmath microcells with size @xmath , namely @xmath ), is the one
which maximizes the Boltzmann entropy

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

at fixed mass @xmath and energy. That gives the mean-field
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the gravity potential is a solution of the Boltzmann-Poisson
equation @xmath , and where @xmath is the inverse temperature. Moreover
for non-rotating systems the maximum entropy state is spherically
symmetric. However the above approach leading to the global maximum of
the entropy fails to describe globular clusters because the density of
states

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

diverges when some particles can go to infinity or can get a very large
kinetic energy (in equation ( 3 ) the energy is given by the relation
@xmath ). It means, among other things, that thermodynamical concepts
like temperature, entropy, and so on cannot be used to describe globular
clusters even with a finite number of stars (see below the 3 body case).
Therefore no equilibrium state exists, and the equilibrium state ( 2 )
will never be reached. However it could be possible that long-lived
metastable states exist, that are local maxima of @xmath at fixed @xmath
and @xmath . Kinetic theory is required to inform about the time scales
and to predict which metastable equilibrium state are reached from given
initial data. This does not necessarily mean that globular clusters, as
we see them now, are the result of the evolution of an isolated set of
@xmath stars, As argued in Kaz they could well be the result of a slow
aggregation of stars already present in the Galaxy. The microcanonical
distribution

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

is defined in general for a system of energy @xmath as an uniform
distribution of probability on the surface (or manifold) of constant
energy. This probability distribution, to be well defined, requires that
the total probability @xmath is well defined too. This total probability
is the volume of the manifold of constant energy. In the case of
gravitational interaction, this manifold of constant energy has an
infinite volume so that the microcanonical partition function, or
density of states @xmath , does not exist (it is given by a diverging
integral). This divergence is due to the fact that the potential energy
is not bounded from below: at constant total energy, the kinetic energy
of many masses may increase indefinitely at the expanse of the potential
energy of a pair getting closer and closer. The most diverging part in
the volume of phase space comes from configurations when only one pair
becomes deeply bound to get a very large negative potential energy,
although all the other stars get a large positive kinetic energy.
Usually, in a regular Gibbs-Boltzmann system with converging
microcanonical partition function the point representing the state of
the system explores in its dynamics the phase space uniformly in the
course of time. The wandering in phase space of finite volume of the
Gibbs-Boltzmann theory is changed for systems with gravitational
interaction into an evergoing exploration of phase space. As argued in
Kaz this situation is not so unusual: one meets something similar when
dealing with a point diffusing by Brownian motion in 1D: if one
considers diffusion on a segment of finite length, statistical
properties derived by time average are well defined and independent on
time, because the equivalent of the microcanonical partition function is
just the length of the segment. If one considers instead the diffusion
on the full real line of infinite length (and so with a diverging
microcanonical partition function), any averaging will yield a time
dependent result, the average squared abscissa will grow proportional to
time, etc. Similarly, in the exploration of phase space by 3 masses (for
instance) in a box Kaz , no average quantity exists in general, only
time dependent quantities. In particular the part of phase space giving
the most diverging contribution to the divergence of the microcanonical
integral is the one dominating the exploration for long time. In the
present problem, this maximal divergence is the one where a pair has an
binding energy tending to minus infinity, an energy transferred to the
kinetic energy of the other masses which grows to plus infinity, again
to maximize the volume of phase space they explore.

A case of such an exploration of infinite phase space is the one of a
pair of masses in the gravity field of a large immobile mass, like
Jupiter and Saturn orbiting in the field of the Sun. Of course, we know
well that part of the phase space for this three-body problem is filled
with quasi-periodic orbits, thanks to the KAM theory. However, as the
Hénon-Heiles model shows, another part is filled by random orbits and so
can be understood, at least qualitatively, by using statistical methods
(instead of the perturbation methods first imagined by Newton).
Therefore, in the case of this three-body problem Sun+Saturn+Jupiter it
is likely that the two planets will have a chance to make a close
encounter which will put enough kinetic energy into the system to allow
the evasion of one planet, by transferring the kinetic energy of the two
close-to-Keplerian orbits around the Sun into the kinetic energy needed
for the evasion. In this respect it is well possible that the 3-body
problem bears some similarities with the @xmath -body problem, @xmath
large, where close interaction/collisions are responsible of the
evaporation of stars out of the cluster Kaz . One may conjecture that
the KAM part of phase space (associated to quasiperiodic motion, not
described by a non smooth invariant measure) will become of smaller and
smaller relevance as the number of planets increases. Therefore
planetary systems with more than three or four big planets will likely
not survive long because of this possibity of evasion after close
encounter between two planets orbiting in the field of the star. In this
respect it is relevant to point out the often observed ”numerical” fact
that ergodicity sets-in in non integrable systems with ”many” degrees of
freedom as soon as the number of freedom grows. One may conjecture that
the relative weight of the KAM part of phase space decreases with @xmath
, number of freedom, in an exponential way, as does the chance of
falling on quasi-periodic orbits with randomly chosen initial
conditions.

This example of planets orbiting in the gravitational field of a big
star helps to explain what happens near the cusp of density at the
center of a cluster. Close enough to this cusp, the stars cannot be
considered anymore as belonging to a continuum. Hénon derived from this
remark an explanation for the pairing of stars occurring near the cusp
and the idea that, because pairs may have a large negative binding
energy, the cusp is a provider of positive energy to the rest of
cluster. This is discussed in subsection III.4 below.

## Iii Equations and cusp-like solution

In this Section we outline the analytical approach to the mean-field
theory of a large number @xmath of interacting point masses. As
explained in Kaz , by taking advantage of this large number, one can
carry a formal expansion in inverse powers of @xmath such that, at
leading order, the dynamics is given by the solution of the
Vlasov-Newton (also called Vlasov-Poisson or mean-field equation
JeansVlasov ). At next order with respect to the small parameter @xmath
one has to add the Boltzmann collision operator as a small perturbation,
etc. The fundamental mathematical object of this mean field theory is
the one-body distribution function, denoted as @xmath below, a function
with positive or zero values depending on time @xmath , of the position
@xmath and velocity @xmath of a star (boldface are for vectors).
Mathematically this function does not have to be smooth: it can have all
sort of discontinuities, the only constraint is that it must be positive
or zero, and yield finite mechanical invariants: total mass, energy and
angular momentum. Moreover to make things simpler we shall assume that
stars have all the same mass. We shall assume the validity of a coarse
grained (or mean-field) picture, where each star moves in the average
field of the others, which is correct in the limit @xmath large if the
density remains finite. The main difference with ordinary thermodynamics
is that, a priori, one does not know for this system the form of this
one-body distribution function in a steady equilibrium state. In a
regular thermodynamic system at equilibrium, the velocity distribution
is just a Maxwellian. Here this cannot be true for point masses, because
this velocity distribution should be multiplied by a function of the
position representing something like a Laplace equilibrium of positions
in the self-consistent gravitational field. This would be in obvious
contradiction with the assumption that this describes an equilibrium
state because it yields a non zero weight to initial conditions of stars
escaping to infinity if their velocity is large enough. Therefore there
is no equilibrium one-body distribution function, and one should instead
look at the steady solutions of the Vlasov-Newton equation written
below.

We give first the Vlasov-Newton equation and explain how it can be
solved by adding some conditions. Then we discuss more specifically the
existence and properties of solutions with a singularity of density near
the center of the cluster, a singularity studied first by Michel Hénon.

The number density of stars @xmath is normalized in such a way that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

The position-velocity distribution @xmath and the number density are
related by the formula:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

The Vlasov-Newton equation describes the evolution of @xmath . As it is
first order it keeps formally the property that if initially @xmath is
positive, it remains so at later (and former) times. This equation
reads:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

with

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

The steady solutions of Vlasov-Newton in the spherically symmetric case
(no global rotation) depend on the two constants of motion in a
spherically symmetric potential, the energy @xmath and the square of the
angular momentum. Let assume also (as did Hénon) that the velocity
distribution is isotropic, @xmath , then the distribution depends on the
energy only, and Poisson equation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

writes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

and where @xmath is related to @xmath by

  -- -- -- ------
           (12)
  -- -- -- ------

This set of equations can be solved explicitly Antonov by writing @xmath
as a function of @xmath and inverting Abel’s transform on the right-hand
side of Equation ( 10 ). This solution is not very easy to handle, so
that we shall deal below with the equations in the form ( 7 - 10 ).

An important quantity is the value of the gravity potential at @xmath .
By taking @xmath equal to @xmath at @xmath infinity, and assuming that
@xmath vanishes at @xmath and at infinity, the value of the potential at
the center of the spherical cluster, when it exists, is equal to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here we shall consider another possibility, the case where this integral
diverges for @xmath close to zero, making @xmath infinitely negative.
This does not violate any basic principle, but requires that @xmath
diverges as @xmath tends to zero, but not too strongly in order that the
total mass and energy of the globular cluster remains finite. This is
the situation that we consider below in subsection III.2 . Before to do
this, we look first at some properties of Vlasov-Newton equation.

### iii.1 Properties of Vlasov-Newton equation

We already pointed out some properties of Vlasov-Newton kinetic equation
( 7 ), like the fact that if its solution is positive or zero at some
time it remains so at later times. Other properties are the conservation
of mass (and number of stars, two non equivalent properties if stars
have unequal masses, something we do not assume) of total momentum,
angular momentum and total energy. Those properties are well known, and
we shall only state them. The total number of stars has been already
defined in equations ( 5 )-( 6 ), the linear momentum is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mass of each star. The angular momentum is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the usual cross product of two vectors. Lastly the total
energy reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the gravity potential, solution in this general case of
the 3D Poisson equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath being related to @xmath by Equation ( 6 ). This completes the
list of the mechanical invariants, mass, linear and angular momentum and
energy. In the present case there is also an infinite number of other
invariants, namely the values of the distribution function. This is
because the distribution function obeys an equation of the Liouville
type. The equation ( 7 ) expresses that the probability density @xmath
is conserved along the flow lines of the velocity field defined by the
equation of motion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because of Liouville theorem the 6D volume element @xmath in phase space
is conserved in the course of time, so that the probability density in
phase space is conserved along the flow lines. Therefore any integral
like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is constant in the course of time, for any function @xmath such that
@xmath is given by a convergent integral. This puts various constraints
on the solutions of the Vlasov-Newton equation. First, because the
values of @xmath are convected along the flow lines of the equations of
motion just written, an infinite value of @xmath , as the one discussed
below, has to be also present in the initial conditions. Moreover this
pointwise conservation of the values of @xmath implies that there is no
restoring mechanism to ensure the smoothness of @xmath , this is because
there is no diffusion of @xmath perpendicular to the flow lines defined
by the equations of motion written above. Therefore the conservation of
the values of @xmath during the evolution does not help much to find the
steady state reached from given initial data: adding a small
perturbation to this initial data with a fast variation in phase space
will change the distribution of values of @xmath to first order, but
without any effect on the dynamics, because the acceleration @xmath is
given by an integral over space which smooths out the fast variations of
@xmath in phase space. Because of the absence of diffusion in phase
space in the direction normal to the flow lines, there is no obvious way
to tackle this problem of finding the steady state resulting from a
given initial condition for the Vlasov-Newton equation. Nevertheless one
can predict that there is no hope to get a distribution function with a
finite time singularity if the initial data for @xmath are uniformly
bounded because they have to remain so forever.

There exists an exact free-fall solution of a sphere of dust ( i.e a gas
without pressure interacting only by the gravitational interaction)
leading to a density cusp at the center after a finite time depending on
the initial distribution of density inside the sphere, see section V .
This does not contradict the property that an initially bounded solution
of Vlasov-Newton remains so at any time, because this gas of dust
corresponds to a velocity distribution which is initially a Dirac delta
function, obviously not a smooth bounded function of the velocity.

### iii.2 Steady-state cusp-core solution

We consider the case @xmath tending to @xmath as @xmath , and try to
find a distribution @xmath such that the solution of the spherical
Vlasov-Poisson system ( 7 - 10 ) has finite mass and energy. We use the
most straightforward method, starting with an assumed form of @xmath ,
integrate over the velocity to obtain the density @xmath , equation ( 6
), and solve Poisson equation ( 10 ) , to get the corresponding
potential @xmath . Let us recall the behavior of the solution if the
energy distribution is given by the most simple formula, the truncated
power law

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath real positive exponent, @xmath (maximum energy) is a
constant which is introduced to ensure that @xmath has compact support,
@xmath is Heaviside function and @xmath a normalizing constant. In the
following the distribution @xmath has no compact support because we
shall assume that the energy can get infinite negative values. The
mass-density is computed via equation ( 6 ), integrating by parts over
the velocities and setting @xmath we obtain @xmath where @xmath is the
Beta function, or

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath .

Assuming that the maximum energy is negative, @xmath , equation ( 10 )
can be written in a scaled form as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

when using the scaled variables @xmath , @xmath with @xmath . Finally
defining the quantity @xmath , which is positive inside the cluster and
tends asymptotically to @xmath as @xmath , we obtain the Lane-Emden
equation for the ”relative” (with respect to @xmath ) potential @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

The literature on this equation usually rejects solutions with a density
cusp at @xmath because it leads to infinite mass when considering its
behavior at large @xmath . For that reason we shall consider separately
the behavior of the power law solution of Lane-Emden equation as @xmath
tends to zero (where @xmath tends to @xmath ) and @xmath where @xmath
goes to zero.

Let us first consider the behavior of a diverging power law solution for
@xmath , and find the range of parameter @xmath which gives finite mass
and energy in the central part of the sphere. At large negative @xmath ,
the relation @xmath inserted into Poisson’s equation yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

or

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the negative exponent

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

is consistent with the behavior of @xmath at large negative @xmath . The
expansion of Poisson equation close to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

Close to @xmath the total energy converges if the integral @xmath
converges. This requires

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

that is equivalent to the condition @xmath for the negative exponent in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the condition of convergence of mass is less stringent. The
critical value of the exponent @xmath is exactly the classical critical
power beyond which the ” smooth” (with finite central density) solution
of Lane-Emden equation has infinite radius and mass. This divergence of
radius and mass also occurs for the cusp-like solution with @xmath
larger than @xmath , as illustrated in fig.( 2 )-b, dashed line.

Let us consider the outer part of the cluster, the domain @xmath . In
this domain, the relative potential must tend to zero. Assuming a
power-law behavior for the energy distribution, @xmath , and considering
the case @xmath , it can be easily shown that the condition for the mass
to be finite is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

the condition on the energy being less drastic. Finally, any expression
of @xmath which behaves at small @xmath like @xmath , and at large
@xmath as @xmath with @xmath and @xmath fulfilling respectively the
relations ( 26 ) and ( 27 ), could be physically relevant with a cusp at
the center.

As an example the function @xmath could be a candidate, or the simplest
form,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

that we shall investigate because it is analytically tractable.
Inserting expression ( 28 ) for @xmath in equation ( 6 ), the density
becomes the sum of two terms,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that using the scaled variables defined just above, the equation for
the relative potential @xmath writes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Defining a scaled density @xmath by dividing the density
( 29 ) by the constant @xmath , we obtain (keeping the same notation)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

a positive quantity inside the cluster, equal to zero outside. The
solution of this modified Lane-Emden equation is shown in figure ( 2 )
for the values of the exponents @xmath and @xmath that satisfy the
condition for finite mass and energy. The relative potential in (a) is
drawn in red inside the globular cluster, vanishes at @xmath and tends
asymptotically to the value @xmath ( @xmath tends to zero) as @xmath
goes to infinity (blue part of the curve). This blue part of the curve
corresponds to the outside of the globular cluster where the relative
potential @xmath fulfills equation ( 30 ) with zero in the r.h.s. and
behaves asymptotically as @xmath . The mass @xmath enclosed inside a
sphere of radius @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

is drawn in (b), and the density @xmath given by equation ( 29 ) is
drawn in (c) (both with solid lines). The standard Lane-Emden case (with
@xmath ) is shown in dashed lines for comparison.

Let discuss the physical relevance of such solutions presenting a
density cusp at @xmath . In the interior of a star a diverging density
could be excluded on physical grounds. However, if @xmath represents the
gravity potential there, it is clear that this divergence of a non
relativistic gravity potential should be stopped by general relativity
effects: such effects depend on the ratio @xmath , @xmath speed of
light, and @xmath gravity potential per unit mass, Therefore, in very
dense matter near the core of a star, the indefinite growth of @xmath as
@xmath in the classical limit could only mean that there is a sphere
near the core where general relativity effects have to be taken into
account. In this respect the case of steady state of globular clusters
with @xmath is a priori different of the core of a dense star: near the
center of the globular cluster, one should instead take into account the
graininess of the mass density, namely replace the continuum described
by Vlasov-Newton by a discrete set of interacting masses as explained
below, subsection III.4 . In principle one could also have situations in
globular clusters where the regularization of the divergence of @xmath
near the cusp is by general relativity effects. However, the numbers one
can put on the ratio @xmath at the core of globular clusters are far too
small to make general relativity effects relevant. It could be however
that they become so near the center of Galaxies, but this is another
story.

### iii.3 Multiplicity of cusp-like solutions

An important question is the dimensionality of the manifold of the
cusp-core steady solutions of equation ( 10 ). In other terms does it
exist a family of solutions which behave as the steady cusp solution
described above? Let @xmath be any finite value of the radius. At this
point a small deviation deviation @xmath of the potential has two free
parameters, the values of @xmath and @xmath . We ask if these two
parameters are enough to reach a solution having same behavior close to
@xmath and same total mass as the steady solution. The answer will be
given by linearizing the solution of equation ( 10 ), or equivalently of
its scaled forms ( 30 ).

Let us explore the possible behaviors of small variations of @xmath near
the solution @xmath of the modified Lane-Emden equation ( 30 ). We
introduce a small function @xmath such that the exact solution of
equation ( 30 ) is @xmath , or equivalently @xmath with @xmath .

In the core region the potential is given by the asymptotic expressions
( 22 )-( 25 ), and the positive relative potential is @xmath . The small
deviation @xmath is a solution of the linear homogeneous equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath , a positive constant in the domain @xmath considered here.
The solution of this equation, of the form @xmath is such that @xmath is
a root of the second degree polynomial

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

that gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath which is positive for @xmath . Therefore the behavior of
@xmath as @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary constants. Note that equation ( 33
) is homogeneous with respect to the variable @xmath . Therefore it can
be transformed into a linear autonomous and homogeneous second order
differential equation by changing @xmath into @xmath , that leads to a
solution of the form @xmath , as expressed in ( 35 ). As @xmath tends to
zero, or @xmath tends to minus infinity, the deviation @xmath oscillates
periodically with respect to the variable @xmath , with a frequency
@xmath of order unity, and increasing amplitude. We have to notice that
the periodic behavior of @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath , see
Figs. 3 - 4 , corresponds to an aperiodic oscillatory behavior of the
solution with respect to the physical variable @xmath , with shorter and
shorter period as the radius @xmath tends to zero. This ensures a finite
mass in the cusp region, where the integral of the density (multiplied
by @xmath ) is practically insensitive to the more and more rapidly
oscillating perturbation, as confirmed by the numerical study.

The numerical study of the family of perturbed solutions is performed by
taking initial conditions in the cusp region, at a given radius @xmath
where equation ( 30 ) reduces to ( 21 ). There the solution writes at
first order with respect to a small deviation @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is given by the relation ( 35 ). Equation ( 36 ) is a good
approximation of the perturbed solution as soon as the relation @xmath
is fulfilled, as illustrated in Fig. 3 -(b) where the dotted curves
stands for the analytical expression ( 35 ). In Figs. 3 - 4 we took
initial conditions at @xmath , where @xmath . In fig. 3 -(a) the steady
solution @xmath (red curve) displays a straight portion with slope
@xmath (in @xmath plot) which delimitates the cusp domain; the perturbed
solution @xmath (blue curve) oscillates around the steady solutions with
increasing amplitude as @xmath approach the center, and decreasing
amplitude towards the edge of the cluster, see Fig.(c) in Log/linear
scale. At a given radius @xmath much smaller than @xmath ( @xmath for
the data of the figure) the perturbed solution crosses zero, because at
this radius the modulus of the negative deviation becomes as large as
the steady solution value. Inside the very small domain @xmath the
physical solution has to be taken as @xmath because of the positivity of
the relative potential, that defines a sort of bubble inside which the
density of stars is strictly zero, whereas it is very large outside but
close to the bubble surface. The potential @xmath and the modulus of the
deviation @xmath are drawn in @xmath scale in Fig.(b), together with the
analytical expression ( 36 ), in order to illustrate the relative values
of the oscillating potential and its deviation, and the validity domain
of the first order solution.

The density @xmath , plotted in Fig. 4 with same notations, also
displays oscillating behavior around the steady cusp-solution, with
relative amplitude decreasing from the bubble surface towards the edge
of the cluster, and @xmath inside the bubble. In the domain @xmath , the
numerical solution clearly shows a small amplitude oscillation around
the steady solution. The constraint of mass conservation is satisfied by
fitting one of the two parameters, either @xmath or @xmath . In summary
the modified Lane-Emden equation with initial condition of the form ( 36
) taken at @xmath , with @xmath much smaller than unity, has a
one-parameter family of solutions oscillating around the steady
cusp-solution, and vanishing abruptly inside a very small bubble located
at the center of the cluster.

### iii.4 What happens physically near the cusp?

We try now to connect the solution with a diverging density at @xmath
with the point made by Hénon on the cusp as a source of binaries and a
source of energy. A diverging density does point to the fact that the
assumption behind the validity of the mean-field approach breaks down
near the center. Below we give a more quantitative assessment of this
point and explain how to define a local approximation near @xmath ,
different from the mean-field theory and how to match it with this
mean-field theory sufficiently far from the center.

Close enough to the cusp, the stars cannot be considered anymore as
belonging to a continuum. Hénon derived from this remark a picture of
the long term dynamics of globular clusters. He explained first how
pairs (or binaries) form in a globular cluster, supposed to be made
initially of single stars. Actually, if stars are on average at large
distances from each other, the chance they form a pair is very small,
because this would require a very unlikely three stars encounter.
Instead near the cusp there is a much larger probability to make pairs
because of the large inhomogeneity of the mean-field there. Compared to
the problem just alluded to, the region of the cusp is a bit like the
attracting mass of the Sun in a planetary system. From equations ( 23
)-( 24 ), the density near the cusp behaves like @xmath . It diverges at
@xmath because @xmath is negative. To put it in a way where the physical
quantities appear, we write this density like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the total number of stars in the cluster and @xmath is
the radius of the cluster. This writing of @xmath is such that, when
@xmath grows big enough to become of order @xmath , the density becomes
of order @xmath , the average density in the cluster up to a
multiplicative constant of order one. Therefore the graininess of the
density near the cusp will be significant when the radius @xmath will be
such that the total number of stars between @xmath and @xmath will be of
order one, say a finite number @xmath . This number is related to @xmath
in such a way that @xmath . Up to an unknown multiplicative constant of
order one, this yields the following relationship between @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note the exponent @xmath is positive because @xmath is between @xmath
and @xmath .

For @xmath very large one should recover a continuous medium, that is a
medium described by the Vlasov-Newton equation. It means that, in the
range @xmath , with @xmath , the Vlasov-Newton equation applies and so
provides the approximation for the dynamics far from the cusp. As usual
in matching problems, this ”asymptotic” picture is valid in an
intermediate range @xmath . In this range the power law found before
applies and it describes the local solution of the Vlasov-Newton
equation. At short distance instead, that is for @xmath , one must solve
the full dynamical problem of interacting point masses, with the
condition that it matches at @xmath the solution of the Vlasov-Newton
equation. This problem of solving at short distance with the full
”molecular” dynamics (the inner problem) and matching it with the
mean-field kinetic theory far away (the outer problem) is obviously
rather challenging, but seemingly solvable in principle. It amounts to
solve a @xmath -body problem in the sphere of radius @xmath , with the
condition that for @xmath masses coming with a positive radial velocity
escape, although masses with a negative radial velocity are injected
randomly on the surface of this sphere with a probability distribution
given by @xmath computed for @xmath by solving the Vlasov-Newton
equation. In principle, if @xmath is big enough there should be a smooth
interpolation between the statistics of particles inside the sphere and
the continous distribution outside of it. That it is necessary to solve
the full @xmath -body problem inside the sphere of radius @xmath is a
consequence of the fact that the mean-field theory requires @xmath to be
very large. Inside the sphere of radius @xmath , because of the boundary
condition on the surface, the order of magnitude of the potential and of
the gravitational energy of a given star are the same, as everywhere in
the cluster, but it happens that @xmath , number of stars, is not large,
and of order one instead. Therefore, in this sphere one has to solve the
full @xmath -body problem. The power law behaviors derived above for the
gravity potential will be imposed as asymptotic conditions for the inner
problem. The creation of pairs will occur as a small perturbation to the
velocity distribution (pairs should contribute negligibly to the mass
density and so to Poisson’s potential). Such a creation of a population
of binaries will perturb slowly the cluster near the cusp. It will
require in the long run to assume that this population of binaries to be
added to the population of single stars, Later on such binaries will
return near the cusp and have a chance either to yield multiple stars or
to be transformed again into two single stars and so on.

## Iv On the formation of a density cusp

In the previous sections, we did analyze the existence of a cusp of
density at the center of a cluster in the mean-field limit. This
analysis was done for a steady state. In Hénon original work, this cusp
was considered instead as the result of a dynamical process. We look at
this possibility below, namely we try to find conditions such that the
initial density is everywhere finite and tends to infinity at later time
at @xmath . The occurrence of singularities in density under the effect
of gravitational attraction has attracted much attention over the years.
Likely the most ancient model proposed by Mestel was the one of a sphere
of dust filled uniformly at time zero and collapsing under the effect of
self-attraction of the dust gas initially at rest Penston . In
particular an exact solution is known in a parametric form for this
pressureless case, with various exponents for the singularity, see
section V .

On the other hand pressure has been added to this picture, namely a
relation between pressure and density, that leads to a description
largely used to treat the collapse of massive stars, neutron stars and
white dwarfs seen as compressible unviscid fluids. When this is done, no
exact general solution is known. Nevertheless for a power law relation
between pressure and density (polytropic fluid case), it is relatively
easy to write equations for a self-similar collapse of the first kind in
Zel’dovich Zel classification: combining the fluid equations and the
power law for the pressure-density relation, one finds an unique set of
exponents for the self-similar equations. These exponents are such that
any physical quantity depends on time @xmath , @xmath time where the
collapse occurs, and on @xmath , radius through a power of @xmath times
a function of a monomial @xmath . The exponent @xmath is found by
imposing that the equations so derived are ordinary differential
equations of functions of @xmath although the equations one starts from
are partial-differential equations for functions of @xmath and @xmath ,
like the density and velocity field. However things are not so easy.
Fundamentally, this is because even a finite time singularity does not
guarantee that the self-similar solution is of the first kind. Actually,
it happens in this problem that the solution found numerically Mannev
follows the laws of the self-similarity of the second kind. The pressure
term, assumed to be of the same order of magnitude as the gravitational
term in the first kind, becomes actually negligible compared to gravity.
That transforms the problem into a second kind and brings a freedom in
the exponents. The free exponent is found from asymptotic matching
arguments, because the inner self-similar solution must match the outer
one, a constraint not satisfied by the first kind solution. This remark
shows how careful one must be when dealing with singularities due to the
collapse of a self-gravitating gas with pressure-like effects. In
addition we have to note that the kinetic theory introduces in the
dynamics something more complex than just a density-temperature
dependent pressure.

### iv.1 How to reach a steady distribution ?

The first difficulty met when trying to extend the theory of steady
states to time dependent systems concerns the validity of the isotropic
velocity distribution hypothesis. A priori the distribution @xmath
depends on the energy @xmath and angular momentum modulus @xmath with
@xmath (Jeans theorem, see mouhot for instance), then the isotropic
spherical models require that the distribution @xmath is uniform with
respect to the angular momentum @xmath . However this assumption is
disputable, and rarely fulfilled in numerical studies which generally
assume zero velocity everywhere in the star, that implies a distribution
depending both of the energy and angular momentum as discussed below.

#### iv.1.1 L=0

Let us take an initial condition with radially symmetric distribution of
position, and zero velocity, @xmath , with @xmath the Dirac distribution
and @xmath . Then the angular momentum is null at time @xmath , and one
may write @xmath . After an infinitesimal time, all masses will begin to
fall toward the center making the velocity distribution obviously
anisotropic. We have still @xmath since the velocity is purely radial
everywhere. The inward motion is described by a distribution of the form
@xmath (with @xmath the radial component of the velocity, and its 2D
orthogonal component), which leads to the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now let us see if a steady distribution with @xmath formally exists.
Assuming that the steady motion keeps this purely radial velocity
dependance, and that close to the center the energy distribution is
given by the simple formula @xmath , the density becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

when we insert the differential expression @xmath . Finally if a pure
radial motion persists until an equilibrium state is found, the steady
density will take the same form as in the isotropic velocity case

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath . Defining @xmath and using the same scaling as above except
@xmath , Poisson equation ( 20 ) becomes identical to ( 21 ) except
@xmath in the r.h.s. Using the results of section III.2 , we can
conclude that the modified distribution ( 28 ) together with the
expression ( 37 ) could describe an anisotropic cusp-core steady
solution (with zero angular momentum) with finite mass and energy under
the conditions @xmath and @xmath .

#### iv.1.2 @xmath

Generally speaking the velocity distribution of a spherically symmetric
system of masses depends on three scalars, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
However the number of scalars can be reduced to two. This is because one
can reduce, following Newton (Principia, Book 1, prop. 41), the equation
of motion to an equation for the radius with a modified potential,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mass enclosed inside the sphere of radius @xmath
defined in ( 32 ) and @xmath is the square of conserved angular momentum
of a star divided by its mass @xmath , related to the velocity by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the radial velocity. For a given particle the only
quantities changing in the course of time are the radial position @xmath
and velocity @xmath , so that one can reduce the Vlasov-Newton equation
for a spherically symmetric system to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the radial acceleration. The difference between this
equation and the more general one written in ( 7 ) is that @xmath , and
@xmath are scalars, which reduces considerably the number of scalar
variables. Contrary to the case of the Vlasov-Newton equation written
before, the angular momentum appears explicitly in the equation, as it
enters in @xmath . Therefore it is not possible in general to get rid of
this angular momentum, because, even if the initial condition @xmath is
independent on , the solution at later times is not because appears
explicitly in the equation of evolution of @xmath .

To make the Vlasov-Newton equation ( 41 ) fully explicit, one has to
write @xmath as a function of @xmath . One has first the integral
expression of @xmath as a function of the density @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

This requires the knowledge of @xmath in function of @xmath . The number
density @xmath is the integral on the velocities of the
position-velocity distribution (equation ( 6 )). In the present case,
this integral has to be done on a function of the variables @xmath ,
radial velocity, and , squared angular momentum. Let us split the
velocity into its component in the direction of @xmath , namely @xmath ,
and its component perpendicular to @xmath , say @xmath . This vector in
a two dimensional space (the plane orthogonal to @xmath ) is equal to
the angular momentum, rotated by an angle of @xmath and divided by
@xmath . Moreover the distribution function depends on the length of
@xmath only. Therefore one can write the element of integration for
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This assumes isotropy in the plane perpendicular to @xmath , which
explains the @xmath factor coming from the angular integration on all
directions in this plane. Therefore the density @xmath is given in
function of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

This completes the writing of the Vlasov-Newton set of equations in the
spherically symmetric case, it includes Equations ( 41 ), ( 42 ) and (
43 ). Notice that this set of equation has an invariant, which can be
seen as the probability distribution of the square momentum. This is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

By integrating the equation of motion ( 41 ) with respect to @xmath and
@xmath one finds that @xmath does not depend on time. One can consider
models where the dependence of @xmath with respect to is simple, for
instance

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a given squared angular momentum and @xmath a
normalising quantity. With this choice the steady solution of Equation (
41 ) are functions of the energy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This eliminate to have recourse to the (usual) assumption of
independence of the steady distribution with respect to the squared
angular momentum. Such probability distribution of angular momentum with
@xmath cannot yield a cusp at the origin in a steady state, because, as
shown by the expression of @xmath , at short distance the term
proportional to depends on @xmath like @xmath , although in a cusp-like
solution, the potential @xmath increases at most like @xmath as @xmath
tends to zero. In summary a cusp-core steady solution cannot have a
distribution of angular momentum peaked at @xmath , but may exist for
@xmath , a very peculiar case.

## V An example of finite time singularity: collapse of the dust gas

Having posed at hand the problem of the long time dynamics of solutions
of Vlasov-Newton equation, we discuss now finite time dynamics. One
would like to know if a well defined solution exists at finite time. At
the time of Michel Hénon thesis, the numerical methods cannot solve more
than about a hundred body problem. So, one had recourse to the
analytical approach. In the present case the analytical results are
limited, and established in the frame of various assumptions which may
or may not be realistic when compared to the result of accurate modern
numerics. The only instance where there is a way of solving explicitly
this set of equations is by assuming the spherical symmetry and that
initially there is no velocity at all, that amounts to assume a zero
angular momentum too, as written above. This defines the problem of the
collapse of a dust gas (namely a gas without internal pressure, a free
fall process). Because of the absence of angular momentum, equation ( 40
) is transformed into

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

where one has introduced the quantity @xmath , independent on time, and
@xmath . This is a constant because the mass is carried by the motion.
This is correct if the motion is in one direction only, toward the
center. Otherwise one cannot relate in this way the mass in the interval
@xmath to the one in @xmath at time zero.

This equation can be solved by introducing a parameter @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath being the density distribution, a function of the
radius, at @xmath .

There is a singularity in the distribution of mass when @xmath becomes
equal to @xmath . Then the derivative @xmath becomes zero and so the
mapping of @xmath into @xmath becomes singular. This happens first (as a
time increases) when the prefactor of @xmath in equation ( 48 ) is the
smallest, which is for @xmath if @xmath is maximum at @xmath . This
critical time for the occurrence of a singularity in the solution is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Near this critical time one can carry, as was done by Larson and by
Penston Penston , a local expansion of @xmath for @xmath a slightly
before @xmath and near @xmath . As was not pointed out by those authors,
the singular solution depends on the expansion of @xmath near @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath has a Taylor expansion @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
positive. It happens that the exponents of the singularity depend on the
power @xmath . If @xmath as assumed by Larson and by Penston, one finds
a certain set of exponents, but another set is found for @xmath . This
remark is of some relevance because we found Mannev that such a
free-fall solution described by equations ( 47 )-( 48 ) appears at the
end of the collapse of a sphere of compressible fluid . This occurs for
a model describing a kind of ”soft compressibility”, with a pressure
increasing relatively slowly at large densities. In that case
gravitation forces becomes dominant in the late stage of this collapse,
just before the singularity. Therefore, the late stage of this collapse
is described by the same equations as the ones of the collapse of a dust
gas. But it happens that the exponent are the ones corresponding to
@xmath , not @xmath which could look more ”natural”. We showed that
@xmath is chosen because the asymptotic behavior of the core solution
can be matched with a free-fall solution decaying slowly far from the
center, although the case @xmath somehow requires a supersonic flow far
from the center which is not realized in general in a compressible
fluid.

Compared to the fluid case, where the velocity and density field are
single defined functions of @xmath and @xmath , a dust gas does not have
this constraint: flux of particles cross each other without creating any
shock wave. Therefore it makes sense for this case to continue the
solution after the time @xmath of occurrence of the singularity. In
particular, it makes sense to consider the question of the ultimate
state reached at time infinity. Somehow this makes a prototypical
problem of evolution of a gas of point masses interacting
gravitationally only.

The simplest assumption one can make for the behavior of the dust gas is
that particles cross @xmath by keeping their kinetic energy and linear
momentum. In the case of spherical symmetry, this condition is simple to
state: the limit values of @xmath at @xmath are the same, for @xmath
positive (outward motion) and negative (inward motion). Note that it
would be more complicated to write the same condition in the non
axis-symmetric case because one would have to make a distinction between
different directions of space. The condition for conservation of energy
and linear momentum writes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is positive and @xmath negative. This condition of
continuity makes sense if the two functions @xmath are finite.
Otherwise, one has to replace it by the condition that the ratio of the
two functions @xmath and @xmath tends to one as @xmath tends to zero. In
principle this condition allows to continue the dynamics beyond time
@xmath . This is made quite complex because, one cannot in general keep
track of the ordering with respect of the center of the shells initially
at different radii. Nevertheless it is possible to solve the problem of
evolution at least for short times after the first singularity. We plan
to return to this subject in the future.

However there is simple case where one can continue the dynamics after
the first singularity and even forever, the case where @xmath is
constant, not depending on @xmath , initial radial distance. In this
case all the dust sphere collapse at the same time on the center, this
time being the one formerly denoted as @xmath which becomes independent
on @xmath when @xmath is constant. What happens next is rather
straightforward: all particles reaching the center at @xmath bounce back
by following a reflected trajectory: their order in the radial direction
is unchanged, as the fastest ones are those coming from the edge of the
dust sphere. Therefore the mass @xmath in equation ( 46 ) remains the
same as it was before the singularity, the only difference with the
dynamics before this singularity is that the radial velocities are now
positive, directed outward. At time @xmath all particles reach a
motionless state at the same radial position as they had at time @xmath
, the initial time for the beginning of the collapse. Therefore, the
motion of the whole dust sphere is periodic of period @xmath , with a
complete stop at each period and a collapse to the center a time @xmath
after this complete stop. Indeed one expects this will be changed as
soon as the initial density distribution @xmath is not a constant
anymore.

An understanding, even limited, of the problem of the solution of the
dynamics of the dust sphere in this case would be very valuable, because
it would yield a sure understanding of what happens in the dynamics of
masses interacting gravitationally.

## Vi Summary and conclusion

This contribution to the volume in tribute to Michel Hénon has been
written in a perhaps slightly unusual way, considering a specific
problem, the occurrence of a finite time singularity of density, or
density cusp. As we have seen this occurrence requires a number of
special conditions to be satisfied, the most stringent from the point of
view of physics is likely the absence, or at least the smallness of
angular momentum in the initial conditions. As usual in Astrophysics,
this question of the initial conditions is very hard to answer. The case
of the dust gas (with no kinetic energy at the beginning) shows at least
that such a singularity is possible. Globular clusters, on the time
scale of the period of the motion in the average field of the cluster
should be seen as steady objects. However, and as had been seen by
Hénon, stars inside the cluster tend to evaporate and one may wonder why
such clusters are still there. It has been suggested Kaz that the
observed clusters are the result of an imbalance between evaporation and
aggregation of surrounding stars in the Galaxy. They would be therefore
more like dynamical than static equilibria, this being seen on the time
scale of the (rare) binary encounters in the cluster which can put stars
of the cluster on an escape trajectory or stars from the Galaxy in a
bound trajectory. Therefore, if this is correct, the question of what
happens on the ”short” orbital time in the evolution of the cluster is
unrelated to any physical stage in the history of real clusters.

As had been suggested for a rather long time it could be that ”dark
matter” is necessary to account for the rotation speed of Galaxies. This
speed has long been observed to be noticeably larger than expected from
the balance between the centrifugal force of visible matter and the
centripetal inertia force. If this dark matter is made of particles
interacting with their kins or with the others by gravitation only, one
might wonder how this halo of dark matter survived over time the
evaporation following close encounters either with the same particles of
dark matter or ordinary matter in the Galaxy. This puts bounds on the
properties of this dark matter, on their density and mass in particular.

Michel Hénon was a provider of many new ideas in Astrophysics and in
other fields as well. This communication tried to show how bright were
his beginnings in Science and how inspiring they continue to be.