###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Outline of this thesis
-    2 The @xmath -function
    -    2.1 Preliminaries
        -    2.1.1 Notation
    -    2.2 Algebro-geometric background
        -    2.2.1 The @xmath -function
        -    2.2.2 Quotients of the upper half plane
        -    2.2.3 Linking geometry and model theory

## Chapter 1 Introduction

One of the main areas of pure model-theoretic study is the abstract
classification of theories. In the process of this classification,
abstract properties of theories are isolated to create dividing lines
between them. For example, these dividing lines can be in the form of
stability properties, relating to the number of types of elements
realised in models of the theory, or restrictions of the number of
models of the theory. Armed with these abstract notions, we can look at
natural structures arising in mainstream mathematics, and try to see
where they lie in this classification. It may also be illuminating to
know what good, abstract model-theoretic behaviour translates into in
these more concrete situations.

In pure mathematics, we try and decide which statements hold in which
mathematical structures. However, many of the most interesting of these
statements are not easily translated into a reasonable model-theoretic
setting. In some cases, showing that a particular problem can be
embedded into a model-theoretic setting that is known to have good
model-theoretic properties, can lead to spectacular results.
Hrushovski’s application of the theory of difference fields to the
Manin-Mumford conjecture [ hrushovski2001manin ] , and Pila’s embedding
of the André Oort conjecture into an O-minimal setting [
pila2011minimality ] are examples of such results. However, in addition
to knowing that a statement of mathematics is true, it is also essential
to have some conceptual justification of why it holds. The two
applications above could be seen as providing proof and conceptual
justification simultaneously.

The aim of this thesis is to make a contribution to our understanding of
the natural structures related to algebraic geometry. There is a
particularly strong connection between model theory and algebraic
geometry. One of the reasons for this is that the theory of
algebraically closed fields of characteristic 0, i.e. the theory of the
structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

lies right on the top of the hierarchy given by the model-theoretic
classification of structures. It is what Zilber would describe as
‘logically perfect’, that is, it has a unique model in every uncountable
cardinality. Such structures are said to be ‘categorical in powers’ ,
and their defining characteristic is that you can recover such a
mathematical structure uniquely from the data of its theory and its
cardinality.

The notion of categoricity was a guiding light in the early development
of stability theory. Initially there was Morley’s theorem, which says
that if a first- order theory has a unique model in one uncountable
cardinality, then it is categorical in all uncountable cardinalities.
Then came the Baldwin-Lachlan characterisation of uncountably
categorical theories, which says that a first-order theory is
categorical in powers if and only if it is @xmath -stable and has no
Vaughtian pairs. Once this was all worked out, categoricity took a back
seat as stability theory was developed by model theorists. However, soon
Shelah started developing the model theory of more expressive extensions
of first-order logic such as @xmath , where you can form countable
conjunctions and disjunctions, and Zilber realised that many interesting
natural structures arising in mainstream mathematics can be studied in
this infinitary setting.

A complex algebraic variety may be viewed with its complex analytic
topology, and any form of ‘comparison theorem’, which allows the passage
of information between the algebraic and analytic categories is
extremely useful. In the analytic category, by making use of the notion
of path we can construct the universal covering space, which classifies
all of the analytic covers of the complex analytic space. Grothendieck’s
functorial abstraction of the notion of universal cover (via the fibre
functor), allows the construction of the analytic universal cover to be
mimicked in the algebraic category, where the topology is too weak to
talk about paths. This way of thinking is certainly not dissimilar to
that of Zilber, whose outlook is that we should be able to capture
essential properties of the analytic universal covering space by more
algebraic means, and in some situations be able to recover the analytic
object from this algebraic description. Zilber’s so called
‘pseudo-analytic’ structures lie in this gap between the analytic and
algebraic worlds, and these kinds of structures occupy the content of
this thesis.

One of the most basic examples of one of these objects is the universal
cover of the multiplicative group @xmath considered as a two-sorted
structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is considered as an algebraic variety embedded in the
algebraically closed field @xmath , and the covering sort is just a
divisible, torsion-free, abelian group. That is, we have forgotten about
nearly all of the complex analytic topology on the universal cover,
leaving only its additive group structure. In [ zilber2006covers ] and [
bays2011covers ] it is shown that we can recover the analytic universal
cover of @xmath , as the unique model of an @xmath -sentence stating
that @xmath is an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero, and
is a surjective homomorphism from the additive group @xmath onto the
multiplicative group @xmath . The above statement may need some
clarification for geometers. For example, we do not claim to be able
recover a unique Riemann surface structure on either sort, because
complex conjugation commutes with the exponential function and therefore
lifts to an automorphism of the two sorted structure as a whole. What we
mean is that we take the analytic universal cover and forget about all
of the analytic structure except the Zariski topology on @xmath , and
the addition on the covering sort. The categoricity result then says
that we may recover this model theoretic structure up to isomorphism
from a purely algebraic description (i.e. the @xmath -sentence). The
analogous result for the universal cover of an elliptic curve without
complex multiplication has been exposed by Gavrilovich and Bays in [
gavrilovich2006model ] and [ bays2009categoricity ] .

Unlike the first-order setting, there is no equivalent characterisation
of categorical @xmath -theories, and the situation is more delicate. The
standard technique used demonstrate the categoricity of an @xmath
-sentence, is to show that it satisfies the conditions of ‘quasiminimal
excellence’. This technique was pioneered by Zilber, making use of
Shelah’s abstract notion of excellence. Quasiminimality can roughly be
seen as saying that the definable sets in the models are countable or
co-countable, or that the structure is homogeneous in the sense that you
can extend a partial automorphism to one of the whole structure. The
excellence condition is more difficult to describe, and to verify.
However, recently there has been a major development in this area, and
in [ bays2012quasiminimal ] it is essentially shown the excellence
condition follows from quasiminimality. In this thesis we will make use
of this result, and one of the main themes here will be to axiomatise a
natural mathematical structure in the logic @xmath , and then show that
we may recover this structure uniquely from this axiomatisation by
showing that the theory is quasiminimal.

The modular @xmath -function is an analytic function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

mapping the upper half plane onto the complex numbers. It is invariant
under the modular group @xmath , and gives a complex analytic
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

realising @xmath as the moduli space of elliptic curves. In Chapter 2 of
this thesis, we will describe a model-theoretic setting for the study of
the @xmath -function, and verify that in this setting the @xmath
-function is another example of a ‘logically perfect’ mathematical
object. Furthermore, we show that the purely model-theoretic statement
of the theory of the @xmath -function being categorical is equivalent to
deep algebro-geometric results regarding the openness of the images of
certain Galois representations in Tate modules of products of elliptic
curves. This demonstrates a tight interaction between model theory and
geometry. For the case of a single elliptic curve, it is a celebrated
result of Serre ( [ serre1968abelian ] and [ serre1971prop ] ) that
these images are open, and the fact that categoricity is equivalent to
these arithmo-geometric statements, might be seen as providing some
model-theoretic justification as to why they hold.

In the process of isolating algebraic conditions from which we may
recover the @xmath -function uniquely, it becomes clear that at the core
of the @xmath -function’s good model-theoretic behaviour is the simple
fact that it is a branched covering map. In Chapter LABEL:chapcur we
investigate this further, and a more general model theoretic setting for
the study of the universal cover of an arbitrary smooth complex
algebraic curve is described. The motivation here was to provide a
framework in which all of the previous categoricity results regarding
covers of complex algebraic curves (and also that of the @xmath
-function) could be embedded.

### 1.1 Outline of this thesis

In Chapter 2 , a model-theoretic setting for the study of the @xmath
-function is described. An axiomatisation for the first-order theory of
the @xmath -function is given, and then shown to be complete and to have
quantifier elimination. An object similar to a pro-étale cover is then
defined, and shown to be a model of the same first-order theory. We are
then able to embed our discussions in this object. We show that
categoricity can be seen as the statement that this pro-étale cover
contains the same types of ‘independent’ tuples as the standard model.
Categoricity then becomes equivalent to certain statements about Galois
representations in the geometric étale fundamental group. In particular,
it is close to an instance of the adelic Mumford-Tate conjecture
regarding the images of Galois representations in the Tate-modules of
products of elliptic curves, and is stronger in the sense that it is
over fields bigger than number fields, but slightly weaker in another.
After proving this equivalence, we then verify that these
algebro-geometric conditions hold, mostly by putting together results
already proven by geometers in the literature, and then checking the
remaining conditions.

In Chapter LABEL:chapcur , we describe a general setting for the
model-theoretic study of the universal cover of an arbitrary smooth
complex algebraic curve. Guided by Grothendieck’s fibre functor, an
axiomatisation is given for the general theory of the universal cover of
a smooth curve. In this setting, we show that the analytic universal
cover and the pro-étale cover may be seen as models of the same theory,
which is shown to be complete and to have quantifier elimination. We
then prove a model-theoretic comparison theorem in this setting, showing
that the analytic universal cover embeds in the pro-étale cover. At this
stage, we then focus on the specific case of the multiplicative group
@xmath , giving a categorical axiomatisation for the theory of the
universal cover of @xmath within this new framework. We then give a new
proof of the categoricity result of [ zilber2006covers ] .

Finally, a large appendix is included. Since this thesis is aimed at
both algebraic geometers and model-theorists, to help the exposition of
the results flow more smoothly, many results which might not be assumed
common knowledge for some subset of the target audience are included in
this appendix. I expect that in terms of the background knowledge
required to understand the work of this thesis, the algebraic geometer
who is comfortable with the basic notions of model theory is in a better
position than the pure model-theorist who knows the basics of algebraic
geometry. For this reason, there is a large section of the appendix
dedicated to the theory of algebraic curves, which will be nothing new
for the geometers, but might be useful for the model-theorist. I would
suggest that the best way of reading this thesis would be to refer to
the appendix when required, but possibly with the exception of §
LABEL:seccov regarding the general theory of covering spaces. This
general theory is at the heart of the thesis, and it will be difficult
to get a good feel of what is going on without a basic knowledge of
covering spaces.

## Chapter 2 The @xmath-function

In this chapter, a natural two-sorted structure for the model theoretic
study of the modular @xmath -function is defined, and a natural
axiomatisation is given for the complete first-order theory of the
@xmath -function in this setting. This first-order theory is then
augmented with a non first-order axiom, which fixes the fibres of @xmath
to be orbits under the modular group @xmath , and it is shown that the
openness of Galois representations in the automorphism group of a
pro-étale cover is equivalent to categoricity of this augmented theory.
Finally, it is then shown that the non-elementary theory of the @xmath
-function has a unique model in each infinite cardinality, by
demonstrating that certain Galois representations in the Tate modules of
products of elliptic curves are open.

### 2.1 Preliminaries

Consider the upper half plane @xmath with the group @xmath acting on it
via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

along with the modular @xmath -function mapping @xmath onto the complex
numbers @xmath . Some possible intuition behind this set-up is that
@xmath is nearly the universal cover of @xmath , which is complex
analytically isomorphic to @xmath via @xmath . A point in the upper half
plane gives rise to a lattice, and taking the quotient of @xmath by this
lattice gives an elliptic curve. Two points in the upper half plane give
rise to elliptic curves which are isomorphic over @xmath if and only if
they are conjugated by an element of @xmath , so the @xmath -function
realises @xmath as the moduli space of elliptic curves. The action of
@xmath as a group of analytic automorphisms on the cover @xmath gives
information about isogenies between elliptic curves, however elliptic
curves will not need to be mentioned again until § LABEL:secgalrep . It
is exactly the scalar matrices of @xmath which act trivially on the
whole of @xmath , so to ensure we have a faithful action we will
consider the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath modulo its centre.

Let @xmath be a first-order language for two-sorted structures of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a set @xmath with a unary function symbol @xmath for each @xmath .
These unary function symbols will correspond a left action of @xmath on
@xmath , and we will usually just write @xmath instead of @xmath , and
@xmath instead of @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an algebraically closed field @xmath of characteristic zero expanded
with a set of constant symbols @xmath , and the function @xmath goes
from @xmath to @xmath . We will refer to @xmath as the ‘covering sort’
and @xmath as the ‘field sort’ .

Let @xmath be the complete first-order theory of standard @xmath
-function in the language described above i.e. the first-order theory of
the ‘standard model’

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of special points (see 2.1.1 ). Also define the
@xmath axiom

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which fixes a fibre of @xmath to be an @xmath -orbit. We abbreviate by .

The main theme of this chapter is to consider a ‘pro-étale cover’ as a
model of @xmath , and to embed the model theoretic discussion in this
algebro-geometric object. We will see that the categoricity of @xmath
may be interpreted as the statement that in this setting, the analytic
universal cover realises the same ‘independent’ types as the pro-étale
cover (the notion of independence is defined in LABEL:defgindep ).

#### 2.1.1 Notation

-   For a subset @xmath of @xmath we will write @xmath for @xmath . For
    @xmath , @xmath is called a ‘Hecke orbit’ ;

-   For a tuple @xmath and a function @xmath , we define @xmath .

-   If @xmath is (the unique element) fixed by some @xmath , then @xmath
    is called ‘special’ . The set of all special points in @xmath is
    denoted @xmath . In this situation, we also say that @xmath is
    special;

-   Let @xmath , the image of @xmath in @xmath . @xmath is a non-normal
    subgroup of @xmath .

-   For a field @xmath , let @xmath be its absolute Galois group.

-    Definable means definable with parameters.

-   @xmath is the complete type of @xmath and @xmath the quantifier-free
    type.

### 2.2 Algebro-geometric background

In this section we recall some of the background results in arithmetic
geometry that are needed to set the scene.

#### 2.2.1 The @xmath-function

###### Proposition 2.2.1.

[ milne2006elliptic , Chapter 5, §2] There exists a unique meromorphic
function @xmath on @xmath , invariant under the modular group @xmath
which is holomorphic everywhere except for one simple pole at @xmath ,
and takes the values

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.2.2.

Define the modular @xmath -function (or @xmath -invariant) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So the @xmath -function gives a complex analytic isomorphism from the
Riemann surface @xmath (see below) onto the Riemann sphere. The two
points @xmath above, have non-trivial (finite) stabiliser in @xmath (and
it is only points in the orbits @xmath and @xmath which have non-trivial
stabiliser). As a result, the projection map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a branched covering map, with the branching occurring exactly at the
points @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath is actually a true covering map of
@xmath , and this will be at the heart of the discussion to follow. In
fact, in the setting of this chapter, the theory of the special points
is so rigid that we will not be interested in the fibres of special
points under certain branched covering maps, and in particular we will
not be interested in the branch locus @xmath (which are indeed (very)
special points), or its preimage under these maps.

#### 2.2.2 Quotients of the upper half plane

In this subsection we recall some of the classical theory of the
correspondence between Riemann surfaces and algebraic curves, in the
setting of modular curves. See LABEL:appmod for a slightly more more
detailed discussion around quotients of the upper half plane, and the
algebraicity of such quotients.

###### Definition 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be a discrete subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath is called a
cusp of @xmath if there is an element @xmath of @xmath fixing @xmath .
Define the extended upper half plane to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient @xmath is a compact, Hausdorff space [
shimura1971introduction , §1.4] , and given any discrete subgroup @xmath
of @xmath , the quotient @xmath can be given the structure of a Riemann
surface. Therefore if @xmath is of finite index in @xmath , the quotient
@xmath is a compact Riemann surface (since the natural map induced by
the inclusion of groups is a finite branched covering map, so is
proper), and is therefore algebraic by the Riemann existence theorem (
LABEL:thmrie ). Also, since @xmath is compact there are finitely many
@xmath -orbits of the cusps.

An arbitrary tuple @xmath determines a subgroup of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient @xmath is a complex algebraic curve by the discussion in [
shimura1971introduction , §1.4 and 1.5] (or see LABEL:appmod ).

###### Definition 2.2.4.

With @xmath as above, define @xmath to be the complex algebraic curve
biholomorphic to @xmath .

Given two discrete subgroups @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with @xmath a
subgroup of finite index in @xmath , the natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induced by the inclusion of groups is holomorphic ( [
shimura1971introduction , §1.36] ), so by the basic theory of Riemann
surfaces is a branched covering map. The map also induces an algebraic
map on the corresponding algebraic curves by the Riemann existence
theorem.

Given @xmath , the double coset has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath form a finite set of coset representatives [
milnemodular , 5.29] . For @xmath , we will abbreviate the double coset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath form a set of coset representatives for @xmath in
@xmath (the number of cosets is denoted @xmath ). We also note that an
explicit set of coset representatives for @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see [ lang1987elliptic , 5, §1] ), and an easy computation then gives
the following:

###### Proposition 2.2.5.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.2.6.

Consider the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we denote the corresponding complex affine algebraic curve by
@xmath .

###### Proposition 2.2.7.

Given an arbitrary tuple @xmath , there is @xmath and finite, surjective
(algebraic) morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is étale outside a finite branch locus (i.e. the points of @xmath
lying above @xmath under the natural map @xmath ).

###### Proof.

Given the tuple @xmath , consider @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we let @xmath be the lowest common multiple of the @xmath , then
viewing @xmath as a congruence subgroup as in 2.2.5 , we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore the inclusion of groups gives us a holomorphic covering
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which induces regular map on the corresponding algebraic curves by the
Riemann existence theorem. ∎

###### Definition 2.2.8.

Let , be the category of ‘branched finite algebraic covers’ of @xmath
i.e. we consider finite, surjective algebraic morphisms preserving the
covering maps between varieties.

Given a branched Galois cover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath , there is a right action of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the fibre @xmath . Since the cover is Galois, the action is
transitive, and if @xmath is outside of the branch locus then the action
is free and the fibre @xmath is a @xmath -torsor.

#### 2.2.3 Linking geometry and model theory

In the above discussion we used the fact that compact Riemann surfaces
are algebraic to show that certain quotients of the upper half plane
were algebraic. To see that an arbitrary compact Riemann surface is
algebraic usually requires appealing to Riemann-Roch or something
similar, but for the Riemann surfaces we are interested in here the
situation is much simpler. The reason is that once you know that the
@xmath -function gives a complex analytic isomorphism between @xmath and
@xmath , then we may use the general theory of covering spaces (as in
Appendix LABEL:app_etale ) to explicitly see that the covering maps
induced by inclusions of groups may be used to realise these quotients
as a definable set in the field sort. This is the key fact linking the
algebraic geometry with the model theory, and will eventually mean that
types correspond to certain Galois representations. The general
algebraicity results of subsection 2.2.2 are not actually essential for
any of the proofs to follow, but were included to give the reader some
background understanding of what is going on geometrically. It is a
subtle, but important point, that we need to use the definablilty
results of the current subsection, rather than the algebraicity results
of the previous subsection to make model theoretic progress.

Fix a basepoint @xmath outside of the ramification locus of @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.2.9.

Fix an enumeration @xmath of a set of coset representatives for @xmath
in @xmath and consider the map

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then @xmath is biholomorphic onto its image, which is definable in
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is invariant under @xmath , we can view @xmath as a
holomorphic function from @xmath to @xmath . @xmath is injective since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath acts on the image @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and each @xmath induces an automorphism of the complex analytic cover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

compatible with the canonical projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Making the variable substitution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath induces a corresponding permutation of the variables giving a map

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Denote the finite group of maps arising from @xmath in this manner as
@xmath . Clearly each element of @xmath is definable in the field sort.
By the theory of covering spaces (see Appendix LABEL:app_etale for
example), the image @xmath is exactly the subset of @xmath containing
@xmath such that fibres of the projection onto the @xmath -coordinate
are @xmath -torsors outside of the branch locus @xmath , and the
projection onto the @xmath -coordinate is equal to the canonical
projection @xmath on the branch locus. This set is definable in @xmath .
∎

###### Definition 2.2.10.

Denote this definable subset of @xmath by @xmath . The projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induces a covering map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is also definable in the field sort. The group of covering
automorphisms @xmath has already been defined in the above proof. Each
element of @xmath is definable in the field sort.

###### Theorem 2.2.11.

Let @xmath . Consider the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is biholomorphic onto its image, which is definable in
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Similarly to the proof of 2.2.9 , we may consider @xmath as an injection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

biholomorphic onto its image. Define the tuple

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath , and also of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath acts on the image @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath acting trivially. As in the proof of 2.2.9 , each element of
the finite set @xmath induces a permutation of variables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we define @xmath to be the (unique) subset of @xmath such that
@xmath contains @xmath , each of the projections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

make @xmath into an étale cover of @xmath outside of the branch locus
@xmath , and @xmath is equal to the canonical analytic projection on the
branch locus. The image of the projection

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is @xmath , and is definable in @xmath . ∎

###### Definition 2.2.12.

Denote this definable subset of @xmath by @xmath . We see from the above
proof that @xmath comes with a canonical definable projection map

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

induced by the definable projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now describe a inverse system of maps between the @xmath , with each
map being definable in the field sort. As above, we may find @xmath such
that there is an inclusion of groups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be the unique map taking @xmath to @xmath , étale outside of the
points above the branch locus @xmath , and agreeing with the
corresponding analytic covering map on the branch locus, such that the
diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --
