Both space and laboratory plasmas can be associated with static magnetic
field, and the field geometry varies from uniform to non-uniform. This
thesis investigates the impact of magnetic geometry on wave modes in
cylindrical plasmas. The cylindrical configuration is chosen so as to
explore this impact in a tractable but experimentally realisable
configuration. Three magnetic geometries are considered: uniform,
focused and rippled.

For a uniform magnetic field, wave oscillations in a plasma cylinder
with axial flow and azimuthal rotation are modelled through a two-fluid
flowing plasma model. The model provides a qualitatively consistent
description of the plasma configuration on a Radio Frequency (RF)
generated linear magnetised plasma (WOMBAT, Waves On Magnetised Beams
And Turbulence [Boswell and Porteous, Appl. Phys. Lett. @xmath , @xmath
( @xmath )]), and yields agreement between measured and predicted
dependences of the wave oscillation frequency with axial field strength.
The radial profile of the density perturbation predicted by this model
is consistent with the data. Parameter scans show that the dispersion
curve is sensitive to the axial field strength and the electron
temperature, and the dependence of the oscillation frequency with
electron temperature matches the experiment. These results consolidate
earlier claims that the density and floating potential oscillations are
a resistive drift mode, driven by the density gradient. This, to our
knowledge, is the first detailed physics modelling of plasma flows in
the diffusion region away from the RF source.

For a focused magnetic field, wave propagations in a pinched plasma
(MAGPIE, MAGnetised Plasma Interaction Experiment [Blackwell et al.,
Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath )]) are modelled
through an ElectroMagnetic Solver (EMS) based on Maxwell’s equations and
a cold plasma dielectric tensor.[Chen et. al., Phys. Plasmas @xmath ,
@xmath ( @xmath )] The solver produces axial and radial profiles of wave
magnitude and phase that are consistent with measurements, for an
enhancement factor of @xmath to the electron-ion Coulomb collision
frequency and a @xmath reduction in the antenna radius. It is found that
helicon waves have weaker attenuation away from the antenna in a focused
field compared to a uniform field. This may be consistent with
observations of increased ionisation efficiency and plasma production in
a non-uniform field. The relationship between plasma density, static
magnetic field strength and axial wavelength agrees well with a simple
theory developed previously. Moreover, the wave amplitude is lowered and
the power deposited into the core plasma decreases as the enhancement
factor to the electron-ion Coulomb collision frequency increases,
possibly due to the stronger edge heating for higher collision
frequencies.

For a rippled magnetic field, the spectra of radially localised helicon
(RLH) waves [Breizman and Arefiev, Phys. Rev. Lett. @xmath , @xmath (
@xmath )] and shear Alfvén waves (SAW) in a cold plasma cylinder are
investigated. A gap-mode analysis of the RLH waves is first derived and
then generalised to ion cyclotron range of frequencies for SAW. The EMS
is employed to model the spectral gap and gap eigenmode. For both the
RLH waves and SAW, it is demonstrated that the computed gap frequency
and gap width agree well with the theoretical analysis, and a discrete
eigenmode is formed inside the gap by introducing a defect to the
system’s periodicity. The axial wavelength of the gap eigenmode is close
to twice the system’s periodicity, which is consistent with Bragg’s law,
and the decay length agrees well with the analytical estimate.
Experimental realisation of a gap eigenmode on a linear plasma device
such as the LArge Plasma Device (LAPD) [Gekelman et al., Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 62, 2875 (1991)] may be possible by introducing a
symmetry-breaking defect to the system’s periodicity. Such basic science
studies could provide the possibility to accelerate the science of gap
mode formation and mode drive in toroidal fusion plasmas, where gap
modes are introduced by symmetry-breaking due to toroidicity, plasma
ellipticity and higher order shaping effects.

These studies suggest suppressing drift waves in a uniformly magnetised
plasma by increasing the field strength, enhancing the efficiency of
helicon wave production of plasma by using a focused magnetic field, and
forming a gap eigenmode on a linear plasma device by introducing a local
defect to the system’s periodicity, which is useful for understanding
the gap-mode formation and interaction with energetic particles in
fusion plasmas.
