A constructive procedure to build gravitational duals from quantum
mechanical models is developed with the aim of studying aspects of the
gauge/gravity duality. The construction is simplified as far as possible
- the most notable simplification being that quantum mechanical models
are considered as opposed to quantum field theories. The simplifications
allow a systematic development of the construction which provides direct
access to the quantum mechanics / gravity dictionary.
The procedure is divided into two parts. First a geometry is constructed
from a family of quantum states such that the symmetries of the quantum
mechanical states are encoded as isometries of the metric. Secondly,
this metric is interpreted as the metric that yields a stationary value
for the dual gravitational action. If the quantum states are
non-normalisable then these states need to be regularised in order to
define a sensible metric. These regularisation parameters are treated as
coordinates on the manifold of quantum states. This gives rise to the
idea of a manifold “bulk” where the states are normalisable and of a
“boundary” where they are not. Asymptotically anti-de Sitter geometries
arise naturally from non-normalisable states but the geometries can also
be much more general.
Time-evolved states are the initial interest. A sensible regularisation
scheme for these states is a simple complexification of time so that the
bulk coordinate has the interpretation of an energy scale. These
two-dimensional manifolds of states are dual to models of dilaton
gravity where the dilaton has the interpretation of the expectation
value of a quantum mechanical operator. As an example, states
time-evolving under an @xmath Hamiltonian is dual to dilaton gravity on
@xmath , in agreement with existing work on the @xmath correspondence.
These existing results are revisited with the aid of the systematic
quantum mechanics / dilaton gravity dictionary and extended. As another
example, states time-evolving under an @xmath Hamiltonian are shown to
be dual to dilaton gravity on @xmath .
The higher dimensional analysis is restricted, for computational
reasons, to the example of states that possess full Schrödinger symmetry
with and without dynamical mass. The time and spatial coordinates are
complexified in order to both regularise the states and maintain the
state symmetries as bulk isometries. Dictionaries are developed for both
examples. It is shown that submanifolds of these state manifolds are
studied in the existing @xmath and @xmath literature.
