In a smooth semiparametric model, the marginal posterior distribution of the
finite dimensional parameter of interest is expected to be asymptotically
equivalent to the sampling distribution of frequentist's efficient estimators.
This is the assertion of the so-called Bernstein-von Mises theorem, and
recently, it has been proved in many interesting semiparametric models. In this
thesis, we consider the semiparametric Bernstein-von Mises theorem in some
models which have symmetric errors. The simplest example of these models is the
symmetric location model that has 1-dimensional location parameter and unknown
symmetric error. Also, the linear regression and random effects models are
included provided the error distribution is symmetric. The condition required
for nonparametric priors on the error distribution is very mild, and the most
well-known Dirichlet process mixture of normals works well. As a consequence,
Bayes estimators in these models satisfy frequentist criteria of optimality
such as Hajek-Le Cam convolution theorem. The proof of the main result requires
that the expected log likelihood ratio has a certain quadratic expansion, which
is a special property of symmetric densities. One of the main contribution of
this thesis is to provide an efficient estimator of regression coefficients in
the random effects model, in which it is unknown to estimate the coefficients
efficiently because the full likelihood inference is difficult. Our theorems
imply that the posterior mean or median is efficient, and the result from
numerical studies also shows the superiority of Bayes estimators. For practical
use of our main results, efficient Gibbs sampler algorithms based on
symmetrized Dirichlet process mixtures are provided.