In this Thesis, we propose a new theoretical information-geometric
framework (IGAC, Information Geometrodynamical Approach to Chaos)
suitable to characterize chaotic dynamical behavior of arbitrary complex
systems. First, the problem being investigated is defined; its
motivation and relevance are discussed. The basic tools of information
physics and the relevant mathematical tools employed in this work are
introduced. The basic aspects of Entropic Dynamics (ED) are reviewed. ED
is an information-constrained dynamics developed by Ariel Caticha to
investigate the possibility that laws of physics - either classical or
quantum - may emerge as macroscopic manifestations of underlying
microscopic statistical structures. ED is of primary importance in our
IGAC. The notion of chaos in classical and quantum physics is
introduced. Special focus is devoted to the conventional Riemannian
geometrodynamical approach to chaos (Jacobi geometrodynamics) and to the
Zurek-Paz quantum chaos criterion of linear entropy growth. After
presenting this background material, we show that the ED formalism is
not purely an abstract mathematical framework, but is indeed a general
theoretical scheme from which conventional Newtonian dynamics is
obtained as a special limiting case. The major elements of our IGAC and
the novel notion of information geometrodynamical entropy (IGE) are
introduced by studying two toy models. To illustrate the potential power
of our IGAC, one application is presented. An information-geometric
analogue of the Zurek-Paz quantum chaos criterion of linear entropy
growth is suggested. Finally, concluding remarks emphasizing strengths
and weak points of our approach are presented and possible further
research directions are addressed. At this stage of its development,
IGAC remains an ambitious unifying information-geometric theoretical
construct for the study of chaotic dynamics with several unsolved
problems. However, based on our recent findings, we believe it already
provides an interesting, innovative and potentially powerful way to
study and understand the very important and challenging problems of
classical and quantum chaos.
