Despite decades of inquiry an adequate theory of ‘quantum gravity’ has
remained elusive, in part due to the absence of data that would guide
the search and in part due to technical difficulties, prominently among
them the ‘problem of time’. The problem is a result of the attempt to
quantise a classical theory with temporal reparameterisation and
refoliation invariance such as general relativity.

One way forward is therefore the breaking of this invariance via the
identification of a preferred foliation of spacetime into parameterised
spatial slices. In this thesis we argue that a foliation into slices of
constant extrinsic curvature, parameterised by ‘York time’, is a viable
contender. We argue that the role of York time in the initial-value
problem of general relativity as well as a number of the parameter’s
other properties make it the most promising candidate for a physically
preferred notion of time.

A Hamiltonian theory describing gravity in the York-time picture may be
derived from general relativity by ‘Hamiltonian reduction’, a procedure
that eliminates certain degrees of freedom — specifically the local
scale and its rate of change — in favour of an explicit time parameter
and a functional expression for the associated Hamiltonian. In full
generality this procedure is impossible to carry out since the equation
that determines the Hamiltonian cannot be solved using known methods.

However, it is possible to derive explicit Hamiltonian functions for
cosmological scenarios (where matter and geometry is treated as
spatially homogeneous). Using a perturbative expansion of the unsolvable
equation enables us to derive a quantisable Hamiltonian for cosmological
perturbations on such a homogeneous background. We analyse the
(classical) theories derived in this manner and look at the York-time
description of a number of cosmological processes.

We then proceed to apply the canonical quantisation procedure to these
systems and analyse the resulting quantum theories. We discuss a number
of conceptual and technical points, such as the notion of volume
eigenfunctions and the absence of a momentum representation as a result
of the non-canonical commutator structure. While not problematic in a
technical sense, the conceptual problems with canonical quantisation are
particularly apparent when the procedure is applied in cosmological
contexts.

In the final part of this thesis we develop a new quantisation method
based on configuration-space trajectories and a dynamical
configuration-space Weyl geometry. There is no wavefunction in this type
of quantum theory and so many of the conceptual issues do not arise. We
outline the application of this quantisation procedure to gravity and
discuss some technical points. The actual technical developments are
however left for future work.

We conclude by reviewing how the York-time Hamiltonian-reduced theory
deals with the problem of time. We place it in the wider context of a
search for a theory of quantum gravity and briefly discuss the future of
physics if and when such a theory is found.
