This thesis discusses recent advances in precision calculations of
quantum chromodynamics and their application to the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) physics program and beyond.

The first half of the thesis is dedicated to the study of vector boson
fusion Higgs (VBF) production; fully differential at the
next-to-next-to-leading order level (NNLO), and inclusively at
next-to-next-to-next-to-leading order (N @xmath LO). Both calculations
are performed in the structure function approximation, where the VBF
process is treated as a double deep inelastic scattering. For the
differential calculation a new subtraction method, “projection-to-Born”,
is introduced and applied. We study VBF production in a number of
scenarios relevant for the LHC and for Future Circular Colliders (FCC).
We find NNLO corrections after typical cuts of @xmath while differential
distributions show corrections of up to @xmath for some standard
observables. For the inclusive calculation we find N @xmath LO
corrections at the order of @xmath .

The second half of the thesis presents recent results on the matching of
fixed order calculations with parton showers. We first present the
POsitive Weight Hardest Emission Generator ( POWHEG ) method for
matching next-to-leading order (NLO) calculations with parton showers.
We then proceed to apply it to the case of vector boson fusion @xmath
production and discuss the results for scenarios relevant for the LHC
and a possible FCC. In order to present the matching of a NNLO
calculation with a parton shower, we next discuss the Multi-Scale
Improved NLO ( MiNLO ) procedure. By applying a reweighting procedure to
MiNLO improved Drell-Yan production, we obtain a generator which is NNLO
accurate when integrated over all radiation while providing a fully
exclusive description of the final state phase space. We compare the
calculation to dedicated next-to-next-to-leading logarithm resummations
and find very good agreement. The generator is also found to be in good
agreement with @xmath and @xmath LHC data.

\college

Merton College \degree Doctor of Philosophy \degreedate Trinity 2016

{romanpages} {dedication}

Til mine forældre
