## 1 Introduction

Spacetime symmetries are among the most powerful principles in physics.
The prime example, Lorentz invariance, is pervasive in high energy
physics and is efficiently implemented within the framework of
pseudo-Riemannian geometry. Recent years have shown a great deal of
activity in trying to impose similar restrictions in condensed matter
settings. In this case however, relativistic symmetry is generically not
available. ¹ ¹ 1 Among the most notable exceptions is of course the low
energy theory graphene, which supports a Dirac mode with a relativistic
dispersion relation. Rather Galilean invariance is the relevant symmetry
of the problem.

As one might expect from the relativistic example, applying Galilean
invariance has proven quite fruitful. Early work by Greiter, Witten, and
Wilczek [ 1 ] implemented Galilean invariance by demanding the equality
of the momentum and charge currents

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

to restrict the low energy effective theory of superconductors,
including a proof of the London Hall effect.

The subject found renewed interest following work by Son and Wingate [ 2
] , who demonstrated that Galilean invariance dramatically reduced the
number of phenomenological parameters allowed in the effective theory of
the unitary Fermi gas. A flurry of activity resulted over the next
decade in which their method was applied especially to quantum Hall
physics. In [ 3 ] it was demonstrated that the @xmath part of the Hall
conductivity @xmath is determined entirely by the shift @xmath and the
equation of state. ² ² 2 In an alternate approach, this was shown later
[ 4 ] to be the result of non-relativistic Ward identities. As we shall
see, these follow from coordinate invariance on a background with
Galilean symmetry. A similar analysis in [ 5 ] found the chiral central
charge could be determined by measuring the density response to applied
curvature. Non-relativistic symmetry in conjunction with the lowest
Landau level limit was used to construct a dynamical theory of the
quantum Hall effect in [ 6 ] and used to demonstrate universal behavior
of the polarization tensor up to order @xmath . This program was
furthered in [ 7 ] , which proved a number of spectral sum rules for the
traceless part of the stress tensor. Newton-Cartan geometry also
features prominently in the work of [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] on the
superfluid dynamics of neutron stars. In short, Galilean invariance has
a number of powerful consequences and it’s worth understanding how to
efficiently implement it.

An approach to Galilean invariance exists in the general relativity
literature, pioneered by Cartan in the 1920’s with the goal of providing
a geometric picture of Newtonian gravity a la general relativity, now
called Newton-Cartan geometry [ 12 , 13 ] . We give a brief overview of
this subject in section 1.1 . For applications to non-relativistic
supergravity theories, see [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] . Though used in
varying degrees by the condensed matter references listed above, it is
never adopted exclusively since this approach is poorly adapted to
effective field theory in a few respects.

The first is that the formalism, as presented by Cartan, is not
convenient for the construction of invariant actions, a matter that we
will discuss later in this introduction. The second is that, as we shall
see, torsion is an essential ingredient in a number of condensed matter
applications, particularly fluid dynamics and linear response theory.
Cartan’s approach did not involve torsion because it did not need to for
the task of describing Newtonian gravity. Furthermore, in contrast to
the relativistic case, it also proved surprisingly difficult to adapt to
a torsionful setting. We will discuss both of these matters in detail in
section 1.1 .

The point of this thesis is to present a reformulation of Cartan’s work
that easily incorporates torsion in a Galilean invariant way and is well
adapted to applications in condensed matter physics, allowing for
automatic implementation of Galilean invariance within field theory in
the same manner that Lorentz invariance is typically realized in the
relativistic case. In their common domain of application this formalism
reduces entirely to that articulated by Cartan. The formalism, which we
call the extended vielbein formalism, is similar to the first-order
formulation of pseudo-Riemannian geometry, the key difference being that
the vielbein does not lie in the defining representation of gauge group,
but rather a higher-dimensional representation which we call the
extended representation. The vielbein then contains additional
information beyond a basis for the tangent space. This information
precisely encodes Newtonian gravitational effects.

We present this formalism in chapter 2 , which principally draws from
the work of this author and collaborators in [ 18 , 19 ] . The rest of
the thesis is then dedicated to demonstrating how it is applied in
practice. Chapter 3 defines the set of currents available in any
non-relativistic theory and the Ward identities they satisfy by virtue
of coordinate and Galilean invariance. This treatment collects the
non-relativistic Ward identities found in [ 20 , 21 ] into a single,
manifestly Galilean covariant presentation and generalizes them to the
curved, torsionful backgrounds established in chapter 2 , a step that
will be essential for the fluid analyses later on. The material of
chapter 3 was developed over the course of several papers, beginning
with [ 22 ] , which presented the Ward identities for the first time in
a manifestly diffeomorphism covariant form but did not deal with
Galilean invariance. A manifestly Galilean invariant formulation
followed in [ 18 ] , which was then extended to the spinful case, with
careful attention paid to the difference between the Cauchy and
unphysical currents, in [ 23 ] .

Chapter 4 gives simple examples, most of which also appear in [ 23 ] ,
of how to construct Galilean invariant field theories and ends with a
general effective action for quantum Hall systems that encodes response
to an unrestricted Bargmann geometry. The additional freedom this
provides gives us access to new quantized coefficients characterizing
the topological phase that have not previously been considered. Chapter
5 concludes with a number of applications within non-relativistic fluid
dynamics, including linear response theory and the quantum Hall effect,
drawing from material in [ 24 , 18 ] .

Before we begin, a few words are due regarding the relevance of Galilean
invariance in condensed matter. We have seen that it has a number of
interesting an powerful consequences, but to be clear, Galilean
invariance is often broken in the condensed matter setting by a variety
of sources such as lattice effects and disorder. This however does not
diminish the utility of a formalism that makes the Galilean invariance
of the spacetime itself manifest. One may simply add the relevant
Galilean breaking effects as additional data. In this thesis we will
usually restrict ourselves to idealized systems with true Galilean
invariance as a first step, in some cases breaking it with a finite
temperature and chemical potential and/or applied electromagnetic fields
as the need arises, keeping this in mind. Additional Galilean breaking
effects may be considered on top of this if desired, but we will not
consider them.

Our index conventions will be as follows. Greek letters @xmath represent
spacetime indices and can take on either temporal or spatial values
@xmath . Indices that transform in the vector and covector
representation of @xmath are denoted with lower case Latin letters
@xmath while those in the vector or covector representation of @xmath
use upper case Latin letters @xmath which can take on temporal or
spatial values @xmath . Indices in the extended or dual extended
representations of @xmath are denoted @xmath . We will often convert
between coordinate indices and internal Galilean indices using the frame
@xmath or coframe @xmath without note.

### 1.1 Newton Cartan-Geometry

We begin with a brief overview of Newton-Cartan geometry and then
motivate the need to reformulate it. Our treatment is a much condensed
version of Malament [ 25 ] which we refer the reader to for details and
a complete list of references.

A Newton-Cartan geometry is a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath with a
closed non-vanishing one-form @xmath , a positive semidefinite symmetric
tensor @xmath whose kernel is spanned by @xmath

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

and a derivative operator @xmath compatible with both structures

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

This data has the following interpretation. The one-form @xmath
determines the rate at which clocks tick and is called the clock form.
An observer traversing a path @xmath between two events measures an
elapsed time

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

which all such observers agree upon since @xmath is closed. It also
determines a temporal orientation of @xmath . Those vectors @xmath for
which @xmath are said to be future directed timelike and those for which
@xmath are past directed timelike. ³ ³ 3 See Malament for a discussion
of non-time orientable Newton-Cartan geometries [ 25 ] . We shall have
no cause to consider them. Since @xmath is closed and non-vanishing, it
is at least locally derived from a local time function @xmath so that we
have a preferred time coordinate that foliates the manifold into spatial
slices. ⁴ ⁴ 4 We shall always assume our spacetime is simply connected
so that this may be taken to be a global time function. Of course, the
data contained in @xmath and @xmath is equivalent, but we’ll soon need
to relax the condition @xmath , in which case the only notion of elapsed
time is given by ( 4 ) and is path dependent.

The tensor @xmath serves as a spatial metric in the following sense. A
vector @xmath is said to spatial if @xmath and the set of spatial
vectors form a subspace @xmath of the tangent space at a point. Any
spatial vector can be written as a one-form “raised” with @xmath ,
though this expression is not unique.

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

One then defines the length of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

which is not affected by the ambiguity ( 5 ).

Why does one not simply use a metric with lowered indices? A rank-
@xmath symmetric matrix with lowered indices defines a unique
non-vanishing vector field @xmath with zero eigenvalue. This is most
certainly not what we want in a theory of non-relativistic gravity as it
defines a preferred class of observers with velocity @xmath and would
explicitly break the principle of Galilean relativity. In what follows
we must be careful not to at any point invoke a preferred vector field
@xmath unless it is provided for by additional physical data or we can
demonstrate that our results do not depend on that choice.

The connection @xmath defines a notion of parallel transport and, as one
would expect, encodes gravity. However, the manner in which it does so
is qualitatively different from the relativistic case. In general
relativity, the connection is totally equivalent to the data found in
the metric as there is a single torsion free, metric compatible
connection. On the contrary, there are many connections satisfying ( 3 )
at fixed torsion. Unlike GR, gravity has nothing to do with the metric
data @xmath and @xmath , but is instead contained in the unfixed part of
the connection.

For the time being, we consider only the torsionless case. Any two
derivative operators @xmath and @xmath differ by a tensor field @xmath .
For example

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

For both to be compatible with ( 3 ), this tensor must be of the form

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is a two-form whose index we have raised with @xmath . We
will often use this convention, though one should be careful since
@xmath is not invertible. An index, once raised, cannot be lowered and
many standard manipulations in the pseudo-Riemannian case are forbidden.

To show how this is related to gravity, we for the moment break
covariance to follow the textbook treatment by Misner, Thorne, and
Wheeler which we suspect is most familiar to readers [ 26 ] . Consider a
Newton-Cartan geometry with a flat clock form and spatial metric in the
sense that there exists a coordinate system where

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

The @xmath components of the Christoffel symbol are left undetermined by
metric compatibility. If we declare that they are of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

then the geodesic equation reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the velocity vector of a causal curve (affinely
parametrized in the sense @xmath ). That is, free fall in this
Newton-Cartan geometry is equivalent to motion in a Newtonian
gravitational potential. In the presence of a matter distribution @xmath
, the potential is fixed by the Poisson equation @xmath . One may check
using ( 10 ) that this is equivalent to a non-relativistic version of
the Einstein equations in which stress energy is dominated by the mass
density @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

with all other components of @xmath equal to zero.

The covariant version of this is the Trautman recovery theorem [ 25 ] ,
which says that, under certain conditions, a Newton-Cartan geometry may
always be thought of as encoding a Newtonian gravitational potential.

Theorem: Let @xmath be a Newton-Cartan geometry that satisfies the
curvature conditions

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
     @xmath      (14)
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

For each point @xmath there exists a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath and a
derivative operator @xmath and scalar field @xmath on @xmath such that

1.  @xmath is compatible with @xmath and @xmath .

2.  @xmath is flat @xmath .

3.  For causal curves with velocity @xmath

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

4.  @xmath satisfies the Poisson equation

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (17)
      -- -------- -- ------

The derivative operator @xmath is said to be a geometrization of @xmath
. If @xmath has compact support and we require that @xmath go to zero at
spatial infinity, then @xmath is in fact the geometrization of a unique
Newtonian potential. Before moving on, we note that while the above
discussion may make it seem as though flatness is essential for an
interpretation of Newton-Cartan geometry as a geometrization of
Newtonian gravity, this is not the case. Even the torsionful geometries
we will construct using the extended vielbein formalism can be
interpreted in this way, though additional forces will also be present.

### 1.2 Action Principles

This formalism as presented is completely sufficient for the task it was
designed for, that of describing non-relativistic gravity in a covariant
fashion and that which we propose will reduce to it in the torsionless
case. However, for condensed matter applications we will find it at best
maladapted and at worst inadequate. Let’s take a minute to summarize the
issues, beginning with it’s use in effective field theory.

One of the advantages of a geometric formulation of relativistic
kinematics is it’s utility in constructing action principles consistent
with Lorentz invariance. Any term constructed by contracting fields and
their derivatives with the metric is admissible. Spinor fields of course
require reference to a vielbein and spin connection, but this is well
understood and there is no essential complication. In contrast, there is
no manifestly invariant form for even the simplest example of a
non-relativistic field theory, the Schrödinger equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

that refers only to the data presented in ( 2 ) and ( 3 ). The
Schrödinger Lagrangian is not invariant under boosts ⁵ ⁵ 5 In presenting
the standard textbook treatment of Galilean invariance for the
Schrödinger equation we have not been careful to distinguish internal
boosts and diffeomorphisms, a mistake we will soon rectify.

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

unless one also specifies that @xmath transforms projectively, sending
plane waves of momentum @xmath to those of momentum @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this treatment then, Galilean invariance relies on a careful
cancellation between the time derivative and kinetic energy terms under
a projectively realized boost transformation.

The generalization of this treatment to curved spacetimes is perhaps
somewhat less familiar

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ------

Here we have subsumed the Newtonian potential into a Newtonian
gravitational vector potential @xmath whose temporal component is @xmath
. This Lagrangian also appears to break Galilean invariance since it
refers to a preferred future-directed timelike vector field @xmath
(again, normalized so that @xmath ), which is not available in the
Newton-Cartan data. However, the action does not depend on this choice
if we demand that @xmath transforms when we make a different selection
of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an arbitrary one-form such that @xmath . Note that in
this picture, @xmath does not transform at all under boosts. To our
knowledge, this treatment of boost invariance, as well as the
diffeomorphism invariant form of the Lagrangian ( 21 ), first appeared
in [ 27 ] .

Since @xmath has @xmath components that are pure gauge, it in fact
contains no more information than the Newtonian potential and we shall
call the gauge in which @xmath Newtonian gauge. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that this
gauge is not @xmath gauge invariant since @xmath . Moreover, we see in
this treatment that the coupling of a massive field to gravity follows
directly from Galilean invariance, which further implies that the
inertial mass (the mass the appears in the denominator of the kinetic
energy) is equal to gravitational mass (the mass with which the density
couples to @xmath ), which is rather satisfying.

As one would hope, the two approaches just given are equivalent in the
case of flat metric data. In this case, one can choose a coordinate
system such that ( 21 ) reduces to ( 18 ) by selecting coordinates so
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

If one made a different selection @xmath , then one must select
different coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

to preserve the form of @xmath and @xmath . Of course there is now a new
mass gauge field

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

but one can bring @xmath back into the desired form by a @xmath gauge
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

after which @xmath . We see then that the projective transformation ( 20
) follows from the diffeomorphism covariant transformation law ( 22 ) as
the result of a combined internal boost plus @xmath gauge transformation
to preserve the Newtonian form of the gravitational vector potential.
The second approach will prove more useful to us since the projective
transformation does not readily generalize to curved spacetimes.

Newton-Cartan geometry then does not prove helpful in constructing the
Schrödinger action, whose invariance is guaranteed rather by a careful
cancellation between two separate, non-invariant terms under ( 22 ).
There is nothing wrong with this so far as it goes, the action is after
all invariant, but we can anticipate this issue will complicate attempts
to construct other theories when the need arises. For instance, Greiter,
Witten, and Wilczek argue that the Landau-Ginzburg theory for the
superconducting order parameter must include higher derivative couplings
to properly account for Galilean invariant sound propagation [ 1 ] . The
higher derivative term they introduce is simply the square of ( 18 ),
but this done we must in principle ask, what else appears at this order?
Given our experience so far, answering this question within this
approach is likely to be cumbersome. One may check manually that at this
order, the combination

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

forms another acceptable possibility, but how would we generate this
automatically and in a manner that could be easily generalized to even
higher derivatives?

A similar problem arises for non-relativistic Goldstones. Greiter,
Witten, and Wilczek have demonstrated that the lowest order, Galilean
invariant effective action of a non-relativistic Goldstone is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function that represents the pressure of
the system as a function of chemical potential [ 1 ] . This is derived
by arguing that in a non-relativistic theory, momentum arises purely
from the motion matter, and so they set @xmath . Interpreting these
currents as the Noether currents for translations and phase rotations,
this reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Lagrangian in ( 28 ) is the solution to this differential equation.
Again, Newton-Cartan geometry is not terribly helpful in reproducing
this form. The approach is also specific to systems with excitations
that have only a single charge to mass ratio @xmath and so does not
apply to a wide class of physically relevant systems, for instance,
mixtures of superfluid He-3 and He-4. The authors of [ 1 ] leave
generalization of the above action to higher derivative,
multi-constituent theories as an open question, one that we hope to
address in future work [ 28 ] .

In chapter 4 we present a simple and systematic method to ensure
Galilean invariance. The key element is a chronically underused, @xmath
-dimensional representation of the Galilean group which we call the
extended representation, within which the non-Galilean covariant
derivatives @xmath and @xmath are collected. The resulting derivative
@xmath maps tensor and spinor fields into fields with an additional
index valued in an internal space transforming under the extended
representation of local Galilean transformations. One can then proceed
to construct actions such as ( 18 ), ( 27 ), ( 28 ), and their
generalizations along the same lines that one would construct a
relativistic action, simply making sure all indices are properly
contracted using good geometric objects.

### 1.3 The Need for Torsion

The remaining complication will prove more serious. As mentioned above,
there are a number of condensed matter applications in which the
presence of torsion is essential. For instance, torsion may be used to
mock up the coarse grained effect of lattice defects in a solid [ 29 ] .
The example that will be relevant to us is energy transport, which we
shall find requires coupling to torsionful backgrounds. The key issue is
that unlike the relativistic case, torsion cannot be chosen
independently of the metric data and once torsion is nonzero, the
freedom in choosing a connection cannot be fixed in the manner described
above. Torsionful Newton-Cartan geometries originally figured
prominently in a number of non-relativistic holographic applications [
20 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 ] . The non-relativistic
limits of electrodynamics on torsionful backgrounds were considered in [
38 , 39 ] .

Perhaps unsurprisingly, and as we shall see in detail in chapter 3 , the
clock form serves as a source for energy current in non-relativistic
theories. Defining the energy current and studying it’s linear response
then requires introducing arbitrary perturbations to @xmath that bring
us outside of the geometry given above. In particular, one finds for
arbitrary @xmath , the compatibility condition @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

For a non-relativistic theory then, torsion cannot be specified
independently of metric data, in stark contrast with the relativistic
case.

Even defining an energy current then requires understanding how to
properly couple a Galilean theory to torsionful backgrounds.
Unfortunately, the other key difference with the relativistic case, the
ambiguity in the connection, complicates this issue and the manner in
which we have fixed this freedom is no longer applicable in the presence
of torsion.

Indeed, after the discussion of the previous section, one might wonder
if we have already committed an error. We have fixed the freedom in the
connection using the Newtonian potential, but the Newtonian potential
depends on a choice of @xmath . Fortunately, one can show the connection
does not in fact depend on this choice, but this is no longer true in
the presence of torsion. Attempting to do so results in a connection
that depends on a choice of @xmath .

For details we refer to [ 40 ] . In the condensed matter literature this
has been dealt with either by continuing to fix the connection using
only a Newtonian potential, or by demanding the “ambiguous part” of the
connection to be zero. In either approach the auxiliary field @xmath
takes on true physical significance and many of the benefits of a
covariant treatment are lost. One of the principle advantages of the
extended vielbein formalism is that the Galilean invariance of the
connection will be automatic even in the presence of torsion, while in
its absence it will reduce entirely to Cartan’s treatment.

Finally, before we move on, let’s take a moment to consider the physical
interpretation of spacetimes with temporal torsion. These no longer
conform to standard notions of non-relativistic physics. In particular,
the clock form will no longer be closed and so we lose any notion of
absolute time. Time dilation occurs, even non-relativistically, as the
elapsed time between events @xmath now depends on the path taken. Such
spacetimes are not of direct physical relevance in the non-relativistic
regime, but they do enter formally in an intermediate stage of some
calculations (another example being the entropy current analysis to
appear in chapter 5 ) and must be considered.

Although such backgrounds do not have any counterpart in real world
non-relativistic applications, they are still consistent backgrounds
with sensible physics so long as we assume that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

By the Frobenius theorem, this is equivalent to @xmath being integrable,
that is, that one may locally construct a foliation of codimension one
surfaces whose tangent spaces are everywhere orthogonal to @xmath . When
@xmath we loose a notion of absolute time, but when @xmath we also loose
an absolute notion of space.

This isn’t a disaster in and of itself, but spacetimes with @xmath have
other features that are far stranger. One can show that for each point
@xmath where @xmath is not integrable, there is a neighborhood of @xmath
within which any point may be reached by a null curve (null in the sense
that it’s tangent is @xmath orthogonal) starting at @xmath . For a
proof, see [ 41 ] . It’s not difficult to extend this proof to show that
indeed any point may be reached by both a future-directed causal curve
and a past-directed causal curve. In this neighborhood, all events are
both in the future and the past of @xmath . We shall then call
spacetimes for which ( 31 ) holds everywhere causal spacetimes and
demand this throughout.

## 2 Bargmann Geometry

In this chapter we define the geometries on which the remainder of this
thesis will be set. This is a covariant extension of the Newton-Cartan
formalism to torsionful backgrounds. For now, we simply state the
definition and devote the remainder of the chapter to explanation and
discussion.

A Bargmann geometry is a @xmath -dimensional spacetime manifold @xmath
equipped with an extended coframe @xmath , an extended torsion two-form
@xmath , and a Galilean connection one-form @xmath satisfying the first
structure equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

As we shall see, the extended coframe is a collection of one-form fields
@xmath , with @xmath which encode geometry and Newtonian gravity and
transform in a @xmath -dimensional representation of the Galilean group.
The extended torsion encodes both spacetime torsion @xmath , and a field
strength @xmath that couples to mass as an external Lorentz force.

The spacetime torsion has of course been considered before, but @xmath
was introduced in our initial work on Bargmann geometries [ 19 , 18 ] ,
as well as in the language of Koszul connections in [ 42 ] . By the
transformation properties of @xmath , this external force cannot be
consistently set to zero in a manner that respects Galilean invariance
when the spacetime torsion is nonzero and is the missing element in
previous approaches to torsionful Newton-Cartan geometries. Moreover, we
will show that when @xmath , our formalism reduces entirely to the
treatment given by Cartan.

We introduce the Galilean group and it’s representations and establish
notation that will be used in the rest of this thesis in section 2.1 .
In section 2.2 we introduce the formalism summarized above and discuss
it’s interpretation and relationship with previous approaches in section
2.3 . In appendix A , we discuss how this approach may be obtained in
terms of a formal symmetry breaking procedure.

### 2.1 The Galilean Group

In the standard treatment of Galilean relativity, different inertial
coordinate systems are related by

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath relates the relative orientation of coordinate axes and
@xmath is their relative velocity. These transformations form a group
called the Galilean group @xmath .

For our purposes, the Galilean group is defined to be the group of
@xmath -dimensional matrices @xmath that leave invariant a co-vector
@xmath and positive semidefinite symmetric tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

These matrices are of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . These matrices clearly mimic ( 33 ), but importantly,
they act on an internal representation space and are distinct from
diffeomorphisms.

There is another, less familiar, @xmath -dimensional representation,
given by matrices of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

which we call the extended representation. Our conventions are that
capital Latin indices @xmath transform in the vector/covector
representations of @xmath , while lower case Latin indices @xmath
transform under the @xmath subgroup. Capital Latin indices beginning
with @xmath transform in the extended representation. For example,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The extended representation also preserves a set of invariant tensors,
one of which is, remarkably, a metric of Lorentzian signature

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We will denote the inverse to @xmath as @xmath and use the metric to
raise and lower extended indices at will. Importantly, one does not lose
information in doing so as one does when raising indices with the
degenerate tensor @xmath . Due to the availability of a metric,
manipulations of extended indices will often be easier than (co)vector
indices.

The vector and extended representations together also posses a mixed
invariant

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with which we may project extended indices to the vector representation
or pull back covector indices to the extended representation. For
example

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Finally, since @xmath , the Galilean group also preserves the totally
antisymmetric tensors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we will take @xmath . There is some potential for confusion with
this notation since we will occasionally raise Galilean covector indices
using the degenerate tensor @xmath . The epsilon tensor with raised
indices is not the “raised index” version of the epsilon tensor with
lowered indices in this sense. Indeed, the fully raised version of
@xmath is simply zero.

Let’s move on to the Lie algebra @xmath of the Galilean group. The
representation induced by the defining representation ( 35 ) of the
Galilean group consists of matrices of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Equivalently, they are the @xmath -dimensional matrices
that satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Similarly, the extended representation of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------

One may also check that the projector @xmath is an intertwiner of the
extended and defining representations of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

Finally, note that the defining and extended representations of @xmath
both contain precisely the same data as a totally antisymmetric matrix
with lowered indices

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

and indeed, this can be used to give us a simple and useful
characterization of the two representations given above

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

It will often be easier to write equations in terms of @xmath rather
than @xmath or @xmath , despite the fact that it is not a representation
of @xmath .

### 2.2 A First-Order Formalism for Non-Relativistic Geometry

The torsionful generalization of Newton-Cartan geometry is far more
transparent within a first-order formalism. To motivate the definition
of a Bargmann geometry then, let’s try constructing non-relativistic
geometry in a first-order formalism in as close an analogy as possible
with the well understood pseudo-Riemannian case and see what changes
need to be made along the way. For an alternate approach to gauging
Galilean symmetry, see [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] .

To begin, introduce a Galilean coframe @xmath and torsion @xmath
transforming in the vector representation of @xmath . As usual, the
coframe is equivalent to the “metric” data of a Newton-Cartan geometry,
which may be retrieved using the invariant tensors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the frame field, defined by @xmath . It should be clear
that these satisfy the requirements of a Newton-Cartan geometry: @xmath
is positive semidefinite with kernel spanned by the non-vanishing form
@xmath . We have however generalized somewhat since @xmath need not be
closed.

One then defines a spin connection @xmath in the Lie algebra ( 42 ) of
the Galilean group via the first structure equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

This transforms in the usual manner

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

and defines a spacetime derivative operator @xmath through

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

Unfortunately, unlike the pseudo-Riemannian case, the first structure
equation does not uniquely specify @xmath as one of the equations is
pure constraint. Contracting ( 49 ) with @xmath we find that the spin
connection drops out and we have merely

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

What remains of ( 49 ) is then a collection of only @xmath equations in
@xmath unknowns and the connection is not completely fixed.

Of course, the constraint is simply that observed previously in equation
( 30 ) and is the reason we require torsion in the study of energy
transport. Moreover, as recounted in section 1.1 , the fact that the
connection is not simply fixed by the torsion and the metric data is the
key feature of Newton-Cartan geometry. It is precisely in this freedom
that the Newtonian potential sits and allows for the formalism to encode
gravity. What we have done then is not wrong, but we need to figure out
how to incorporate the Newtonian potential in a covariant way to
complete our description.

The key to doing so is to consider the transformation law ( 22 ) for the
mass gauge field, which we reproduce here ⁷ ⁷ 7 The placement of the
rotation matrix follows from restoring it in equation ( 20 ) and can
also be justified by the Galilean symmetry breaking procedure discussed
in appendix A .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

As it stands, this is pretty inconvenient to work with due to it’s
nonlinearity. However, we can collect @xmath along with the vielbein
into a single covariant object using the extended representation ( 36 )
of the Galilean group

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

which we call the extended vielbein. The coframe @xmath may always be
covariantly isolated from this

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

but the final component @xmath may not.

The extended vielbein is then an natural object to consider in a
non-relativistic gravitational theory. Let’s also consider it’s
covariant exterior derivative. This will be an object in the extended
representation, which we call the extended torsion tensor

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We can retrieve our original attempt ( 49 ) from this by simply applying
the projector @xmath since @xmath . The key point is then that this
equation includes both ( 49 ) and a single additional equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

Viewed as an algebraic equation for the connection, ( 56 ) is then a set
of @xmath in @xmath unknowns and the data in @xmath and @xmath is
entirely equivalent.

An immediate consequence of these definitions are the Bianchi identities

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the curvature two-form and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

is simply @xmath considered in the extended representation. From these
identities one may obtain the symmetries of the Riemann tensor. These
differ in some respects from their pseudo-Riemannian versions and may be
found in appendix B .

Before moving on we note that a Bargmann spacetime admits a natural
volume element

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

which may be used to define integration over spacetime. There is
similarly a “volume element” with raised indices

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

However, as in equation ( 2.1 ), @xmath is not simply @xmath with raised
indices. In components

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- ------

These are both annihilated by the derivative operator

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

### 2.3 Discussion

What is the relationship between this approach and those given
previously? Cartan’s formalism, recalled at the opening of section 1.1 ,
can be retrieved immediately by going to the torsionless case @xmath .
Projecting the extended vielbein gives the coframe @xmath and spacetime
torsion @xmath , from which we may define the clock form and spatial
metric via equation ( 48 ). ⁸ ⁸ 8 It may seem natural at this stage to
also consider the “metric” @xmath . This is however not invariant under
@xmath gauge transformations @xmath and so is not admissible. Moreover,
the clock form is closed by equation ( 52 ) and the spacetime enjoys a
(at least local) definition of absolute time. The derivative operator is
defined by @xmath , from which metric compatibility follows

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Finally, if we specialize to the flat case @xmath (note we have chosen
Newtonian gauge), solving @xmath for the connection gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

with all other components zero. We thus see that the connection encodes
Newtonian gravity as it should.

Note that as soon as we generalize to torsionful spacetimes, there is no
way to discard the final component @xmath of the extended torsion
tensor, since this piece picks up factors of the spacetime torsion under
a change of frame

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

In previous approaches to torsionful Newton-Cartan geometry in the
condensed matter literature, this term was effectively set to zero. The
non-invariance of the connection is an artifact of this.

How are we to interpret the mass torsion @xmath physically? One may view
it as an external Lorentz force that couples to mass. We shall see a
much more general demonstration of this in section ( 3.3 ), where this
is dictated by Ward identities. However, since our interpretation of
@xmath in part relies on how it affects the equation of motion for a
point particle, it seems appropriate to consider @xmath in this same
light. Let’s then consider the simple case of a non-relativistic point
particle moving on a background spacetime with nonzero @xmath . In flat
space, the action of a point particle coupled to a gravitational
potential is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which we obtain the equation of motion @xmath . We would like a
covariant version of this that will tell us how to couple the particle
to the curved backgrounds under consideration. We will then consider how
@xmath appears.

The action that accomplishes this is

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------

and @xmath is a parameterization of the particle’s path through
spacetime. ⁹ ⁹ 9 One is also free to add a term proportional to @xmath .
This gives rise to an additional Lorentz force exerted by @xmath on the
particle’s energy current and will not affect our discussion. This is
reparameterization invariant, Galilean invariant, and invariant under
@xmath gauge transformations @xmath . To see this, note that in terms of
the extended coframe a @xmath gauge transformation is given by @xmath
and thus

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

for wordlines without endpoints. Furthermore, one may check that when
@xmath , this action reduces precisely to ( 68 ). It also agrees with
the coupling to curved backgrounds found in [ 48 , 49 , 40 ] .

The equations of motion found from varying @xmath is a generalization of
the geodesic equation to torsionful backgrounds

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

where for simplicity we have chosen an affine parameterization in the
sense that @xmath . In writing this we have introduced the object @xmath
, which denotes the unique null vector in the extended representation
that projects to the particle velocity

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In components this takes the form @xmath (this trick will be of great
use in our fluid analysis in sections 5.2 and 5.3 and we will
reintroduce it when the time comes).

We see from equation ( 71 ) that the extended torsion couples to the
point particle as an external force @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Note the
similarity to the relativistic case where we have @xmath . In
particular, the mass component of the torsion @xmath enters as an
external Lorentz force coupling to the mass current

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

as we set out to show. This is perhaps rather unphysical since in the
real world the only force we know that couples to mass exactly is
gravity as dictated by the equivalence principle. However, the physical
world is, at least to an excellent approximation, torsionless. If we
insist on considering torsionful spacetimes, as our later applications
will force upon us, Galilean invariance dictates that we must consider
such a force. Since the equivalence principle is broken anyways on
torsionful backgrounds, this is not a problem.

## 3 Currents and Ward Identities

We now begin to present some physical consequences of the formalism
introduced above. This chapter concerns the currents present in any
non-relativistic theory and the Ward identities they satisfy by virtue
of diffeomorphism invariance and internal local Galilean invariance. As
such, they are entirely general for theories with underlying Galilean
symmetry. This chapter will also serve to set up some of the necessary
framework for more targeted applications in chapter 5 .

In section 3.1 we begin by defining the complete set of currents
generated by our background. These include the stress, mass current,
momentum current, energy current, and spin current. All of these have
been studied in the past and energy current in particular was originally
defined in the classic work of Luttinger as response to a fictitious
potential (the “Luttinger potential”) that couples to energy [ 50 ] . As
we shall see, the Luttinger potential lies naturally within the extended
vielbein @xmath , which collects the background perturbations available
in any Galilean invariant theory into a single covariant object.
Specifically, it lies within the clock form @xmath , which is why it is
necessary to couple a theory to torsional geometries when studying
energy transport: we must must consider systems in an arbitrary clock
form field and hence arbitrary temporal torsion @xmath .

As has been pointed out by several authors, this approach has several
advantages over Luttinger’s treatment. For one, it allows one to
directly define energy current @xmath in a microscopic theory, whereas
Luttinger’s treatment merely defines it so as to satisfy local energy
conservation. Furthermore, in Luttinger’s work, the Luttinger potential
was coupled to a theory assuming pre-existing knowledge of the energy
density operator. The potential was then not used as a calculational
tool to define energy current but rather as an intermediate step to
derive Kubo formulas. Given the Luttinger potential’s appearance within
@xmath and our knowledge of how to couple microscopic theories to
torsionful geometries (see chapter 4 ), covariance will dictate how the
clock form will enter our action so that we may directly derive the
energy current operator in an arbitrary microscopic theory. This done,
one may generate Kubo formulas for thermal transport, as done in section
5.4 , of which Luttinger’s will be one example, and then compute them in
whatever theory is relevant for application. So far as we are aware,
this has not yet been done and would be an interesting extension of our
work.

To our knowledge, the Luttinger potential was originally identified
within the Newton-Cartan data in [ 20 ] where the work-energy equation
was derived as a Ward identity in flat backgrounds, and discussed
further in [ 30 ] . The energy current was later studied in [ 22 ] ,
where it’s Ward identity was generalized to curved torsionful
backgrounds, though at this stage the extended torsion was still lacking
so Galilean invariance was being implicitly broken (see equation ( 117 )
for the corrected version). Further work in [ 51 , 24 , 52 ] studied
energy transport in non-relativistic systems with both preserved and
broken Galilean invariance.

The treatment of currents presented here is that of [ 18 ] , which
differs from previous work insofar as it gives a manifestly Galilean
covariant presentation of the Ward identities. This requires collecting
the mass, momentum, energy, and stress currents into a single covariant
object in the extended representation @xmath , reflecting their
transformation properties under @xmath . The Ward identities of previous
treatments mixed under Galilean transformations and we here collect them
into a single Galilean invariant Ward identity ( 117 ). We also present
a Ward identity for the stress-mass tensor that follows from local
Galilean transformations that to our knowledge is not present in the
literature (see equation ( 125 ) and discussion below) and makes precise
the intuition used by Greiter, Witten and Wilzcek [ 1 ] that Galilean
invariance implies the proportionality of momentum and charge currents
and demonstrates how it extends to the multi-component case.

### 3.1 Non-Relativistic Currents

In this section we define the currents discussed above. A Bargmann
geometry defines a set of background data @xmath which may be perturbed
to define the stress-energy tensor @xmath and spin current @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

By @xmath we mean the unique antisymmetric matrix whose first index
raises to @xmath (see equation ( 47 )). From the transformation law for
( 50 ) for @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

under a local internal Galilean transformation @xmath .

The tilde’s indicate that the components of @xmath are not yet the
physical currents measured in the lab. For instance, we shall see that
in the presence of spinful matter, the stress part @xmath is not
necessarily symmetric and so cannot be the Cauchy stress used in
condensed matter and engineering applications. Properly defining the
“true” currents is in some respects more subtle than in the relativistic
case, an issue that we will turn to in section 3.2 . Until then, let’s
assume that we are considering spinless matter and drop the tildes.

The object @xmath collects response to the clock form @xmath , spatial
vielbein @xmath and mass gauge field @xmath into a single covariant
object. That is, it contains the energy current @xmath , stress tensor
@xmath , momentum current @xmath , and mass current @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

Though it contains much more information than the name indicates, we
shall call @xmath simply the stress-energy tensor for brevity. In a
Galilean invariant theory, the components listed in ( 76 ) don’t have an
independent existence, just as stress and energy do not in a
relativistic theory. Separately, they depend on a choice of frame; but
in @xmath they are collected into a single covariant object

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

whose components transform among each other as indicated by the index
structure.

We can however use the invariant tensors introduced in section ( 2.1 )
to isolate some of this information in a frame independent way. For
example, we may use @xmath to project out the stress-mass components of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath . We shall refer to @xmath as the stress-mass
tensor and it is the same as the boost invariant stress tensor of [ 40 ]
. Similarly, the mass current @xmath may be completely separated from
the others using @xmath (a preferred tensor that points in the “mass
direction” @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, there is an invariant way to separate the stress-mass tensor from
the stress-energy, as well as a way to separate out the mass current
from the stress-mass. However, we cannot isolate the stress or momentum
from the mass current since different observers will disagree on the
measured valued of @xmath and @xmath by terms proportional to @xmath .
Similarly, there is no way to isolate the energy current from any of the
other components of @xmath without additional data. We are then forced
to discuss the entire object if we wish to consider energy current in a
covariant fashion.

Finally, let’s conclude this section with a word on the interpretation
of these various currents. The interpretation of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as the mass current, stress, and energy current should be
relatively clear. Referring to @xmath as the momentum current may
however seem somewhat ad hoc. To justify this, let’s compute @xmath on
flat spacetime explicitly for a theory of a spinless massive field with
single derivative couplings @xmath .

Under a variation of the @xmath components of the coframe about the
background @xmath , the temporal frame @xmath varies as @xmath . Now the
natural covariantization of @xmath is @xmath which then changes as
@xmath . The Lagrangian then varies as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the canonical Noether current for translations on flat space.
¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In this computation we have freely converted between @xmath and
@xmath indices using @xmath . One can also ascertain this using the
formalism of chapter 4 via equation ( 143 ) without the need to argue
for natural covariantizations.

#### 3.1.1 Currents as Measured by Observers

Though the currents are naturally collected into the single object
@xmath , in the presence of an observer with velocity @xmath , ¹² ¹² 12
As always, we are normalizing so that @xmath . one can discuss the
stress, momentum, and energy currents as measured by that particular
observer. In this section we briefly discuss how to do this and so
introduce a number of definitions that will be useful to us in the fluid
analysis of section 5.3 .

To begin with, the mass current measured by @xmath is simply @xmath and
is agreed upon by every observer. Equivalently, one may check directly
that the @xmath components of ( 77 ) do not transform under internal
Galilean transformations. Given @xmath we may also isolate the momentum
current and spatial stress

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where we have introduced the @xmath -orthogonal projector @xmath , which
satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In general, whenever we introduce a frame-dependent quantity, we will
denote it with an overset symbol labeling the frame as above, though we
shall try to do this as infrequently as possible. Note that momentum and
stress are purely spatial tensors in the sense that @xmath , @xmath .

The energy current is contained within the temporal component of the
extended stress-energy tensor @xmath and we need an extended vector that
points in a temporal direction to extract it ( @xmath will not do since
it points in the “mass direction” and moreover has been used to extract
@xmath ). We can always construct such an object given a velocity field.
As in our discussion of the point particle equation of motion ( 71 ), we
need a vector @xmath in the extended representation that projects to
@xmath . Of course, there are many such @xmath ’s, but we can fix this
freedom by demanding that it be null with respect to the Lorentzian
metric @xmath . That is, let @xmath be the unique extended vector
satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In components, this is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

One may then define

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the boost invariant energy current of [ 53 ] , though stated in
a different language.

The objects @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are then the natural
objects that can be constructed from the stress-energy tensor @xmath and
an observer’s spacetime trajectory and can be interpreted as the mass,
momentum, stress, and energy current as measured by an observer with
velocity @xmath . To lend additional support to this interpretation,
let’s consider their relationship with the components of the stress
energy tensor given in ( 77 ). To make our discussion as transparent as
possible we will restrict ourselves to the case of a flat metric and
clock form, as in equation ( 9 ).

In components then we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We can then compute the components of the stress-energy tensor in terms
of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

In writing this we have used the Ward identity ( 125 ) for local
Galilean transformations, which we will prove in section 3.3 . In
particular, this implies the identity @xmath .

This will look more familiar if we consider the case of an observer
comoving with the mass current. In this case we have @xmath and the
above simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath is the local momentum density measured by comoving observers,
then we would expect it to vanish, as it indeed does. The final two
equations are the standard textbook formulas for the stress and energy
currents measured in the lab. The lab energy density @xmath includes
both the energy density @xmath as measured by observers in the rest
frame defined by @xmath , plus the kinetic energy @xmath , while the
energy current includes that measured by the comoving observers, that
induced by stress, and the flow of kinetic energy in the direction
@xmath . Similarly, the lab frame stress @xmath includes both the stress
measured by comoving observers and the standard kinetic contribution
@xmath familiar from non-relativistic continuum dynamics. We see that
all of these kinetic contributions are in fact fixed by Galilean
invariance.

### 3.2 Physical Currents

In relativistic theories with spinful matter there are two possible
definitions of the stress-energy. One can vary the action at fixed
connection, as we have done above

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

or at fixed torsion

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

While both are good operators, the later is the more physically relevant
of the two since it is @xmath that appears in the Einstein equations. It
is also more natural from a condensed matter/engineering perspective for
several reasons. For one, when local rotational invariance is unbroken,
conservation of angular momentum ensures that the Cauchy stress tensor
is symmetric [ 54 ] , which is true of @xmath but not @xmath . More
directly, stresses in the lab are induced by a shear with the background
torsion held fixed. We shall then refer to @xmath as the Cauchy, or
true, stress tensor.

Though not of direct physical relevance, @xmath is often useful as an
intermediate step since it somewhat easier to compute. However one must
remember to always then obtain the true stress, which in the torsionless
case is related to @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

a process we will refer to as “improvement”.

Though well understood, we dedicate some space here to considering the
non-relativistic case for completeness, but especially because because
the energy current involves some subtleties not present in the
relativistic example. The reason is the same that has troubled us
before: it is impossible to introduce a perturbation to the clock form
without introducing torsion. For this reason it will prove impossible to
define improvements to @xmath (and thus the full stress-energy tensor
@xmath , though we can improve @xmath ). We will argue below that the
unimproved energy current defined above already corresponds to the true
internal energy of the system, and so should not be improved in any
case.

#### 3.2.1 The Cauchy Stress-Mass Tensor

Before we turn to the energy current however, let’s consider the
stress-mass tensor, whose story is straightforward. The physical
currents are to be defined at fixed torsion, so we will require that the
variation of @xmath does not involve the clock form. This in turn
implies that the variation may be written as the pullback of some form
@xmath to the extended representation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

By design, we then also have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

for some @xmath . We then define the Cauchy stress-mass @xmath and spin
current @xmath by the variation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

To perform the translation between ( 74 ) and ( 95 ) we shall need the
variation of the spin connection @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath .
We can retrieve this from the first structure equation @xmath , which
gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , this reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

which after some algebraic rearrangement gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Finally, using @xmath and the definition ( 78 ) of the unimproved
stress-mass tensor @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

which implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, this gives a physical mass current @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the physical mass current for non-scalar matter since the
Newtonian gravitational potential is contained within the connection
@xmath . That is, it is @xmath rather than @xmath that flows in response
to a gravitational perturbation at fixed torsion.

#### 3.2.2 The Stress-Energy Tensor

Finally, let’s turn to the energy current and thus, by necessity, the
full stress-energy tensor @xmath . A perturbation to the the clock form
necessarily introduces temporal torsion and so we cannot perform a
variation at fixed torsion as done above. One might hope there is a way
around this, for instance, by performing the variation at fixed spatial
torsion @xmath . However, since @xmath is merely the spatial component
of the Galilean vector @xmath , there is no invariant way to do this.
That is, since @xmath under a Galilean boost, once temporal torsion is
present, there is no way to set spatial torsion to zero in a manner that
all observers can agree upon.

Let’s see what would go wrong if we tried to naively define the
stress-energy at fixed extended torsion @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because @xmath , this is a constrained variation of the vielbein @xmath
and we are free to add a term @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary
antisymmetric tensor. This shifts the stress-energy tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

which, comparing to equation ( 77 ), alters the energy current while
leaving the stress, momentum, and mass components fixed. Thus we can
unambiguously improve the @xmath , but not @xmath .

Of course, this is unphysical. One considers the Cauchy stress since
this is the stress measured in the lab, induced by shearing the system
at fixed torsion. The energy measured in the lab of course has no such
ambiguity. Moreover, the energy density @xmath already corresponds to
the Hamiltonian density of the system and so truly is the physical
energy density of the system.

This can been seen in simple case of the spinful Schrödinger equation,
whose action on the background @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath are the spin representation matrices. One then finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the Hamiltonian density for this system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

We see that @xmath is the Hamiltonian density minus coupling to external
potentials and so corresponds to the internal kinetic and interaction
energy of a system.

While we have motivated this in the specific case of the Schrödinger
theory, it is actually quite general. The proper, coordinate invariant
definition of the Hamiltonian is given by Iyer and Wald in the appendix
to [ 55 ] . Carrying out their analysis on a Bargmann geometry yields
the same result.

### 3.3 Ward Identities

Finally, we turn to the principle results of this chapter, the Ward
identities satisfied by the currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a result of diffeomorphism invariance, @xmath gauge invariance, and
internal Galilean invariance. Note we have now included an external
electromagnetic gauge field @xmath and its current @xmath for later
applications. There is no essential complication in considering general
non-abelian gauge fields and the generalization of our results to this
case should be clear throughout. However, since we have an eye to
quantum Hall applications, we shall restrict to @xmath for simplicity.
In what follows we will refer to the mass and charge @xmath ’s as @xmath
and @xmath respectively.

We will first consider the consequences of @xmath invariance since this
is the simplest case, and perform the calculation in detail. Under a
@xmath transformation @xmath , the action varies as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have integrated by parts in the second equality. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note
that in the torsionful case, integration by parts also introduces a
torsional term. This is because upon integration by parts, one generates
the term @xmath . Since we assume the action is gauge invariant, this
must be zero for all choices of @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

Identities generated in this fashion are called Ward identities and are
true on shell (since the variation of dynamical fields is proportional
to the equations of motion, which we have set to zero). The Ward
identity for @xmath invariance follows in exactly the same manner. After
a variation @xmath , we generate the Ward identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

The next easiest Ward identity follows from local Galilean invariance

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In their infinitesimal forms @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The action then transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

from which we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we turn to the Ward identities for diffeomorphisms. Under an
infinitesimal coordinate transformation @xmath , the background fields
transform as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

These transformations aren’t terribly convenient since they refer to
non-covariant objects such as @xmath and @xmath . However, they only
differ from covariant expressions by a @xmath gauge transformation
@xmath and an infinitesimal local Galilean transformation @xmath . Since
our theory is assumed to be gauge and local Galilean invariant we may
perform a simultaneous diffeomorphism, @xmath , and @xmath
transformation, after which we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Variation of the action then yields the Ward identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

The explicit appearance of @xmath may be concerning since it includes
the @xmath connection @xmath , which is not gauge invariant. This is
however not a problem since @xmath multiplies precisely the Ward
identity ( 110 ) and so drops out of the equation. To see this, perform
a @xmath transformation @xmath , after which we pick up a term
proportional to @xmath .

This identity may seem somewhat novel due to it’s unfamiliar
presentation. It is however well known in the case of flat spacetimes.
Setting @xmath and @xmath and churning through ( 117 ) in components (
77 ), we find the @xmath and @xmath components of the Ward identity are
respectively ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Let’s consider spinless matter for now so that we
can ignore the issues discussed in section 3.2 .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the electric field, @xmath the magnetic field, and
@xmath the gravitational field.

These should be quite familiar. The first is simply the work-energy
equation expressing the work done by external background fields on the
system. The second is the continuum version of Newton’s second law, also
known as the Cauchy momentum equation, expressing the local flow of
momentum density subject to internal stresses @xmath and external
electromagnetic and gravitational forces. Once supplied with
constitutive relations in terms of local thermodynamic degrees of
freedom, this is the Navier-Stokes equation. These equations,
supplemented by local mass and charge conservation, collectively serve
as fluid equations of motion [ 56 ] . The Ward identity ( 117 ) then
collects the work-energy and Cauchy momentum equations into a single
covariant package and generalizes them to the curved, torsionful
geometries we are considering. It will serve as the starting point for
our fluid analyses in chapter 5 .

It will prove convenient later on to isolate the stress-mass part of
equation ( 117 ). To do this, we raise the index using the spatial
metric @xmath . Using the identity @xmath and ( 110 ), we find this
gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

This also includes the local conservation of mass ( 110 ), which can be
obtained by contracting with @xmath .

#### 3.3.1 Ward Identities for the Cauchy Stress-Mass

In summary, the Ward identities for diffeomorphism invariance, gauge
invariance and local internal Galilean invariance are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
     @xmath      (121)
     @xmath      (122)
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

which in particular include

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, these are for the currents defined at fixed connection and we
would like to state them for the physical currents.

As discussed in section 3.2 , there is simply nothing we can do about
@xmath as a whole and so ( 120 ) must remain as it is. We can however
find the Ward identities satisfied by the Cauchy stress-mass @xmath .
Plugging in the expressions ( 3.2.1 ) into ( 123 ) and using the
identity ( 389 ), we find the antisymmetric part of the stress-mass
tensor is fixed by the torsion and spin current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, on torsionless backgrounds, @xmath is totally symmetric,
which is indeed required of the Cauchy stress tensor @xmath when local
rotational invariance is unbroken [ 54 ] . Referring to equation ( 78 ),
we see that this also implies the equality of the momentum and mass
currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

generalizing the relation ( 1 ) used by Greiter, Witten, Wilczek and
many subsequent authors to impose Galilean invariance to the
multi-constituent case. Satisfyingly, this identity is precisely the
Ward identity for internal Galilean boosts.

Similarly, in terms of the Cauchy stress-mass, equation ( 124 ) reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have made use of the identity ( 389 ). We can remove the
explicit dependence on the curvature by using the symmetry of the
Riemann tensor under exchange of the first and second pairs of indices (
392 ). One then finds

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In appendix B we have defined @xmath by the equation @xmath . Note that
as such it is not necessarily the exterior derivative of a two-form (we
use the notation since @xmath ). Contracting with @xmath we find that
the physical mass current is also conserved

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 128 ) is the covariant generalization of the Cauchy momentum
equation to general Bargmann spacetimes. In particular we see that there
are external forces exerted by extended torsion in addition to the usual
electromagnetic force. Also note that, as promised in section ( 2.2 ),
the mass component of the extended torsion @xmath exerts a Lorentz force
on the (unimproved) mass current. This is then a general feature of
physics on Bargmann spacetimes and not merely of the non-relativistic
point particle. While it may seem awkward to include the unimproved
tensor @xmath in ( 128 ), having converted everything else to physical
currents, this is something we must simply accept as we have shown there
is no unambiguous way to improve the energy current. We simply observe
that the external force exerted by extended torsion couples to the
unimproved stress-energy.

In summary then, we have the following (somewhat redundant) list of Ward
identities for the physical currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the torsionless case relevant for most applications these simplify to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

## 4 Galilean Invariant Theories

In chapter 3 , we considered very general consequences of Galilean and
diffeomorphism invariance, valid in any theory that realizes them. Now
we turn to the question of how to actually write down theories that do
so. As overviewed in the introduction, the metric formalism of
Newton-Cartan geometry isn’t terribly helpful in this regard, as both
the Schrödinger and superfluid Lagrangians cannot be written with only
the data @xmath . The Schrödinger action requires a careful cancellation
between the kinetic and time derivative terms of ( 21 ), while the
action ( 28 ) for superfluid Goldstones is instead solved for from a
differential equation in the dependence of the Lagrangian on fields and
their derivatives. It is lowest order in derivatives and specific to
single-constituent superfluids. These are among the simplest and most
useful actions we know of, so one might justifiably be concerned that
writing down more complicated Galilean field theories will quickly
become extremely cumbersome.

One approach, common in the literature, is to construct such theories by
writing down a “parent” relativistic theory in a Lorentzian spacetime of
one higher dimension. One then demands a null isometry and chooses to
keep modes of only a certain momentum in that direction, which will then
be the mass of the resulting non-relativistic field. The resulting
theory is guaranteed to realize Galilean symmetry. This method requires
a fair amount of excess conceptual baggage though and can be
computationally cumbersome. It is however a systematic means to churn
out theories of the Schrödinger type.

In this chapter we introduce a simple and efficient means to realize
Galilean symmetry in Wilsonian effective actions. The key ingredient is
a derivative operator @xmath , introduced in section 4.1 , that is
valued in the extended representation of the Galilean group. We claim
this is the natural derivative operator that can be defined on the
@xmath bundle encoding the kinematics of massive non-relativistic
fields. Only when operating on massless fields can @xmath be restricted
to an invariant spacetime derivative operator @xmath .

One can then systematically generate actions with manifest Galilean
symmetry by writing them in terms of fields, their extended derivatives,
and Galilean invariant tensors as we will do in section 4.2 . For
massive fields, this generates the Schrödinger action at lowest order
and easily produces higher derivative terms to any order one desires. We
shall find that this is formally equivalent to the procedure of null
reduction, but has the benefit of being intrinsic to the
non-relativistic spacetime under consideration and not requiring any
computation. In future work we will show how this method may also be
used to reproduce Greiter, Witten, and Wilczek’s theory of superfluids
in a systematic way that generalizes to the multi-constituent case [ 28
] .

We then consider theories of a different type, the non-relativistic
analog of the Dirac equation. Such actions were originally considered by
Levy-Leblond in [ 57 ] and generalized to a larger class of
representations by de Montigny, Niederle, and Nikitn in [ 58 , 59 ] .
Recently, Levy-Leblond’s action has been coupled to Newton-Cartan
geometries [ 60 ] , though their method should also work for the more
general Dirac-like representations of de Montigny et al. In section 4.3
we review their constructions. While we are not aware of any physical
systems that realize these possibilities (other than the
non-relativistic electron with @xmath -factor 2, which may also be
discussed in the Schrödinger approach), they are interesting to consider
and one might hope nature will be kind enough to furnish us with
examples some day. The content of section 4.3 is then entirely the
product of other researchers. We include it here out of interest and a
sense of completeness as another example of a collection of actions one
may write down with manifest Galilean symmetry.

### 4.1 The Extended Derivative Operator

To recap from section 1.2 , generalizing the Schrödinger action to
curved spacetimes requires referencing an auxiliary timelike vector
field @xmath , which one uses to write down the time derivative term.
Identifying this field with the timelike portion of the frame @xmath ,
¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 At this point, these are conceptually distinct. However, the
actions we will write down in this section will naturally churn out
theories with @xmath . we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we are considering massive matter with arbitrary charge and spin.
The covariant derivative is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the charge, @xmath is the mass, and @xmath the rotation
(and boost) operators acting on @xmath (see equation ( 367 )). For
example, for a spin @xmath particle, @xmath where the @xmath ’s satisfy
the Clifford algebra @xmath , and @xmath . ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 An important
ingredient for Galilean invariance is that @xmath is boost trivial, that
is, @xmath . As in the relativistic case, boosts cannot be realized
unitarily and so the action would not be invariant under a non-trivially
realized boost transformation. For further discussion see section 4.3 .

Of course, @xmath is not boost invariant @xmath . Fortunately, the
second term is not either, owing to the transformation of the mass gauge
field @xmath . Galilean invariance of ( 132 ) then relies on a careful
cancellation between the kinetic and time derivative terms as discussed
in section 1.2 .

In other words, the “covariant derivative” @xmath is not covariant at
all, but transforms under Galilean boosts as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

The key observation of this section is that it can however be collected
into a larger derivative operator valued in the extended representation
of the Galilean group

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

One may then check by hand that if @xmath transforms in some
representation @xmath of @xmath , it’s extended derivative also
transforms covariantly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is then @xmath rather than @xmath that is the natural derivative
operator on massive non-relativistic fields.

Note that for massless fields @xmath , we have @xmath . In this case the
derivative operator may be written as the pullback of the usual
derivative operator to the extended representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular we may retrieve in this way the Newton-Cartan derivative
operator @xmath which we know to be Galilean invariant, but this
derivative operator does not act on massive fields.

### 4.2 Schrödinger Fields

Now let’s use this to start writing down theories. The first obvious
thing to try is the “Klein-Gordon”-type action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

which upon expanding yields precisely ( 132 ). We have thus found a
manifestly invariant formulation of the Schrödinger equation. Moreover,
it’s now a trivial matter to consider more general theories without
breaking Galilean invariance.

As an example, the first higher derivative term that appears is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

The get a sense for this term, let’s expand it in flat space

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After integration by parts, this is the term ( 27 ) given in the
introduction to this thesis. One may check by explicit computation that
this is in fact invariant under the projectively realized Galilean
transformation that one uses to check boost invariance in the standard,
textbook approach.

One can now extend this method to any order in derivatives one wishes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

So long as one properly contracts indices using the invariant metric
@xmath , the resulting theory will be Galilean invariant. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 One
can also contract with @xmath , but this is rather trivial since @xmath
.

As promised, this method of generating non-relativistic theories is
clearly equivalent to the procedure of null reduction. The extended
derivative @xmath is simply the covariant derivative in the
higher-dimensional spacetime, which of course should be contracted with
a @xmath -dimensional Lorentzian metric. Selection of a particular
momentum in the null direction is simply the fact that @xmath . We hope
however that our formulation has certain conceptual advantages since it
is intrinsic to the non-relativistic spacetime. It is certainly more
streamlined from a calculational point of view, as one may write down
theories directly, without the intervening steps of postulating a parent
unphysical theory and performing reduction, which can be cumbersome in
the presence of interacting modes.

#### 4.2.1 Currents

As an example, let’s compute the currents defined in chapter 3 for the
Schrödinger field ( 138 ). For this we will need the variation of the
extended derivative operator acting on @xmath . The non-covariant
derivative @xmath simply varies with the mass gauge field @xmath , from
which we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

Including the variation of the spin connection and electromagnetic gauge
field then gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the variation of the volume element is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these formulas, it’s then not difficult to find the currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

where importantly, by @xmath we do not mean the raised index version of
the non-covariant derivative @xmath , but rather @xmath contracted with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

Before writing the Cauchy currents, we note that the spin current for
the Schrödinger field is conserved on-shell @xmath , as one would expect
in a theory with no spin-orbit coupling

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second equality we have used the fact that @xmath is a
massless ( @xmath invariant) field which implies that @xmath . Finally,
the last line vanishes by the covariant form of Schrödinger’s equation
(on torsionless backgrounds) @xmath .

The physical currents are then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have restricted to torsionless backgrounds for simplicity. In
the above we have used ( 4.2.1 ) to write the stress-mass tensor in a
manifestly symmetric form on shell, something which we know is
guaranteed by the Ward identity for local Galilean transformations ( 125
).

Since this likely all looks rather unfamiliar, we also give component
expressions of the above equations for a spin @xmath particle in flat,
three-dimensional space. On shell, these are

  -- -------- -- -------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Pauli spin operators. Note the energy current is
the anticommutator of the energy @xmath and velocity @xmath and
represents kinetic energy being transported with the velocity of the
particle.

For the sake of familiarity, we have defined @xmath , ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 The
formula @xmath is useful here. whose density is the spin density of
standard quantum mechanics and whose current may also be interpreted
along the lines of the energy current as it is half the anticommutator
of the spin density and velocity. By virtue of ( 4.2.1 ), this is
conserved on shell

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

The mass current is simply @xmath times the probability current, plus a
magnetization term @xmath that can be very roughly interpreted as mass
flow due to spinning matter whose rate of precession is not uniform. As
usual, one should not take this too interpretation too seriously. Note
in particular, variation in the spin density does not give rise to an
electromagnetic magnetization current and the charge and mass currents
are distinct even in the single-constituent case in the presence of
spinful matter.

Finally, the stress tensor is the familiar stress tensor for spinless
Schrödinger fields, plus a contribution @xmath arising from
non-uniformities in the spin current. Of course, we do not display the
momentum current since it is equal to the mass current on shell.

### 4.3 Non-Relativistic Dirac Fields

There are some options for non-relativistic actions which we have not
considered. If a massive field @xmath transforms under boosts, the
action ( 138 ) is not invariant since boosts cannot be realized
unitarily. Importantly, we are not referring to the projective boost
transformation of equation ( 20 ), which we long ago absorbed into the
the mass gauge field; rather, we are considering internal boosts

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

parametrizes an arbitrary @xmath transformation and the generators
@xmath are nontrivial. To our knowledge, a general theory of the
finite-dimensional representations of the Galilean group has not been
developed and finding them is a surprisingly difficult task, but in four
spacetime dimensions, a complete list with spin 1 and lower has been
obtained and may be found in equation (11) and Table 1 of [ 58 ] . To
convert their results to our conventions, one should take @xmath ,
@xmath .

Of those representations with @xmath , there is one with spin @xmath and
eight with spin 1. The spin @xmath representation for instance contains
two spin @xmath fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

that transform into each other under boosts

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and was originally discovered by Levy-Leblond in [ 57 ] . The
non-relativistic Dirac equation ( 155 ) for this field is precisely the
@xmath limit of the relativistic 4-component Dirac equation: the second
spinor is auxiliary and integrating it out yields the Schrödinger
equation with a @xmath -factor of 2. We are unfortunately not aware of
physical realizations of the other boost-nontrivial representations
listed in [ 58 ] .

However, given a field in one of these representations @xmath , one may
follow the standard procedure to construct a Dirac equation for it. In a
follow up to [ 58 ] , the authors find a collection of matrices @xmath
for each @xmath such that [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-relativistic Dirac action is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have taken the liberty of minimally coupling their action to a
Bargmann spacetime. The @xmath -matrices they obtain may be found in
equation (10) and equations (42-45) of [ 59 ] . ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In comparing to
[ 59 ] , we have @xmath . For the Leby-Leblond representation they are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The non-relativistic Dirac equation obtained from ( 155 ) is then
precisely the @xmath limit of the relativistic 4-component Dirac
equation (see also [ 60 ] ). Expanding this out we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

The bottom component @xmath is auxiliary, satisfying the constraint (we
are now restricting to flat spacetimes)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

Plugging this in on torsionless backgrounds then gives, after
integration by parts, the Schrödinger action with a @xmath -factor of 2
for the top spinor @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the magnetic field and @xmath is the spin operator. Note
that the @xmath -factor also induces a non-minimal coupling to the Ricci
scalar @xmath . This follows from the same commutator of derivatives
giving rise to the magnetic moment.

#### 4.3.1 Currents

From the action ( 155 ) we find the stress-energy and spin current to be

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath and as usual @xmath . Computing the
components of @xmath from ( 153 ) and ( 156 ), we find that @xmath is in
fact totally antisymmetric in its indices. Given this total
anti-symmetry, it’s independent components are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The Cauchy stress-mass in torsionless backgrounds is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

In simplifying this we have used the total antisymmetry of @xmath and
used the Ward identity @xmath since we are considering the on shell
currents.

This form has the benefit of being manifestly Galilean covariant, but is
perhaps somewhat mysterious. To get a feel for this let’s restrict to
the Levy-Leblond representation and simplify using the constraint ( 158
). In components we then have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, we have the standard charge and mass currents, plus
magnetization currents arising from the magnetic moments that the @xmath
-factor attaches to particles. Note that the mass magnetization enters
as though it had @xmath -factor 1. In comparison to the Schrödinger
case, these currents also have additional terms in the energy current
and stress arising from the non-minimal coupling terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 4.4 Quantum Hall EFT

We conclude with an application to the quantum Hall effect, writing down
most general effective action (to our order in power counting)
consistent with Galilean invariance for systems gapped by a
non-vanishing magnetic field @xmath . This problem has been considered
by numerous authors, beginning with [ 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 ] , which
characterized the long distance physics of quantum Hall systems by the
quantized coefficients of the Chern-Simons and Wen-Zee terms (we shall
specialize to the case of the integer quantum Hall states in this
section and not consider the heirarchical construction).

Additional restrictions owing to Galilean invariance were considered in
[ 3 ] , which also imposed an additional symmetry

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

specific to single particle systems (see [ 65 ] ). In this section we
enlarge the the backgrounds considered by previous authors to general
Bargmann spacetimes and impose Galilean invariance without resort to (
165 ), so finding the most general effective action to our order in
power counting, applicable to systems composed of arbitrary numbers of
fundamental constituents. The added generality leads us to introduce
three new Chern-Simons-type terms with quantized coefficients @xmath ,
and @xmath . These terms attach mass to vorticity, charge to vorticity,
and mass to curvature respectively.

All results will be stated on torsionless backgrounds. Hence though
torsion will be essential to carry out the variations correctly, it will
not appear in the final formulas for the variations themselves.

#### 4.4.1 Setup

As is usual, we shall assume slowly varying fields and so adopt a power
counting scheme in which derivatives are small

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We are concerned with backgrounds in which there is a large magnetic
field @xmath gapping the system and so

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The power counting is chosen so that @xmath , but electric fields are
small @xmath . Although in experimental setups, the other background
curvatures @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are small or vanishing, it will
be convenient to consider all potentials on the same level as the
electromagnetic one

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The most general effective action to order @xmath is then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (169)
              @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have made the following definitions. First of all, since we
have a nowhere vanishing magnetic field, we may define the drift
velocity 3-vector

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The gravitational vector potential @xmath is not boost invariant,
however in the presence of a preferred frame such as @xmath we may
define @xmath to be @xmath measured in that frame. One convenient way to
do this is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is then simply @xmath in the frame where @xmath . The one-form
@xmath is the spatial part of the spin connection @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not possible to involve the boost part of the connection @xmath to
this order.

Finally, the equation of state @xmath is a function of the curvatures

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is of course the magnetic field and @xmath the curvature of a
spatial slice. The other two curvatures may require some comment on
interpretation however. In flat space, the third may be calculated to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

and so is the vorticity of the quantum Hall fluid. The term @xmath
ensures the boost invariance of @xmath and can be thought of as the
Coriolis contribution to the vorticity in a rotating frame. The
curvature @xmath is proportional to @xmath and so is nonzero only in
spacetimes that are not causal. While not physical, considering non-zero
@xmath is a useful intermediate step to derive energy currents and has
been used for this purpose in a number of works [ 51 , 52 ] .

In what follows, it will be convenient to introduce the definitions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These are the “electric” components of their associated field strengths
in the frame where @xmath . Note in particular that in the case of pure
Newtonian gravity @xmath ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 There is always a Galilean frame in
which this is true.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

so @xmath represents the Newtonian gravitational force. Of course, there
is no comoving electric field in the frame defined by the drift
velocity: @xmath . The field strengths then have the decomposition

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (179)
     @xmath   @xmath      (180)
     @xmath   @xmath      (181)
     @xmath   @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the @xmath -orthogonal spatial volume form. One may check that @xmath
is @xmath orthogonal in it’s first index, @xmath -orthogonal in it’s
second index, and squares to itself, so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 4.4.2 The Stress-Energy Tensor

Let’s begin by calculating the stress energy tensor @xmath for the
action ( 169 ). We’ll begin with the (non-gravitational) field strengths
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The covariant vorticity @xmath is more
involved due to @xmath ’s dependence on the extended tetrad and we
return to it in a moment. For this we need the variation of the “spatial
volume element” @xmath . Using @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the final step we have plugged in ( 179 ). The same steps also
lead to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

the additional term arising from the fact that @xmath . Similarly

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note the terms resulting from @xmath vanish since we are varying about
torsionless backgrounds.

Since @xmath and @xmath both depend on the drift velocity @xmath , we
must find how this changes under a geometric perturbation @xmath to
continue. From the expression for @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now the variation of the null extended frame @xmath is determined by
@xmath and @xmath , which are solved by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

is the @xmath and @xmath -orthogonal extended projector, which one may
check satisfies @xmath .

Finally, we turn to @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the final step we have noted that @xmath , which may be checked
by noting that both sides of this equation are @xmath and @xmath
orthogonal in their extended indices, and that both sides project to
@xmath upon application of @xmath . From this, we obtain the variation
of the covariant vorticity

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The variations in hand, it is now a straightforward exercise to compute
the stress-energy tensor. Let’s begin with the unimproved mass current,
which is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The unimproved stress-mass is then simply a pressure term, plus
contributions determined by the mass current (here @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

The full stress-energy contains these contributions, plus energy
transport

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the comoving energy current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

We postpone a discussion of the physical content of these formulas until
we pass to the Cauchy stress-mass.

#### 4.4.3 The Cauchy Stress-Mass Tensor

To pass to the Cauchy stress-mass, we need to first calculate the
spin-current @xmath . This is rather easier than finding @xmath , the
only necessary variations being

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The spin current is then @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

It will prove convenient to write this as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the spin density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

In terms of @xmath , the Cauchy stress-mass is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used ( 3.2.1 ) and @xmath , which follows from ( 198 ). An
easy way of computing this is to decompose it into its @xmath -parallel
and @xmath -orthogonal parts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and compute these separately. Explicitly, @xmath and @xmath
. From ( 202 ), the improved mass current is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, the spin contribution to @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We have used the identity @xmath to simplify the final term in the
second line. Moreover we have introduced the shear tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it’s dual

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (207)
  -- -------- -- -------

Perturbing around flat space, it’s coefficient is the Hall viscosity.

#### 4.4.4 Summary

The currents encoded in the action ( 169 ) are given bellow. We see that
the new quantized gravitational coefficients @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath lead to the following effects. @xmath attaches mass to vorticity
and leads to mass transport transverse to the gravitational field.
@xmath attaches mass to curvature in the same manner @xmath attaches
charge. It also leads to a Hall viscosity proportional to vorticity and
transverse response to time dependent metric perturbations encoded in
@xmath . This is all summarized in the formulas below. Though we have
not carried out the computation of @xmath here, it proceeds along lines
entirely similar to those given above.

Let’s begin with the charge current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the expansion. The Cauchy stress-mass is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Cauchy mass current

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the spin density and we see receives contributions not only
from the Wen-Zee coefficient @xmath , but also the “gravitational”
Wen-Zee coefficient @xmath , which leads to a Hall viscosity
contribution proportional to the vorticity and the tying of mass to
curvature.

The full stress-energy on the other hand is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the comoving energy current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath and @xmath are the unimproved stress-mass and mass currents

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (214)
     @xmath   @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

## 5 Non-Relativistic Fluid Dynamics

In this chapter we apply the formalism established in the previous
chapters to non-relativistic fluid dynamics and linear response. As a
phenomenological theory given in a derivative expansion, this is a
particularly easy setting within which to enforce symmetry principles
and indeed, the fluid equations of motion are themselves the Ward
identities of spacetime symmetries. We will review these aspects and
develop the theory of non-relativistic fluids on Bargmann spacetimes in
section ( 5.1 ).

Fluid mechanics is a theory of nearly-thermal systems when fluctuations
occur on length and time scales much larger than any microscopic scales
characterizing it. As such, it is an extremely powerful tool for probing
the near-equilibrium physics of a variety of systems whose microscopic
descriptions are resistant to traditional field-theoretic techniques.
One such system we will be interested in is the fractional quantum Hall
states, which are known to form an incompressible quantum fluid at zero
temperature [ 66 ] .

In section 5.2 , we consider the fluid dynamics of a system constrained
by energetics to lie in the lowest Landau level, allowing us to extract
universal predictions for quantum Hall states at finite temperature with
@xmath , so long as the temperature lies far below the cyclotron gap. We
find that the results are strongly constraining: to first order in a
derivative expansion charge transport is determined entirely by the
equation of state while energy response includes only an independent
thermal conductivity, Righi-Leduc or thermal Hall conductivity, and
magnetization. Many of these constraints follow from consistency of the
fluid description on torsionful backgrounds and so demand the treatment
of chapter 2 to be consistent with Galilean invariance. In section 5.3
we turn to the standard @xmath -dimensional fluid in a perturbing
electromagnetic field. Kubo formulas for all response coefficients are
given in section 5.4 .

### 5.1 Generalities

In this section we discuss the generalities that will be necessary for
our later studies of quantum Hall fluids and standard multi-component
fluids. The general form of the Ward identities on curved torsionful
spacetimes has already been given in section 3.3 , but in section 5.1.3
we rephrase these in terms of the currents measured by comoving fluid
observers. In section 5.1.4 we supply constitutive relations to leading
order in a derivative expansion and obtain the curved space perfect
fluid equations of motion. Technical aspects of fluid frame
transformations are recalled in sections 5.1.5 and 5.1.6 .

The program of fluid dynamics is to describe the fluctuations of
thermodynamic variables in slightly out of equilibrium media. These
variables include the temperature and velocity @xmath as well as a
chemical potential for each conserved charge. For us, there are two such
quantities, the electric charge and mass, whose associated chemical
potentials we will denote @xmath and @xmath . In all we have @xmath
degrees of freedom

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the velocity has been normalized so that @xmath and thus
represents @xmath degrees of freedom. The equilibrium properties of the
system are then completely characterized by an equation of state @xmath
, which expresses the pressure as a function of the state variables. The
entropy, charge, mass, and energy densities are then defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Just out of equilibrium, the thermodynamic variables are allowed to vary
slowly in space and time, where slow is compared to the mean free path
and mean free time, so that local equilibrium is always a good
approximation. The Ward identities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

are then sufficient to serve as equations of motion since they are the
same in number as the thermodynamic variables. We need only constitutive
relations for the currents in terms of these degrees of freedom and
their derivatives. In ( 5.1 ) and for most of this chapter we will
principally restrict our attention to spinless fluids, except for the
quantum Hall fluid which we take to be spin polarized and minimally
coupled to curvature. It would be interesting to generalize our results
beyond this case.

Since we are perturbing away from equilibrium, these constitutive
relations naturally organize themselves in a gradient expansion where
higher derivatives of ( 216 ) take on diminishing importance. To
complete our power counting scheme, one needs also specify the
backgrounds to be perturbed around. In this paper we shall assume a
trivial spacetime background background

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

in equilibrium so that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

are first order in derivatives.

This is not a unique selection and corresponds to a choice of regime in
which we expect our results to be applicable. The power counting for
@xmath will depend on the problem at hand. The quantum Hall fluid is
gapped by a large magnetic field and fluctuations are assumed to be
small enough to not significantly alter the size of the gap. We will
then take the magnetic field to be order zero in derivatives in our
study of the LLL fluid in section 5.2 , but order one in the standard
fluid in section 5.3 .

The constitutive relations so obtained are not in general sensible and
could lead to an on shell decrease in entropy, the canonical example
being that of a negative shear viscosity [ 56 ] . As such we must also
impose the second law of thermodynamics as an additional constraint on
fluid flows, diminishing the freedom present in the gradient expansion
and returning a reduced set of transport coefficients. This procedure is
known as an entropy current analysis and has been carried out in many
systems including @xmath -dimensional relativistic normal fluids [ 67 ]
and @xmath -dimensional relativistic superfluids [ 68 ] . In this thesis
we will work to first order in derivatives. It’s well known that even at
first order, the dynamics is very rich in the parity odd sector when
@xmath and so we shall eventually restrict to two-dimensional fluids.

#### 5.1.1 Comoving Currents

As we have seen, the stress-energy tensor @xmath cannot in general be
separated into it’s constituent currents in a manner that is consistent
with Galilean invariance. Notions of energy, stress, and momentum are
then observer dependent and can be retrieved from knowledge of their
spacetime trajectory as discussed in section 3.1.1 . In the hydrodynamic
setting however, Galilean invariance is broken by the boost invariant
fluid velocity @xmath , which defines a preferred rest frame: the frame
of observers comoving with the fluid.

It will thus prove natural to organize our calculation in terms of the
comoving currents

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

in terms of which the stress-energy and stress-mass tensors decompose as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above we have defined a @xmath orthogonal “inverse” @xmath to
@xmath , with which we have lowered the index on the projector

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Of course, since the stress-mass tensor is symmetric in the spinless
case (equation ( 125 )), the spatial stress is symmetric and the
comoving momentum is simply the @xmath orthogonal part of the mass
current

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that for notational simplicity we have dropped the over-script
@xmath ’s of section 3.1.1 since these are the only currents with which
we shall have to deal with for most of this analysis. One should always
keep in mind however that all of these quantities are as measured in by
comoving observers. To distinguish them from the components of @xmath ,
we will refer to these as the “lab” currents

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.2 Incorporating Torsion

As we have seen, knowing how to covariantly couple to torsion is
necessary for a sensible derivation of the energy current of a given
theory. It will thus prove necessary in any microscopic calculation of
the transport coefficients to be discussed (see section 5.4 for a
collection of Kubo formulas). In our fluid analysis it will however play
a different role.

The key idea, introduced in [ 67 ] , is that the more general a
background a system is placed on, the more constraining the entropy
current analysis is. For example, in this work the authors demonstrate
entropy flow induced by acceleration @xmath sources entropy density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since this term is sign indefinite, one concludes that the coefficient
@xmath must vanish. Thus, even if one is studying fluids in flat
spacetime, considering them on a curved space is a useful theoretical
experiment. Time evolution should still be consistent with the second
law of thermodynamics and imposing this yields additional relations not
apparent in flat space.

We will also get a lot of mileage out this reasoning and further find it
useful to extended the analysis to torsionful spacetimes. Spatial
torsion may be interpreted in the condensed matter setting as a
coarse-grained Burgers vector density and so is necessary in the study
of media with dislocation defects [ 29 ] . However, we will be mainly
concerned with temporal torsion @xmath , since it may be used to mock up
the effect of steady state temperature gradients.

To see why, consider a system in equilibrium subjected to a static but
spatially varying clock form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

and consider the flow induced in the energy current with constitutive
relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath couples to energy density, under a perturbation @xmath ,
energy will flow from higher @xmath to lower @xmath until equilibrium is
regained. This occurs when [ 50 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

We thus see that in thermodynamic equilibrium, non-relativistic fluids
on backgrounds with temporal torsion do not have uniform temperature,
similar to the Tolman-Ehrenfest effect [ 69 ] for fluids in a
gravitational background in general relativity.

Once equilibrium is reached, energy must cease to flow @xmath . ²¹ ²¹ 21
Or at the very least, longitudinal flow vanishes. Persistent currents
proportional to the curl of @xmath (so-called “magnetization” currents)
may remain since they do not lead to a buildup of energy density. This
constrains the constitutive relations so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

a torsional version of the Einstein relation @xmath relating the
longitudinal conductivity and diffusion coefficients @xmath . As
reasoned by Luttinger, even if we cannot turn on @xmath in the lab, this
is an extremely useful relation since it allows us to derive Kubo
formulas for thermal transport since @xmath may be viewed as a
background field perturbing a microscopic system.

This relation and many others will follow from the entropy current
analysis on torsionful spacetimes @xmath , so the additional
complications torsion introduces are worth the effort. We will however
restrict to causal spacetimes @xmath since there is otherwise no
consistent notion of future or past, making the second law of
thermodynamics meaningless (see the concluding paragraph of chapter 1 ).
²² ²² 22 The entropy current analysis may still be carried out formally
in this case. However, we find that no new relations amongst the
physical coefficients are imposed upon doing so since the proliferation
of new terms proportional to @xmath out-paces the number of additional
constraints.

To simplify the analysis, we shall also take spatial torsion to vanish,
though generalization to the fully torsionful case would be an
interesting extension of our work. However, as discussed in the
paragraph below equation 101 , there is no Galilean invariant notion of
spatial torsion once we allow temporal torsion to be nonzero. To settle
this, we agree that space will be torsionless for comoving fluid
observers

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

The full extended torsion is then of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass torsion measured in the comoving frame. As we
have seen, this acts as an external Lorentz force coupling to @xmath .
Including @xmath is natural in the presence of timelike torsion (it must
be nonzero for some observers and generically will be for fluid
observers in particular) and does not really complicate the analysis.
Unfortunately it doesn’t lead to any interesting relations either.

#### 5.1.3 The Navier-Stokes and Work-Energy Equations

In this section we restate the Ward identity for diffeomorphisms in
terms of the comoving currents. Plugging the extended torsion ( 232 )
into stress-energy conservation ( 5.1 ), we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced the shorthand @xmath and @xmath . As we saw in
equation ( 128 ), the spatial components of this identity, obtained by
raising the index with @xmath give the Cauchy equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

which will serve as the Navier-Stokes equation once we provide
constitutive relations.

We saw previously (equation ( 118 )) that the temporal component of the
diffeomorphism Ward identity contains the work-energy equation. We can
obtain the covariant version of this by contracting the Ward identity
with @xmath . In doing so, the following identity is useful

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this equation and mass conservation, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the comoving electric fields for charge and
mass.

To simplify the final term, we note that @xmath , so there is a @xmath
orthogonal tensor @xmath such that @xmath . Contracting this equation
with @xmath we find that @xmath and so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

Plugging this in, one finds the work-energy equation for the comoving
energy current is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have lowered the index on the stress-mass tensor with @xmath .
In summary, in addition to the work done by external fields, the
comoving energy density is dissipated by fluid shear coupling to the
stress-mass tensor. ²³ ²³ 23 That energy is dissipated rather than
sourced will follow from the constitutive relations and upcoming entropy
current analysis.

In summary, we may restate the Ward identities in terms of the comoving
currents as the work-energy equation and Cauchy momentum equation, plus
conservation laws for charge and mass

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.4 Perfect Fluids

These Ward identities serve as dynamical equations once constitutive
relations have been supplied, specifying the currents @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in terms of the thermodynamic degrees of freedom

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

At zeroth order in derivatives, the most general tensors we can
construct using these variables and the Newton-Cartan structure are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath . They
are the thermodynamic charge density, mass density, energy density and
pressure and satisfy the relations ( 217 ).

Feeding these into the Ward identities ( 5.1.3 ), we obtain the perfect
fluid equations of motion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fluid expansion and @xmath the acceleration. In
these equations and those that follow, dotted objects indicate the
material derivative, @xmath . The final equation is simply Newton’s
second law and an obvious covariant generalization of Euler’s equation [
56 ] .

#### 5.1.5 Fluid Frames

To go beyond perfect fluids one needs to expand the currents to first
order in derivatives. The constitutive relations are then the perfect
fluid ones plus @xmath corrections

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the above the, vector corrections are defined to be transverse

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the tensor correction is traceless

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath is of course already transverse since @xmath is). This is
convenient as it separates the first order corrections into irreducible
representations of @xmath .

The decomposition ( 5.1.5 ) is subject to a well known ambiguity
stemming from the need to define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
out of equilibrium. Any such definition is admissible so long as it
reduces to the equilibrium values at order zero and so is subject to a
@xmath parameter @xmath field redefinition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

called a fluid frame transformation (not to be confused with a Galilean
frame transformation). To deal with this ambiguity we may either fix the
frame by imposing extra conditions, or work in a manifestly frame
invariant manner.

Frame transformations are worked out in detail in [ 53 ] (see [ 68 ] for
the relativistic case) and in this section and the next, we refer the
reader to this treatment for the details. For our purposes we only note
that (besides those related to the entropy, which we have saved for the
next section) the complete set of first order frame invariants is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (247)
  -- -------- -- -------

Although we shall usually take @xmath to be a function of temperature
and the chemical potentials, here we have taken @xmath and the partial
derivatives @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined accordingly. Note we
have an additional vector frame invariant @xmath compared to either the
relativistic case or non-relativistic single-component case due to the
independence of the mass and charge currents.

#### 5.1.6 The Canonical Entropy Current

There is an additional frame invariant involving the entropy, which we
treat separately due to it’s importance in the ensuing calculation. This
is the “canonical entropy current”

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -- -------

Intuitively, this is designed to match the combination of currents found
in the equilibrium identity ( 217 ), but it’s true importance stems from
it’s manifest frame invariance. Out of equilibrium the entropy flow will
in general deviate from the canonical part

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course, since @xmath is a frame invariant, @xmath is as well. It’s
divergence is a quadratic form in first order data

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we have performed a decomposition of @xmath into @xmath and @xmath
orthogonal tensors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Since these are all @xmath orthogonal tensors, there is no information
lost in lowering their indices with @xmath , as we have done above and
shall continue to do throughout.

### 5.2 Hydrodynamics on the Lowest Landau Level

In this section we turn to the quantum Hall effect, whose study inspired
much of the initial interest in Newton-Cartan geometry within the
condensed matter literature [ 6 ] . Since its discovery, the fractional
quantum Hall (FQH) effect [ 70 ] has been subjected to intense study and
proven a fruitful playground for new concepts in both condensed matter
and high energy physics. Beyond its quantized Hall conductance, FQH
states exhibit a number of interesting features including anyonic
excitations [ 71 , 72 ] , edge states [ 73 ] , and are prime examples of
topological phases of matter [ 74 ] . Beginning with the Laughlin wave
function [ 66 ] , it has been attacked with numerous approaches
including Chern-Simons field theory [ 75 , 76 ] and the
composite-fermion approach [ 77 ] .

One reason it has proven such fruitful ground for theoretical studies is
that it is a famously difficult problem exhibiting a variety of physics
in different regimes. The integer quantum Hall effect arises from the
Landau level quantization (with gap of order of the cyclotron frequency)
of free electrons combined with Anderson localization [ 78 ] , while the
fractional quantum Hall effect relies on intra-Landau level strong
coupling physics (with gap of order the Coulomb energy). For systems
with temperature on the order of than the Coulomb gap, little can be
said.

However, the zero temperature integer and fractional quantum Hall states
both form an incompressible quantum fluid [ 66 ] . At finite temperature
and slightly out of equilibrium, one might ask what are the dynamics of
this fluid? In this section we will answer this question by
supplementing the formalism introduced in section 5.3 with a lowest
Landau level projection.

The results are applicable whenever the temperature lies far below the
cyclotron gap. We are thus interested in the universal properties of
systems constrained to the lowest Landau level. In this regime, response
is very simple and highly constrained: we can have an equation of state
@xmath , the usual suite of viscosities @xmath , a thermal conductivity
@xmath , magnetization currents @xmath and @xmath for the charge and
energy currents, and a thermal Hall conductivity @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note we also have a mass magnetization current and vorticity induced
pressure tied to the spin density. Here @xmath denotes the spin of the
approximately spin polarized electrons that make up the quantum Hall
fluid. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the traceless shear, expansion and
vorticity of the drift velocity @xmath , and @xmath . For instance, in
the case of flat space and uniform magnetic field, they read

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Finally, we present a set of generalized Středa formulas. We find a
fractional quantum Hall fluid in thermodynamic equilibrium has
persistent mass, electric, and energy currents,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (256)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

of which @xmath may be recognized as the familiar Středa formula of [ 79
] . The remaining formulas generalize this result to persistent currents
driven by non-uniform magnetic fields and a Luttinger potential (here
@xmath ). We note that these Stěda formula do not agree with those given
in [ 51 ] , we believe due to differing factors of the Luttinger
potential. Of course, throughout this section we will be specializing to
the case @xmath .

#### 5.2.1 The LLL Projection

We begin by addressing how to perform the lowest Landau level projection
within the hydrodynamic setting. The idea is to take the massless limit
@xmath , or more precisely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which the temperature and chemical potential are much less than the
Landau level splitting @xmath . Electrons are then overwhelmingly likely
to be found in the lowest Landau level. Unfortunately, this limit is
typically singular due the ground state energy of the lowest Landau
level, which also goes as @xmath .

This is however not the case for electrons whose @xmath -factor is
precisely two. Consider the Schrödinger action with arbitrary @xmath
-factor @xmath . The curved space generalization of this action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

In writing this down we have assumed spinless electrons and specialized
to causal spacetimes @xmath , where we can always choose coordinates in
which @xmath , and parameterized the Luttinger potential as @xmath . We
have also defined a spatial epsilon tensor @xmath whose spatial
components are @xmath .

The matrix @xmath has eigenvalues @xmath and so the value @xmath is
distinguished, for the matrix @xmath is degenerate. In terms of the
zweibein @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

The eigenvectors of @xmath are the chiral basis vectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of which we have the convenient formulas

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Hence the @xmath action may be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

In flat space, @xmath and we see the degeneracy direction corresponds
precisely to electrons in the LLL. Using a Hubbard-Stratonovich
transformation, we write this as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath limit is then manifestly regular and the higher Landau levels
are now completely trivial to integrate out as @xmath and @xmath simply
become Lagrange multipliers enforcing the constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the curved space equation for the LLL wave function. The
many-body problem of electrons confined to the LLL can then be
understood as a system of interacting particles with no kinetic energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -- -------

for which path integration is carried out subject to the holomorphic
constraint ( 264 ).

Of course, the @xmath -factor is generally not equal to 2 (for GaAs, it
is in fact nearly zero: @xmath [ 80 ] ), but we can can consider a
fictitious, placeholder system with @xmath by absorbing the @xmath
-factor term into the electromagnetic vector potential. That is, perform
a redefinition of fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we denote the action ( 258 ) by @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one may simply consider @xmath as the theory of interest. In this
section we will take @xmath so as to render the massless limit finite.

This doesn’t actually do anything physical, the two theories are the
same by construction. One can think of this procedure simply as a
redefinition of currents to separate out the divergent parts. That is,
if @xmath and @xmath are the currents of the original theory, the
currents @xmath and @xmath defined by taking @xmath and @xmath as the
independent variables are related to the physical ones by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (268)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath as usual, which one may derive by varying @xmath . When
@xmath , the primed currents are finite in the massless limit, while the
unprimed currents are not. In what follows we will always work with the
finite @xmath currents and drop the subscripts, translating back to the
physical @xmath -factor when all is said and done. Note this procedure
is unique to single constituent fluids, which we will be implicitly
assuming throughout. ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 Also note we have not included a @xmath
-factor for @xmath . This may be done in a Galilean invariant manner,
but takes some care and is not particularly needed here.

To this point, we have also assumed spinless electrons, while in reality
electrons in quantum Hall samples are nearly spin polarized. If we
assume only minimal coupling to curvature

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

(the physical value being @xmath ), then we may similarly perform a
redefinition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

to change the spin from @xmath to @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

For convenience we will use this freedom to set @xmath throughout this
section. This alters the definition of the spin current in the manner
@xmath . Using the improvement formula ( 3.2.1 ) we then find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the charge and energy currents are not altered. Performing this
redefinition, we may assume a vanishing spin current throughout, which
greatly simplifies the fluid analysis. Note that while taking @xmath is
simply a matter of convenience, the choice @xmath is essential to our
logic.

#### 5.2.2 The LLL Fluid

Returning to the hydrodynamic regime, we may then perform the lowest
Landau level limit by taking @xmath , in which case the mass current
vanishes ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 Of course, it is the unimproved mass current @xmath
that vanishes, but these are the same since we have set @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -- -------

The hydrodynamic equations of motion ( 5.1.3 ) for the comoving currents
then reduce to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -- -------

We must now specify constitutive relations for the currents in terms of
background fields and the hydrodynamic degrees of freedom ( 240 ).
However, in the massless limit we lose three of these. The mass chemical
potential @xmath drops out since there is no longer a conserved mass.
Furthermore, note that the stress-mass tensor reduces to simply the
stress tensor @xmath , which only has spatial components. A more radical
consequence of the massless limit is then that stress-mass conservation,
the continuum analog of Newton’s second law, loses it’s time derivatives
and becomes a force-free constraint. That is, since the fluid is
massless it is obliged to flow in a manner such that the applied and
internal forces exactly cancel. We may use this constraint to eliminate
any two dynamical degrees of freedom, which we will take to be the fluid
velocity @xmath .

#### 5.2.3 Constitutive Relations

Having done so, the currents are to be specified in terms of background
fields, the temperature, and the charge chemical potential, which we
will denote simply as @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We will do so about equilibrium in flat spacetime with a large constant
magnetic field. That is, constitutive relations are organized into a
derivative expansion in which

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

are specified to be order @xmath and their derivatives order @xmath ,
etc. Note in particular the magnetic field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -- -------

is large and nowhere vanishing.

As before, to zeroth order we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where these are arbitrary functions of our zeroth order scalars @xmath ,
and @xmath , so that in particular

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the magnetization density. Importantly, the pressure
that appears in the stress tensor is not the thermodynamic pressure
@xmath but the so-called internal pressure @xmath . To see this, note
that the variation of the grand canonical partition function @xmath
picks up a term from the variation of @xmath with respect to the metric.
In what follows, the analysis is simplified if we exchange @xmath for
@xmath and take all functions of thermodynamic variables to be functions
of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

Now, to zeroth order the equations of motion then read simply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we use to solve for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

which one may check is the unique zero eigenvector of @xmath . That is,
unsurprisingly, the LLL projection constrains the fluid to move at the
drift velocity @xmath in equilibrium. Note that if we define @xmath , we
have the useful identities

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which we will often use in computations that follow.

Let’s continue our expansion. Organized into representations of @xmath ,
the complete set of first order data is

                               Independent Data
  ---------------------------- ------------------
  Scalar                       @xmath
  Vector                       @xmath
  Traceless Symmetric Tensor   @xmath .

The material derivative of all three thermodynamic variables are not
included since one may always be eliminated by the constraint

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the magnetic field is viewed as a function @xmath . This follows
from the Bianchi identity @xmath . Note we have used the decomposition (
251 ) of @xmath , which we repeat here

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course, the comoving electric field @xmath is zero by definition and
does not appear.

Not all of this data is independent on shell and we may choose to
eliminate some in favor of the others by solving the equations of
motion. In our case, there are two scalar equations: the continuity
equation and the work-energy equation. We use these to eliminate the
material derivatives of @xmath and @xmath , as indicated by parentheses.

We have not included the acceleration and vorticity amongst the allowed
data since these necessarily involve the mass vector potential @xmath .
We can show this quite easily in the simple case of a flat metric and
clock form, in which case @xmath and @xmath are the only independent
non-zero Christoffel components. Then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first equation exhibits the expected appearance of the gravitational
potential in the acceleration which is the hallmark of Newton-Cartan
geometry, while the appearance of @xmath in the vorticity encodes the
Coriolis effect. In either case, a massless, spinless theory cannot
couple to @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath are off limits.

Finally, a few words are due on the fluid frame invariants ( 5.1.5 )
before we expand them in first order data. Typically, under a frame
transformations, the transverse corrections @xmath , @xmath vary as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

(see section 4.2 of [ 53 ] ). However, since in our case the fluid
velocity is no longer a dynamical variable but rather a constrained
function of background fields, there is no freedom to redefine it. Hence
@xmath and @xmath are themselves frame invariant. Indeed, since the mass
current vanishes, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now let’s expand the frame invariants in our data

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (288)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

To save on notation, we have used a tilde to denote oddness under
parity.

#### 5.2.4 Force-Free Flows

We first turn to consistency with the force-free constraint. As
mentioned previously, we may use the force balance constraint to solve
for the charge current @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (289)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

All charge transport coefficients are thus determined by the equation of
state. Also note that all longitudinal responses are zero. This is
because the Lorentz force must cancel forces from pressure gradients and
the magnetic field always produces a force perpendicular to the current.
Hence the current must be perpendicular to pressure gradients.

#### 5.2.5 Entropy Current Analysis

The constitutive relations ( 5.2.3 ) and ( 5.2.4 ) are the most general
possible that are consistent with the equations of motion and
constraint. However, it is still possible to generate flows that violate
the second law of thermodynamics. For example, it is well known that a
negative shear viscosity allows one to remove entropy from an isolated
system and so we should have @xmath [ 56 ] . To derive all such
restrictions, we perform an entropy current analysis along the lines of
[ 67 ] . This involves imposing the second law of thermodynamics
locally. For non-negative entropy production between all spatial slices,
we must have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

We begin by considering the terms in @xmath that involve genuine second
order data. That is, terms that are not simply products and contractions
of the first-order data given above. Since the divergence of the
canonical entropy current is a quadratic form in first order data (see
250 ), this gives merely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the Newton-Cartan identities @xmath and @xmath (which
follow from the causality of spacetime and the Bianchi identity @xmath
respectively). Since each term is sign indefinite and independent, these
coefficients must all vanish for entropy production to be strictly
non-negative.

The remaining first order data is then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that by @xmath we mean the partial derivative with respect to the
chemical potential, not a spacetime derivative. For clarity we will
always use @xmath for the spacetime derivative.

The @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath terms need not be separately
constrained. We obtain a less stringent condition by setting @xmath , in
which case they arrange into a perfect square

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

We note in passing that in thermal equilibrium there can be no entropy
production. This implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

or @xmath in coordinates where @xmath . The physics of this was
discussed below equation ( 227 ). Heat will tend to flow from regions of
higher @xmath to lower @xmath . Equilibrium is reached once the
temperature profile is such that ( 294 ) is satisfied. That is, we have
proven ( 229 ) and the torsional Einstein relation.

From this we immediately obtain the expected signs of the parity even
viscosities and thermal conductivity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -- -------

Meanwhile the remaining terms place new restrictions on the energy and
entropy coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the final set of constraints is obtained only by considering
fluids on backgrounds with temporal torsion @xmath , or equivalently, a
nontrivial Luttinger potential.

We seek the most general solution to these constraints. Begin by
eliminating the entropy coefficients by taking the curl of the third
equation and plugging in the second

  -- -- -- -------
           (297)
  -- -- -- -------

Since the left hand side is the curl of a vector, the right hand side is
divergenceless and it appears as if we might obtain another constraint.
However one may check that this is automatically satisfied by virtue of
the constraints ( 5.2.4 ) and the thermodynamic identities ( 279 ).

We may simplify the partial differential equations ( 297 ) by a
substitution that isolates the energy response’s dependence on the
equation of state and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
                 (298)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is curl free, it must be the gradient of some function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -- -------

The transverse energy response is then determined by the equation of
state and the two free functions @xmath and @xmath . In what follows,
the formulas will be significantly simplified by the redefinition of
coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In summary, the most general set of constitutive relations compatible
with equations of motion and thermodynamics is given by an equation of
state @xmath , three parity even coefficients @xmath and three parity
odd coefficients @xmath and @xmath , all of which are arbitrary
functions of the thermodynamic variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As we shall see, these are the bulk viscosity, shear viscosity, and
thermal conductivity, which indeed should carry the signs given above.

#### 5.2.6 Physical Interpretation

This completes the entropy current analysis, so let’s begin to untangle
what these results mean physically. To make them clearer, lets select a
fluid frame (the so-called Landau frame) where @xmath . That is, we are
defining temperature and chemical potential out of equilibrium so that
physical charge and energy density match their local thermodynamic
values: @xmath and @xmath . We then have @xmath and the currents are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We thus see that @xmath , and @xmath are the bulk, shear, and Hall
viscosities respectively, @xmath is a thermal Hall coefficient, and
@xmath an energy magnetization.

The primes are to remind us that these currents are defined at @xmath
and @xmath , where the lowest Landau level limit is regular. To obtain
the true currents we need to transform back to the physical values of
the spin and @xmath -factor using ( 5.2.1 ) and ( 272 ). To do so we
first note that in passing back to the physical electromagnetic field
@xmath we find the drift velocity becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -- -------

The magnetic field is also altered to @xmath , but this does not alter
our formulas to the order in derivatives that we are working. The
magnetic field dependent shift to @xmath also alters the chemical
potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, the physical currents are given by ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 In this
computation, one must also remember that these currents are the comoving
ones measured relative to @xmath , not @xmath . For instance @xmath
while @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Note that in passing to the physical spin @xmath , we
pick up a momentum current that is pure magnetization and tied to the
variation in the spin density @xmath . Using these formulas, we find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (308)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here primed objects are evaluated at the primed chemical potential, say
@xmath . Those unprimed coefficients not listed in ( 5.2.6 ) are
trivially related to their primed counterparts in the manner @xmath .

The physics of this should be fairly clear: the shift to the energy
density corresponds to the energy cost of a magnetic moment in a
magnetic field, the shift to @xmath simply keeps track of the increased
magnetic moment assigned to each particle, while the shift to the Hall
viscosity accounts for our underestimation of the spin density of the
liquid. In all, the form of the constitutive relations ( 5.2.6 ) does
not change except for the mass magnetization current that is introduced
in the presence of a varying spin density @xmath and the vorticity
induced pressure @xmath , also fixed to the spin density of the liquid.
Of course, one will have to perform the shift ( 5.2.6 ) in a
hypothetical calculation of the coefficients in the lowest Landau level
limit @xmath .

Finally, recall that we have been working with the currents measured by
observers moving with the drift velocity @xmath . The lab currents (the
components of @xmath ) must be obtained from ( 3.1.1 ). However, in the
massless limit most of the modifications drop out and we find to first
order in derivatives ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 Note that in passing to @xmath one
introduces terms proportional to the unimproved mass current @xmath
since one should not improve the energy current. Hence these terms are
zero.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.2.7 Středa Formulas

One notable feature of these formulas is the currents that persist in
thermal equilibrium. We now turn to these, deriving a set of Středa-like
formulas for two-dimensional fluids. Throughout we shall consider flat
space @xmath with a perturbing Luttinger potential @xmath , @xmath .
First note that in thermal equilibrium we have @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath is the external force exerted by the potential @xmath . The
equilibrium currents are then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expressing these in terms of the externally applied fields @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Defining equilibrium responses by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and using some Maxwell relations, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have set @xmath in these formulas. The first is the well-known
Středa formula [ 79 ] . The following two are Středa-like formulas for
currents induced by inhomogeneities in @xmath and an external Luttinger
potential.

Similarly working with the energy current

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

we find that all equilibrium currents are determined by the
magnetization @xmath and energy magnetization @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (315)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

A similar collection of Středa formulas was presented in [ 51 ] ,
however they do not agree with ours due to a difference in the Luttinger
potential factors.

Finally, there are also equilibrium persistent mass currents due to the
spin of the electron. By the same reasoning as above, we find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 5.3 Fluids in @xmath Dimensions

In this section we carry out the same analysis but for standard @xmath
-dimensional multi-constituent fluids in a perturbing external
electromagnetic field. In the relativistic case, @xmath -dimensional
fluids are known to exhibit a rich collection of transport coefficients
in the parity odd sector [ 67 ] and we find the same here.

In the parity even sector, the entropy current analysis returns four
sign semidefinite functions of @xmath , and @xmath : a bulk viscosity,
shear viscosity, conductivity, and thermal conductivity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

as well as an unconstrained transverse thermo-electric coefficient

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parity odd sector on the other hand admits six arbitrary
coefficients, a Hall viscosity, Hall conductivity, thermal Hall
conductivity, thermo-electric Hall coefficient, magnetization and energy
magnetization

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The magnetization determines the magnetic field induced pressure via the
coefficient

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the pressure as a function of energy, charge and mass
density. Kubo formulas for these coefficients are presented in section
5.4 .

In flat backgrounds with no Luttinger potential the constitutive
relations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass current, @xmath the charge current, @xmath the
energy current and @xmath the spatial stress in the lab frame, @xmath is
the fluid velocity and the fluid shear @xmath , expansion @xmath , and
vorticity @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In summarizing these results we have made the choice of fluid frame (
348 ).

#### 5.3.1 Constitutive Relations

The analysis proceeds much along the lines of the previous section, but
a few words are due on the setup before we proceed. We are considering
slightly out of equilibrium fluids to first order in a derivative
expansion about flat spacetime and zero electromagnetic field. That is,
the extended vielbein is @xmath plus first order perturbations and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

are all counted as first order in derivatives.

We are considering fluids with independently conserved mass and charge
and so have five dynamical degrees of freedom, the temperature, a
chemical potential for mass and charge each, and the fluid velocity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the velocity has been normalized so that @xmath . The equilibrium
properties of the system are then completely characterized by an
equation of state such as @xmath , which expresses the pressure as a
function of the state variables. The thermodynamic entropy, charge,
mass, and energy densities are then defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The formulas will prove somewhat simpler if we instead take our
independent variables to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In terms of @xmath and @xmath , the thermodynamic identities read

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now consider the available first order data

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where recall we have defined @xmath . Now let’s separate this data into
irreducible representations of @xmath .

                               Data
  ---------------------------- --------
  Scalar                       @xmath
                               @xmath
  Vector                       @xmath
                               @xmath
  Symmetric Traceless Tensor   @xmath

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (330)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Recall that by @xmath we mean the “spatial volume element” @xmath ,
while @xmath , both of which are boost invariant, though the lowered
index version is defined with respect to the comoving frame.

In the above we have also introduced the form @xmath . This is a boost
invariant version of the Newtonian gravitational 3-potential. In
components it reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -- -------

and is simply @xmath measured in the comoving frame. The mass torsion
@xmath is in fact completely determined by @xmath and the data in the
tensor @xmath . To see this, use @xmath and equations ( 237 ) and ( 251
) with @xmath . One then finds

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We have chosen to use @xmath as part of our independent data rather than
@xmath . Since @xmath satisfies the Bianchi identity @xmath , we will
find below that this is the easier object to work with.

Not all this data is independent on shell. We may thus use the
Navier-Stokes equation to eliminate one vector degree of freedom and one
scalar each for mass conservation, charge conservation and the
work-energy equation. The eliminated data is indicated by parentheses in
the above table.

Finally, the most general first-order constitutive relations for the
frame invariants consistent with spacetime symmetries are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (333)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this we have defined the “dual” operation

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

on vectors and symmetric two tensors. It has the properties

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.3.2 Entropy Current Analysis

Now let’s move on to determining those constraints that result from
imposing the second law of thermodynamics

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -- -------

Start by considering the genuine second order data in the entropy
production, that is, terms that are not products of first order data

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used the Bianchi identities @xmath , which imply

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We conclude that all the coefficients listed above must vanish and so
@xmath only has contributions from the remaining parity odd part

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The rest of the divergence of @xmath is then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is supplemented by the canonical entropy production @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (340)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the above we have made the identifications @xmath and @xmath so that
the entropy production due to electrical and thermal conductivity
factors into a perfect square. ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 What one should do is demand
that the quadratic form defined by these transport coefficients be
degenerate and positive semidefinite (degenerate so that that
equilibrium solutions exist in non-zero background fields). This
immediately gives these identities.

Demanding the second law then requires

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -- -------

To untangle the differential constraints, begin by defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These then read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
                 (343)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to several consistency relations on the four functions ( 342
)

  -- -- -- -------
           (344)
  -- -- -- -------

The first comes from comparing the final component of the second
equation to the first component of the third while the second follows
from comparing the final component of the first equation to the second
of the third. The final condition results from combining the second
component of the first equation, the first component of the second, and
the final component of the third. The vector @xmath is then curl free as
so must be the gradient of some function @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.3.3 Summary of Results

This solves the full set of restrictions imposed by the second law.
Before summarizing results, the following redefinition of transport
coefficients will simplify the final answer

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

after which frame invariants are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives the set of response coefficients listed at the beginning of
this section.

To get a feel for these results, it’s helpful to fix a fluid frame and
write them for the non-covariant currents defined in ( 77 ). We choose
our frame so the physical mass, charge and energy correspond with the
thermodynamic ones and the velocity is that of the mass current

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The frame invariants @xmath and @xmath are then simply the first-order
deviations @xmath and @xmath . In components, the currents are then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this and what follows @xmath is defined to be the electric field in
the lab frame so that the comoving electric field used earlier is ²⁹ ²⁹
29 We hope the reader will forgive the notational dissonance.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are the curved space quantities defined in ( 251 ) .
Explicitly, these are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative on a spatial slice and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 5.4 Kubo Formulas

In this section we collect the relevant Kubo formulas for calculating
the response coefficients found in the previous two sections. They are
stated in terms of the retarded correlators

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (353)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and are to be evaluated on the trivial spacetime background @xmath (and
in the LLL case in a constant background magnetic field). We will denote
their Fourier transforms by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for small, positive @xmath .

#### 5.4.1 LLL Fluid

There are a very small number of coefficients available in the lowest
Landau level theory. Let’s begin with the viscosities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (355)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced the projectors

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (356)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the inverse compressibility at fixed chemical potential
and field strength @xmath (not fixed @xmath ). To derive these we have
used

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

under a variation @xmath . We recommend [ 4 ] for a careful discussion
of these Kubo formulas.

There is also an energy magnetization

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (358)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the thermal conductivities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -- -------

which one may obtain by noting that @xmath under a variation of the
clock form.

#### 5.4.2 Standard Fluid

For the standard, parity braking, @xmath -dimensional fluid, the
transport coefficients we have found are for the most part quite
familiar and have been subjected to extensive study in the literature
and calculated for a number of systems.

First of all, we again have the viscosities ( 5.4.1 ) but with @xmath .
The equations for the conductivity and thermoelectric conductivities are
prototypical examples and first found in [ 81 , 82 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Kubo formulas for the thermal conductivities were first computed in the
classic work [ 50 ] , where the Luttinger potential was introduced. We
find them to be

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (361)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The attentive reader may have noted that the the thermoelectric and
thermal Hall conductivities differ from the parity odd response to the
chemical and Luttinger potentials by magnetizations @xmath and @xmath
respectively, unlike the standard formulas found in [ 82 , 50 ] . This
is because these works assumed vanishing equilibrium currents, as
pointed out in the footnote below equation (4.10) of [ 82 ] . In
general, pure curl persistent equilibrium currents may arise, and in
this case the proper relationship is that given above.

The Kubo formulas for @xmath and @xmath are completed by expressions for
the magnetizations

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (362)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

## Appendix A A Formal Construction

In this appendix we motivate the definition of a Bargmann geometry,
given in chapter 2 , via a formal symmetry breaking procedure. Since
this procedure has been used to motivate previous attempts to define
non-relativistic geometries that are not equivalent to our own, we feel
an appendix dedicated to this topic may be of some interest.
Mathematical preliminaries are established in section A.1 and the
analysis is performed in section A.2 , which concludes with a comparison
to previous attempts.

### a.1 The Bargmann Group

The Bargmann group is the non-relativistic analogue of the Poincaré
group, including time and space translations in addition to the Galilean
group @xmath . It can be concretely realized by it’s action on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (363)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, this symmetry is realized projectively for massive fields as
recollected in section 1.2 . This is similar to the case of spinning
fields in the pseudo-Riemannian case, but there is one key difference.
For spinor representations, one can pass to the universal cover of of
the gauge group, which is then linearly realized. One cannot do this in
our case since realizing the projective representation ( 20 ) as a true
representation of some group alters the local structure: boosts and
translations commute to a phase factor. That is, we must pass to the
central extension of the Bargmann group [ 83 ] .

The centrally extended Bargmann group, which we shall simply refer to
simply as the Bargmann group @xmath from now on, may be realized by it’s
action on @xmath and now includes translations along the internal circle
in addition to spacetime translations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (364)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . It should be clear from ( 364 ) that spacetime
translations plus @xmath phase rotations form a normal subgroup of
@xmath , which has the semidirect product decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (365)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath indicates that @xmath acts on @xmath in the extended
representation. Many of the novel features of the extended vielbein
formalism follow from the need to pass to the centrally extended
Bargmann group. In section A.2 we shall find the Newtonian gravitational
potential will arise as a gauge field @xmath for translations along the
@xmath factor and it’s collection into the extended representation along
with the spacetime vielbein @xmath is dictated by ( 365 ).

In it’s standard basis, the Lie algebra of the Bargmann group is ³⁰ ³⁰
30 Our conventions are that a finite rotation is executed by @xmath , a
boost by @xmath , time translations by @xmath , space translations by
@xmath , and @xmath rotations by @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are rotation generators, @xmath are boosts, @xmath spatial
translations, @xmath temporal translations, and @xmath is the mass
operator that performs @xmath rotations.

We shall find it convenient to restate these commutation relations in a
manner that makes their transformation under the Galilean group
manifest. We can do this by collecting generators together in the
following way

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Then ( A.1 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

This is a sensible definition since these objects do in fact transform
as indicated under the adjoint action of @xmath . An arbitrary Galilean
group element is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (369)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is totally antisymmetric. We may then calculate how @xmath
and @xmath transform using the Hausdorff formula and find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (370)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are simply the vector and extended
representations of the Galilean group used in the previous sections

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (371)
  -- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Bargmann Symmetry Breaking

In this section we use a formal symmetry breaking procedure to generate
Galilean invariant geometry beginning with the Bargmann group. It is a
purely formal construction, one does not in actuality have a physical
Bargmann bundle in the real world, but it is a quick and systematic way
to generate consistent transformation laws and has been used by several
authors in the past to motivate constructions of Galilean invariant
geometry, so we feel it is worth taking the time to present in some
detail. Our approach differs from from these in a few key respects which
we will outline at the end of the section.

In this approach, one considers a group @xmath and a connection one-form
@xmath valued in the Lie algebra @xmath of @xmath . Under local
transformations @xmath , the @xmath -connection transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is interpreted as the local symmetry group of some physical
system. We imagine breaking it to a subgroup @xmath and seek to write
down locally @xmath invariant actions.

Now suppose we can decompose the connection into a sum of broken and
unbroken generators @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (373)
  -- -- -- -------

such that ³¹ ³¹ 31 This is in fact automatic for compact semisimple
@xmath , but is not guaranteed in the case of interest @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (374)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this is the case, then these are good objects with which to construct
invariant actions since the broken and unbroken parts of the connection
transform under @xmath covariantly and as an @xmath -connection
respectively

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (375)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

One may now easily construct gauge invariant actions by using @xmath
-covariant derivatives and the field strength

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

As an example, let’s perform this procedure on the Poincaré group,
breaking it to the Lorentz group. In this case @xmath is the Poincaré
algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -- -------

which decomposes as @xmath , where @xmath is the closed subalgebra of
translations. Due to the semidirect product structure @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the vector representation, the condition ( 374 ) is
automatically satisfied. The @xmath valued form then naturally breaks up
into a translation part and a Lorentz part

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -- -------

By virtue of the transformations @xmath , @xmath , we find that the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath then transform as indicated

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The Poincaré curvature is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (380)
  -- -------- -- -------

exactly reproducing the geometrical structure of torsionful relativistic
spacetimes. We would like to emphasize however that this is a purely
formal procedure used to generate a set of consistent transformation
laws and define the geometry, not a derivation of the kinematics of
general relativity since there is no physical Poincaré bundle. ³² ³² 32
In the language of the coset construction, there are no Nambu-Goldstone
bosons that @xmath and @xmath are secretly functions of and there are no
@xmath transformations we are trying to realize nonlinearly.

This in mind, let’s take @xmath to be the centrally extended Bargmann
group and break it to a subgroup @xmath . Since we seek geometries with
Galilean symmetry, @xmath must at least include the Galilean group. We
must also be careful to satisfy the condition ( 374 ), which is
automatic for compact semisimple @xmath but not for us. However, since
the centrally extended Bargmann group has semidirect product structure
@xmath , we can guarantee that this is satisfied by taking the broken
generators to include both spacetime translations @xmath and the mass
generator @xmath to be in the broken subalgebra, which as we have
already noted, transform among each other in the extended representation
@xmath . If we did not include @xmath , the commutation relation @xmath
would violate the consistency of our procedure.

We then have @xmath , @xmath , while @xmath is the commutative algebra
of translations and @xmath rotations. In the standard basis ( A.1 ), (
367 ) for the Bargmann algebra this reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (381)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The transformation rules ( 375 ) along with ( 370 )
immediately imply that @xmath and @xmath transform as their index
placement suggests. That is, under @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (382)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

To obtain the Galilean spin connection considered previously, we merely
need raise the first index on @xmath and the result transforms as
expected

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (383)
  -- -------- -- -------

That data in @xmath and @xmath is however equivalent. Similarly, the
field strength contains the torsion and curvature tensors

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (384)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

The coset construction thus precisely reproduces the geometry given in
section 2.2 .

Finally, let’s take a moment for comparison with previous applications
of this construction. To our knowledge it was first applied in [ 84 ] ,
but with a different symmetry breaking pattern in which @xmath and
boosts are broken. This breaking pattern is consistent with ( 374 ) and
so yields sensible results, but as noted in appendix B of [ 40 ] , the
geometry is rather applicable to the case of broken Galilean symmetry.
The resulting data includes an invariant vector field @xmath and thus a
preferred family of observers from the outset and a number of the
results of Galilean invariance, such as the equality of the inertial and
gravitational masses, are violated. The analysis given in [ 40 ] then
proceeds using the same breaking pattern as given above and arrives at
the same results we have, but the author discards the mass torsion
@xmath , which we have seen above breaks Galilean invariance on
torsionful spacetimes and so results in a non-invariant connection. This
approach has also been used to gauge the Schödinger algebra as in [ 35 ]
, though in this application the authors then impose various constraints
on the curvature and torsion that we have left unfixed. Very recently,
the authors of [ 85 ] performed the above analysis including dilations,
and their results indeed reduce to ( 381 ) when dilations are discarded.

## Appendix B Symmetries of the Riemann Tensor

In the main text, we required the symmetries of the Newton-Cartan
Riemann tensor to derive equation ( 128 ). These identities involve a
few subtleties not present in the pseudo-Riemannian case, so we collect
their derivations here. Since we are interested in the Ward identities
on unrestricted Bargmann geometries, we will present these symmetries on
spacetimes with general extended torsion @xmath . They are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (385)
     @xmath      (386)
     @xmath      (387)
     @xmath      (388)
  -- -------- -- -------

The derivation of ( 128 ) requires only the first three of these
identities, but we include the Bianchi identity for completeness.
Contracting equation ( 386 ) with @xmath , we also find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first identity follows trivially from the definition of @xmath while
the derivations of ( 386 ) and ( 388 ) from

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

are identical to the pseudo-Riemannian case. The only identity that
requires some care is ( 387 ), which is most easily stated when valued
in the extended representation. By @xmath we mean the curvature
two-form, valued in the extended representation of @xmath , with
spacetime indices pulled back to the extended representation using the
Galilean invariant projector

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (391)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since all indices in equation ( 387 ) are @xmath orthogonal, it is
simply the pullback of an equation valued in the covector representation
of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (392)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath and defined @xmath by @xmath . However, the
proof of this identity is most naturally carried out in it’s extended
form.

One should take care here, since @xmath is not the exterior derivative
of the (in general Galilean non-covariant) two-form @xmath . In
components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (393)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the exterior derivative of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (394)
  -- -------- -- -------

They are the same if and only if the temporal torsion vanishes, in which
case we also have @xmath and @xmath is indeed covariant. The notation
@xmath is still a useful one though since it’s index raises to @xmath ,
which is truly the exterior derivative of the two-form @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (395)
  -- -------- -- -------

as one may explicitly check in components.

To prove ( 387 ) we begin with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (396)
  -- -------- -- -------

which written in tensor notation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (397)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now let’s pull this back to an equation involving only extended indices
using @xmath . One may check by an explicit computation in components
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (398)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . ³³ ³³ 33 One can check by hand that @xmath indeed
transforms covariantly as indicated. Since @xmath , the second term
drops out and we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (399)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is simply the extended index version of ( 386 ), which one can
obtain from here by noting that both sides are @xmath orthogonal in all
their indices. ( 387 ) then follows exactly as in the pseudo-Riemannian
case by repeated applications of this equation along with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (400)
  -- -------- -- -------
