# 1 Introduction

Cyclic codes form an important class of linear codes having a rich
algebraic structure. Their algebraic properties enable one to
effectively detect or correct errors using linear shift registers.
Self-dual, self-orthogonal and complementary-dual codes constitute three
important classes of cyclic codes, which have been studied and
enumerated by Conway et al. [ 2 ] , Huffman [ 10 ] - [ 11 ] , Jia et al.
[ 12 ] and Pless and Sloane [ 15 ] . Linear codes are further
generalized to additive codes, which have recently attracted a lot of
attention due to their connection with quantum error-correcting codes.

Calderbank et al. [ 1 ] introduced and studied additive codes of length
@xmath over the finite field @xmath They further studied their dual
codes with respect to the trace inner product on @xmath In the same
work, they related the problem of finding quantum error-correcting codes
with that of finding self-orthogonal additive codes over @xmath Huffman
[ 7 ] and [ 8 ] provided a canonical form decomposition of cyclic
additive codes over @xmath Using this decomposition, he further studied
and enumerated these codes. Besides this, he obtained the number of
self-orthogonal and self-dual cyclic additive codes of length @xmath
over @xmath with respect to the trace inner product on @xmath In order
to further explore the properties of cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath
-codes, Huffman [ 9 ] generalized the theory developed in [ 7 ] and
viewed cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath as @xmath
-submodules of the quotient ring @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is an
integer. He also determined the number of cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath
-codes of length @xmath and studied their dual codes with respect to the
ordinary and Hermitian trace bilinear forms on @xmath In addition to
this, he determined bases of all the self-orthogonal and self-dual
cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes with respect to these two bilinear
forms on @xmath Furthermore, for any integer @xmath he enumerated all
the self-dual and self-orthogonal cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of
length @xmath with respect to these two bilinear forms. In a recent work
[ 16 ] , we introduced and studied a new trace bilinear form, denoted by
@xmath on @xmath for any integer @xmath satisfying @xmath where @xmath
is the characteristic of the finite field @xmath We also observed that
the @xmath bilinear form on @xmath coincides with the trace inner
product considered by Calderbank et al. [ 1 ] when @xmath and Hermitian
trace inner product considered by Ezerman et al. [ 5 ] when @xmath is
even and @xmath which are well-studied inner products in coding theory.
Further, by placing the bilinear form @xmath on @xmath we enumerated all
the self-orthogonal and self-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of
length @xmath provided @xmath Besides this, we explicitly determined
bases of all the complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes
of length @xmath with respect to @xmath ordinary and Hermitian trace
bilinear forms on @xmath and enumerated these three classes of codes,
where @xmath

The main goal of this paper is to enumerate all the complementary-dual
cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath with respect to
@xmath , ordinary and Hermitian trace bilinear forms on @xmath where
@xmath is a prime power, @xmath is a positive integer coprime to @xmath
and @xmath is an integer. Although our enumeration technique is based
upon the theory of cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes developed by
Huffman [ 7 ] , it is quite different from the technique employed by
Huffman [ 7 ] in the enumeration of self-orthogonal and self-dual cyclic
@xmath -linear @xmath -codes.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 , we state some
preliminaries that are needed to derive our main result. In Section 3 ,
we determine the number of complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear
@xmath -codes of length @xmath with respect to @xmath ordinary and
Hermitian trace bilinear forms on @xmath where @xmath is a prime power,
@xmath is a positive integer with @xmath and @xmath is an integer
(Theorem 3.1 ).

## 2 Some preliminaries

In this section, we will state some basic definitions and results that
are needed to derive our main result.

Throughout this paper, let @xmath be a power of the prime @xmath @xmath
denote the finite field with @xmath elements, @xmath be a positive
integer coprime to @xmath and @xmath be an integer. Let @xmath and
@xmath denote the quotient rings @xmath and @xmath respectively, where
@xmath is an indeterminate over @xmath and over any extension field of
@xmath As @xmath by Maschke’s Theorem, both the rings @xmath and @xmath
are semi-simple, and hence can be written as direct sums of minimal
ideals. More explicitly, if @xmath is a complete set of representatives
of @xmath -cyclotomic cosets modulo @xmath then @xmath is the
factorization of @xmath into monic irreducible polynomials over @xmath
with @xmath for @xmath where @xmath is the @xmath -cyclotomic coset
modulo @xmath containing the integer @xmath and @xmath is a primitive
@xmath th root of unity over @xmath Therefore for @xmath if @xmath is
the (minimal) ideal of @xmath generated by the polynomial @xmath then it
is easy to see that @xmath where @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath as the cardinality of @xmath Next to write @xmath as a direct sum
of minimal ideals, we further factorize the polynomials @xmath into
monic irreducible polynomials over @xmath To do this, by Lemma 1 of
Huffman [ 9 ] , we see that for @xmath @xmath with @xmath which led to
the following factorization of @xmath over @xmath : @xmath where @xmath
for @xmath Therefore, if for each @xmath and @xmath @xmath is the
(minimal) ideal of @xmath generated by @xmath then one can show that
@xmath where @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath with @xmath Further, it is
easy to see that @xmath is a vector space of dimension @xmath over
@xmath for @xmath

In order to study the containment @xmath Huffman [ 9 ] defined ring
automorphisms @xmath as @xmath for any integer @xmath where @xmath are
integers satisfying @xmath @xmath and @xmath When @xmath by Lemma 2 of
Huffman [ 9 ] , we see that @xmath permutes minimal ideals @xmath ’s of
the ring @xmath It is easy to see that for every @xmath there exists a
unique integer @xmath satisfying @xmath This gives rise to a permutation
@xmath of the set @xmath defined by @xmath for @xmath Note that @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath That is, @xmath is either the identity permutation
or is a product of transpositions. Note that when @xmath is even, there
exists an integer @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath as @xmath is odd.
From this, we see that @xmath which implies that @xmath

Now an @xmath -linear @xmath -code @xmath of length @xmath is defined as
an @xmath -linear subspace of @xmath Further, the code @xmath is said to
be cyclic if @xmath implies that @xmath Throughout this paper, we shall
identify each vector @xmath with the representative @xmath of the coset
@xmath and perform addition and multiplication of its representatives
modulo @xmath Under this identification, one can easily observe that the
cyclic shift @xmath of @xmath is identified with @xmath In view of this,
every cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -code of length @xmath can be viewed
as an @xmath -submodule of @xmath Huffman [ 9 ] studied dual codes of
cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath with respect to
ordinary and Hermitian trace bilinear forms on @xmath which are defined
as follows:

Let @xmath be the trace map defined as @xmath for each @xmath It is
well-known that @xmath is an @xmath -linear, surjective map with kernel
of size @xmath (see [ 14 , Th. 2.23] ). Then for any integer @xmath the
ordinary trace inner product on @xmath is a map @xmath defined as @xmath
and the map @xmath is defined as @xmath The Hermitian trace inner
product on @xmath is defined only for even integers @xmath which can be
written as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is odd. It is easy to see that
there exists an element @xmath satisfying @xmath Then the Hermitian
trace inner product on @xmath is a map @xmath defined as @xmath and the
map @xmath is defined as @xmath By Lemma 6 of Huffman [ 9 ] , we see
that @xmath is a non-degenerate, reflexive and Hermitian @xmath
-sesquilinear form on @xmath while @xmath is a non-degenerate, reflexive
and skew-Hermitian @xmath -sesquilinear form on @xmath Sharma and Kaur [
16 ] studied dual codes of cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes with
respect to the bilinear form @xmath on @xmath which is defined only for
integers @xmath satisfying @xmath In order to define the form @xmath ,
we see that for any integer @xmath satisfying @xmath the map @xmath
defined as @xmath is an @xmath -linear vector space automorphism. Now
the @xmath -bilinear form on @xmath is a map @xmath defined as @xmath
and the map @xmath is defined as @xmath By Lemma 3.3 of Sharma and Kaur
[ 16 ] , we see that @xmath is a non-degenerate, reflexive and Hermitian
@xmath -sesquilinear form on @xmath

Next for @xmath throughout this paper, let @xmath be defined as (i) the
set of all integers @xmath satisfying @xmath when @xmath (ii) the set of
all integers @xmath when @xmath and (iii) the set of all even integers
@xmath when @xmath Now for each @xmath with @xmath the @xmath -dual code
of @xmath is defined as @xmath It is easy to see that the dual code
@xmath is also an @xmath -linear @xmath -code of length @xmath We also
note that if the code @xmath is cyclic, then its dual code @xmath is
also cyclic. In fact, if @xmath is any cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath
-code, then one can easily view its dual code @xmath as the dual code of
@xmath with respect to the form @xmath on @xmath Further, by Theorem 4
of Huffman [ 9 ] , we see that @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are @xmath -subspaces of @xmath for @xmath In addition, by Theorem 7 of
Huffman [ 9 ] and Theorem 4.1 of Sharma and Kaur [ 16 ] , we have @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath (throughout this paper, @xmath denotes the
dimension of a finite-dimensional vector space @xmath over the field
@xmath ). Now for @xmath the code @xmath is said to be @xmath
-complementary-dual if it satisfies @xmath For more details, one may
refer to Huffman [ 9 ] and Sharma and Kaur [ 16 ] .
Henceforth, we shall follow the same notations and terminology as in
Section 2 .

## 3 Determination of the number of @xmath-complementary-dual cyclic
@xmath-linear @xmath-codes

Throughout this paper, let @xmath be a positive integer, @xmath be a
power of the prime @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath In this
section, we shall count all the @xmath -complementary-dual cyclic @xmath
-linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath for each @xmath For this, we
first recall that the permutation @xmath of the set @xmath is either the
identity or is a product of transpositions, and it satisfies @xmath and
@xmath (provided @xmath is even). Let @xmath if @xmath is odd and @xmath
if @xmath is even. Let @xmath denote the set consisting of all the fixed
points of @xmath excluding the points of @xmath and @xmath denote the
set consisting of exactly one element from each of the transpositions in
@xmath Throughout this paper, we shall denote the @xmath -binomial
coefficient or Gaussian binomial coefficient by @xmath which is defined
as @xmath where @xmath are integers satisfying @xmath From now onwards,
we shall denote the number of isotropic vectors and hyperbolic pairs in
a reflexive and non-degenerate formed space of dimension @xmath and Witt
index @xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively.

In the following theorem, we enumerate all the @xmath
-complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath
for each @xmath

###### Theorem 3.1.

Let @xmath be a power of the prime @xmath and @xmath be a positive
integer with @xmath Then for @xmath with @xmath the number @xmath of
distinct @xmath -complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes
of length @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath equals

-   @xmath when either @xmath and both @xmath are even or @xmath and
    @xmath is even;

-   @xmath when @xmath and both @xmath are odd;

-   @xmath when @xmath with either @xmath even and @xmath or @xmath and
    @xmath

-   @xmath when @xmath @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath when @xmath @xmath is even and @xmath is odd;

-   @xmath when @xmath and both @xmath are even.

To prove the above theorem, we first observe the following:

###### Proposition 3.1.

Let @xmath be a power of the prime @xmath and @xmath be a positive
integer coprime to @xmath Then for @xmath with @xmath the following
hold:

1.   Let @xmath be a cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -code of length @xmath
    Let us write @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
    Then the code @xmath is @xmath -complementary-dual if and only if
    @xmath for @xmath

2.   For each @xmath let @xmath denote the number of @xmath -subspaces
    @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath For each @xmath let @xmath denote
    the number of pairs @xmath with @xmath as a @xmath -subspace of
    @xmath and @xmath as a @xmath -subspace of @xmath satisfying @xmath
    and @xmath Then the total number of distinct @xmath
    -complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length
    @xmath is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

Proof is trivial. ∎

In view of the above proposition, we see that to enumerate all @xmath
-complementary-dual cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -codes of length @xmath
for each @xmath we need to determine the following:

-   For each @xmath the number @xmath of distinct @xmath -subspaces
    @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath

-   For each @xmath the number @xmath of pairs @xmath with @xmath as a
    @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath as a @xmath -subspace of
    @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath

First of all, we shall determine the number @xmath for each @xmath For
this, we need the following lemma:

###### Lemma 3.1.

Let @xmath be fixed. For each @xmath let @xmath denote the restriction
of the @xmath -sesquilinear form @xmath to @xmath Then the following
hold.

1.   For each @xmath the form @xmath is reflexive and non-degenerate.

2.   For @xmath the form @xmath is Hermitian when @xmath and is
    symmetric when @xmath For @xmath the form @xmath is skew-Hermitian
    when @xmath and is alternating when @xmath

###### Proof.

It follows from Lemmas 6 and 13 of Huffman [ 9 ] and Lemma 4.3 of Sharma
and Kaur [ 16 ] . ∎

Next we make the following observation.

###### Remark 3.1.

Let @xmath be a cyclic @xmath -linear @xmath -code of length @xmath For
each @xmath and @xmath if @xmath then by Lemma 3.1 , the @xmath
-subspace @xmath can be viewed as the orthogonal complement of @xmath
with respect to the restricted form @xmath From this, it follows that a
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath satisfies @xmath if and only if @xmath
is a non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath Therefore the number
@xmath equals the number of non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath
for each @xmath and @xmath

### 3.1 Determination of the number @xmath when @xmath

Throughout this section, we assume that @xmath Here we recall that
@xmath is a @xmath -dimensional vector space over @xmath Further, by
Lemma 10(i) of Huffman [ 9 ] , we see that the integer @xmath is even.
Then in the following proposition, we determine the number @xmath for
each @xmath

###### Proposition 3.2.

Let @xmath be fixed. Then for each @xmath the number @xmath of distinct
@xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

To prove this, for each integer @xmath let @xmath denote the number of
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath
Then we have @xmath

When @xmath we have @xmath which gives @xmath and thus @xmath holds.
This implies that @xmath Moreover, by Lemma 3.1 (a), we see that @xmath
is a @xmath -dimensional reflexive and non-degenerate space over @xmath
. This implies that when @xmath we have @xmath and thus @xmath holds.
This gives @xmath So from now onwards, we assume that @xmath and we
assert that @xmath for @xmath To prove this assertion, by Remark 3.1 ,
we note that the number @xmath is equal to the number of @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath for @xmath Now
we shall consider the following two cases separately: I. @xmath and II.
@xmath
Case I. Let @xmath Here by Lemma 3.1 , we see that @xmath is a
reflexive, non-degenerate and Hermitian form, i.e., @xmath is a unitary
space over @xmath

First let @xmath be odd. By [ 18 , p. 116] , we see that any @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate (and hence unitary) @xmath -subspace of
@xmath has a Witt decomposition of the form @xmath where @xmath is a
hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is an anisotropic vector
in @xmath Now in order to determine the number of @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate (and hence unitary) @xmath -subspaces of @xmath we shall
count all Witt bases of the type @xmath in @xmath For this, we note that
@xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath so by Corollary 10.6 of [ 18 ] ,
it has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the Witt index of @xmath Now
since @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath working as
in Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we can write @xmath where @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath Next we
need to choose the second hyperbolic pair @xmath from the unitary @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath By Corollary 10.6 of [ 18 ] , we see that
@xmath has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the Witt index of @xmath
Continuing like this, we see that the @xmath th hyperbolic pair @xmath
has to be chosen from the @xmath -dimensional unitary @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath so by Corollary 10.6 of [ 18 ] , the hyperbolic pair
@xmath has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the Witt index of @xmath Next
we need to choose an anisotropic vector @xmath from the @xmath
-dimensional unitary @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath By Lemma 10.4 of
[ 18 ] , we see that @xmath has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the Witt
index of @xmath Therefore the number of choices for a Witt basis of
cardinality @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

By [ 18 , p. 116] , for @xmath we note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now using Lemma 10.4 and Corollary 10.6 of [ 18 ] , we see that @xmath
Next working in a similar manner as above and using Lemma 10.4 and
Corollary 10.6 of [ 18 ] , we see that the number of Witt bases of a
@xmath -dimensional unitary @xmath -subspace of @xmath is given by
@xmath Therefore the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate (and hence unitary) @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next let @xmath be even. Here by [ 18 , p. 116] , we see that any @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate (and hence unitary) @xmath -subspace of
@xmath has a Witt decomposition of the form @xmath where @xmath is a
hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath Now working in a similar manner as
in the previous case, the assertion follows.
Case II. Let @xmath By Lemma 3.1 , we see that @xmath is a reflexive,
non-degenerate and skew-Hermitian form. In this case, we will first
transform the skew-Hermitian form @xmath to a Hermitian form @xmath on
@xmath as follows:

By Lemma 11(iii) of Huffman [ 9 ] , we note that @xmath is not the
identity map on @xmath so there exists @xmath such that @xmath Then we
define a map @xmath as @xmath for all @xmath where @xmath It is easy to
see that @xmath is a reflexive, non-degenerate and Hermitian form on
@xmath Next we observe that if two vectors in @xmath are orthogonal with
respect to @xmath then those two vectors are also orthogonal with
respect to @xmath and vice versa. This implies that any non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace of @xmath with respect to @xmath is also non-degenerate
with respect to @xmath and vice versa. So the number @xmath equals the
number of non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath with respect to
@xmath Now as @xmath is a unitary space over @xmath having dimension
@xmath working in a similar manner as in case I, the assertion follows.
This proves the proposition. ∎

### 3.2 Determination of the number @xmath when @xmath

In this section, we will determine the number @xmath for each @xmath and
@xmath Here we recall that @xmath as @xmath for each @xmath

In the following proposition, we suppose that either @xmath or @xmath
and @xmath is even, and determine the number @xmath of @xmath -subspaces
@xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath for each @xmath

###### Proposition 3.3.

Suppose that either @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is even. For @xmath the
number @xmath of distinct @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying
@xmath is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

In order to prove this, for each integer @xmath let @xmath denote the
number of @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath
satisfying @xmath Then we have @xmath

First we observe that @xmath So from now onwards, throughout this proof,
we assume that @xmath Here we assert that for @xmath the number @xmath
when @xmath is odd and @xmath when @xmath is even. To prove this
assertion, by Remark 3.1 , we note that the number @xmath is equal to
the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath for @xmath Now we shall distinguish the cases, I. @xmath and II.
@xmath and @xmath is even.
Case I. Let @xmath Here by Lemma 3.1 , we see that @xmath is a
reflexive, non-degenerate and alternating form, i.e., @xmath is a
symplectic space over @xmath In view of this, we see that the number
@xmath equals the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
(and hence symplectic) @xmath -subspaces of @xmath By [ 18 , p. 69] , we
see that @xmath if @xmath is odd. So we need to determine the number
@xmath when @xmath is an even integer. For this, by [ 18 , p. 69] , we
see that when @xmath is even, any @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
(and hence symplectic) @xmath -subspace of @xmath has a Witt
decomposition of the form @xmath where each @xmath is a hyperbolic pair
in @xmath Further, working in a similar manner as in Proposition 3.2 and
using [ 18 , pp. 69-70] , we get @xmath for each even integer @xmath
Case II. Let @xmath and @xmath be even. In this case, @xmath is even and
@xmath is odd, and hence @xmath only. By Huffman [ 9 , p. 264] , we see
that @xmath and @xmath where @xmath We next observe that @xmath for all
@xmath Since @xmath we observe that if two vectors @xmath are orthogonal
with respect to @xmath then the corresponding vectors @xmath are
orthogonal with respect to @xmath on @xmath and vice versa. So the
number of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces
of @xmath with respect to @xmath is equal to the number of distinct
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath with
respect to @xmath on @xmath Further, by Lemma 3.2 of Sharma and Kaur [
16 ] , we see that when @xmath is even, @xmath is a reflexive,
non-degenerate and alternating form on @xmath i.e., @xmath is a
symplectic space over @xmath having dimension @xmath Now working in a
similar manner as in case I, we obtain @xmath when @xmath is even and
@xmath when @xmath is odd. This proves the proposition. ∎

In the following proposition, we suppose that @xmath and @xmath is odd,
and determine the number of @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath
satisfying @xmath for each @xmath

###### Proposition 3.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be an odd prime power. For @xmath the number
@xmath of distinct @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath
is given by the following:

1.  @xmath if @xmath is odd.

2.  @xmath if either @xmath is even and @xmath or @xmath and @xmath

3.  @xmath if @xmath and @xmath

To prove this proposition, we see, by Lemma 3.1 , that when @xmath and
@xmath is an odd prime power, @xmath is a reflexive, non-degenerate and
symmetric form, i.e., @xmath is an orthogonal space over @xmath
Furthermore, since @xmath is odd, the map @xmath defined by @xmath for
each @xmath is a quadratic map, and hence @xmath is a non-degenerate
quadratic space over @xmath Now to prove Proposition 3.4 , we shall
first prove the following lemma:

###### Lemma 3.2.

Let @xmath @xmath be an odd prime power and @xmath be an odd integer.
Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath
-subspace of @xmath having a Witt decomposition of the form @xmath where
@xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a
non-singular vector in @xmath Then the following hold.

-    The number @xmath of non-singular vectors @xmath with @xmath
    isometric to @xmath is given by @xmath

-    The number @xmath of non-singular vectors @xmath with @xmath not
    isometric to @xmath is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

-   First of all, we observe that for each odd integer @xmath the number
    @xmath is equal to the number of pairs @xmath where @xmath is a
    non-singular vector in @xmath and @xmath is a non-zero square in
    @xmath satisfying @xmath Now to determine the number @xmath we will
    apply induction on an odd integer @xmath

    When @xmath we have @xmath From this, it follows trivially that
    @xmath i.e., the result holds for @xmath Next we assume that @xmath
    is an odd integer and the result holds for all @xmath -dimensional
    non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath Now let @xmath
    be a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace
    of @xmath As @xmath by Lemma 7.3 and Theorem 11.2 of [ 18 ] , there
    exists a hyperbolic pair in @xmath say @xmath Further by Proposition
    2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
    non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath In view of this,
    any element @xmath can be written as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
    Now we shall count all pairs @xmath with @xmath as a non-singular
    vector in @xmath and @xmath as a non-zero square in @xmath
    satisfying @xmath For this, we see that @xmath if and only if

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (1)
      -- -------- -- -----

    Here also, we shall distinguish the following two cases: I. @xmath
    and II. @xmath
    I. Let @xmath Then by ( 1 ), we have @xmath that is, the @xmath
    -subspaces @xmath and @xmath are isometric. As @xmath by applying
    the induction hypothesis, we see that the pair @xmath has precisely
    @xmath relevant choices. Moreover, the pair @xmath has @xmath
    choices. Thus in this case, there are precisely @xmath number of
    pairs @xmath where @xmath is a non-singular vector of @xmath and
    @xmath is a non-zero square in @xmath satisfying @xmath
    II. Next let @xmath Then by ( 1 ), we get @xmath that is, the @xmath
    -subspace @xmath is not isometric to @xmath By applying the
    induction hypothesis, we see that the number of pairs @xmath with
    @xmath as a non-zero square in @xmath and @xmath satisfying @xmath
    is given by @xmath In view of ( 1 ), we see that @xmath is fixed for
    a given choice of @xmath and @xmath Also as @xmath it has @xmath
    choices. Thus in this case, there are precisely @xmath number of
    pairs @xmath with @xmath as a non-singular vector of @xmath and
    @xmath as a non-zero square in @xmath satisfying @xmath
    Therefore from the cases I and II above, we see that the number
    @xmath of pairs @xmath with @xmath as a non-singular vector in
    @xmath and @xmath as a non-zero square in @xmath satisfying @xmath
    is given by @xmath Further, after a simple computation and on
    substituting the value of @xmath we obtain @xmath which proves (a).

-   To prove this, we observe that for each odd integer @xmath the
    number @xmath is equal to the number of non-singular vectors in
    @xmath Furthermore, by Theorem 11.5 of [ 18 ] , we see that the
    number of non-singular vectors in @xmath is given by @xmath where
    @xmath denotes the number of isotropic vectors in @xmath having Witt
    index @xmath From this and using part (a), we obtain @xmath which
    proves (b).

∎

Proof of Proposition 3.4 . To prove this, for each integer @xmath let
@xmath denote the number of @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces @xmath
of @xmath satisfying @xmath Then we have

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Now we proceed to determine the number @xmath for each integer @xmath
@xmath Towards this, it is easy to observe that @xmath So we assume
@xmath from now onwards. Here by Remark 3.1 , we note that the number
@xmath is equal to the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath for @xmath Besides this, we recall that
@xmath is a non-degenerate quadratic space over @xmath where the
quadratic map @xmath is defined as @xmath for each @xmath Then we
observe the following:

1.  The discriminant of every 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspace
    of @xmath is a non-square in @xmath As a consequence, every
    2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspace of @xmath is
    non-degenerate.

2.  Every 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspace of @xmath has an
    orthogonal basis, i.e., it has a basis of the type @xmath with
    @xmath

Furthermore, by Proposition 1 of Drees et al. [ 3 ] , we see that the
determinant of @xmath is a non-square in @xmath From this, by [ 18 , p.
138] and assertion ( @xmath ), it is easy to observe (see Huffman [ 9 ,
p. 279] ) that the Witt index @xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Now in order to determine the number @xmath by [ 18 , p. 138] , we see
that any @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace
of @xmath has a Witt decomposition of the form @xmath where each @xmath
is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath @xmath is its Witt index and @xmath is an
anisotropic @xmath -subspace of @xmath with @xmath By [ 18 , p. 138] ,
we also see that @xmath when @xmath is odd and @xmath is either @xmath
or @xmath (depending upon the isometry class of @xmath when @xmath is
even. We shall first determine the number @xmath of Witt bases of the
type @xmath with @xmath as a basis of the anisotropic @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath where the basis @xmath is orthogonal when @xmath (or
equivalently, @xmath ). For this, we shall distinguish the following two
cases: I. @xmath is odd and II. @xmath is even.
I. Let @xmath be odd. Here, by [ 18 , p. 138] , we have @xmath which
implies that @xmath So in this case, any @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath has a Witt
decomposition of the form @xmath where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a non-singular vector of @xmath We first
note that as @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath by [ 18 , p. 141] ,
it has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the Witt index of @xmath Further
by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath Now we
choose the second hyperbolic pair @xmath from the quadratic space @xmath
By applying Witt’s cancellation theorem, we see that the space @xmath
has Witt index @xmath By [ 18 , p. 141] , again, we see that the second
hyperbolic pair @xmath has @xmath choices. Continuing like this, we see
that the @xmath th hyperbolic pair @xmath can be chosen in @xmath number
of ways. Next to count all possible choices for the basis @xmath of a
1-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath we need to
choose a non-singular vector @xmath from the @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath By applying
Witt’s cancellation theorem, we see that the Witt index of @xmath is
@xmath Now by Theorem 11.5 of [ 18 ] , we see that the number of
non-singular vectors in @xmath is given by @xmath From this, it follows
that when @xmath is odd, the number of Witt bases of the form @xmath and
having cardinality @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

This, by [ 18 , pp. 140-141] , gives

  -- -- -- -----
           (5)
  -- -- -- -----

Next when @xmath is odd, let @xmath denote the number of Witt bases of a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath
Here working in a similar manner as above and by [ 18 , pp. 138-141] ,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

Therefore when @xmath is odd, using ( 5 ) and ( 6 ), we obtain

  -- -- -- -----
           (7)
  -- -- -- -----

II. Next let @xmath be even. Here by [ 18 , p. 138] , we see that @xmath
is either @xmath or @xmath For each even integer @xmath let @xmath
denote the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath having Witt index as @xmath and @xmath denote the
number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspaces
of @xmath having Witt index as @xmath In view of this, we have

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

Now we shall distinguish the following two cases: A. @xmath and B.
@xmath
A. First let @xmath In this case, by [ 18 , p. 138] , we see that any
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath
has a Witt decomposition of the form @xmath where each @xmath is a
hyperbolic pair in @xmath and @xmath is a 2-dimensional anisotropic
@xmath -subspace of @xmath We note that as @xmath is a hyperbolic pair
in @xmath by [ 18 , p. 141] , it has @xmath choices, where @xmath is the
Witt index of @xmath Further by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write
@xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic
@xmath -subspace of @xmath Continuing like this, we see that the @xmath
th hyperbolic pair @xmath can be chosen in @xmath number of ways. In
order to determine the number @xmath we need to determine the number
@xmath of orthogonal bases of all 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath
-subspaces of the @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath For this, by applying Witt’s cancellation
theorem, we see that the space @xmath has Witt index as @xmath Now we
assert that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

To prove assertion ( 9 ), we will consider the following three cases
separately: (i) @xmath (ii) @xmath and (iii) @xmath
(i) First let @xmath Here we assert the following:

1.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath is given by @xmath

2.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath and @xmath containing a singular
    vector, is given by @xmath

To prove (a), we need to count orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with
@xmath as non-singular vectors of @xmath For this, we see that as @xmath
by Witt’s cancellation theorem, the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath Now
as @xmath is a non-singular vector in @xmath by Theorem 11.5 of [ 18 ] ,
we see that @xmath has @xmath choices. Further, by applying Proposition
2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath Now we will choose
another non-singular vector @xmath from the space @xmath As @xmath is
non-singular, we see that @xmath Moreover, since @xmath is odd, by [ 18
, p. 138] , we see that the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath Then we see
that @xmath has @xmath choices. From this and using Theorem 11.5 of [ 18
] , we see that the number of choices for the basis @xmath with @xmath
as non-singular vectors of @xmath and satisfying @xmath is given by
@xmath

To prove (b), we see that if there exists a singular vector, say @xmath
in a 2-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath
satisfying @xmath and @xmath then by Lemma 7.3 of [ 18 ] , we have
@xmath where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in the @xmath -subspace @xmath
of @xmath By [ 18 , p. 138] , we see that the space @xmath contains
@xmath hyperbolic pairs. On the other hand, by [ 18 , p. 138] again, we
see that there are precisely @xmath distinct hyperbolic pairs in a
2-dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath
containing a singular vector. Thus the number of distinct 2-dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath containing a singular vector
is given by @xmath which equals @xmath by [ 18 , p. 141] . Further, we
observe that within each such non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath containing a singular vector, there are precisely
@xmath distinct choices for a basis of the type @xmath satisfying @xmath
and @xmath Thus there are precisely @xmath choices for a basis of the
type @xmath with @xmath satisfying @xmath @xmath and @xmath containing a
singular vector.

Now from assertions (a) and (b), it follows that the number of
orthogonal bases of 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath is given by @xmath which proves assertion ( 9 ) when @xmath
(ii) Next let @xmath Here we assert the following:

1.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath is given by @xmath

2.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath and @xmath containing a singular
    vector, is given by @xmath

To prove this assertion, as @xmath by [ 18 , p. 138] , we write @xmath
where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a
non-singular vector of @xmath

In order to prove (c), by applying Witt’s cancellation theorem, we see
that the Witt index of the @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is @xmath
Now we need to choose a non-singular vector @xmath from the space @xmath
Here the following two cases arise:

-   the non-singular vector @xmath is such that the @xmath -subspace
    @xmath is isometric to @xmath and

-   the non-singular vector @xmath is such that the @xmath -subspace
    @xmath is not isometric to @xmath

First of all, we choose a non-singular vector @xmath from @xmath such
that @xmath is isometric to @xmath In this case, by Lemma 3.2 (a), we
see that @xmath has @xmath choices. Next for each such choice of @xmath
by applying Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath
Here as @xmath and @xmath are isometric, by Witt’s cancellation theorem,
we see that the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath Now we will choose
another non-singular vector @xmath from the space @xmath As @xmath is
non-singular, we see that @xmath By [ 18 , p. 138] , we observe that
@xmath has @xmath relevant choices. Therefore by Theorem 11.5 of [ 18 ]
and Lemma 3.2 (a), the number of choices for the basis @xmath with
@xmath isometric to @xmath and satisfying @xmath and @xmath is given by
@xmath

Next we choose a non-singular vector @xmath from @xmath such that @xmath
is not isometric to @xmath Here by Lemma 3.2 (b), such a non-singular
vector @xmath has @xmath choices. Now by applying Proposition 2.9 of [ 6
] , we write @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath Here as the @xmath -subspaces
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath are not isometric, we see, by Witt’s
cancellation theorem, that the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath Now we
will choose another non-singular vector @xmath from the space @xmath As
@xmath is non-singular, we see that @xmath By [ 18 , p. 138] , we see
that @xmath has @xmath choices. Therefore, by Theorem 11.5 of [ 18 ] and
Lemma 3.2 (b), the number of choices for the basis @xmath with @xmath
not isometric to @xmath and satisfying @xmath and @xmath is given by
@xmath

From the above, we see that the number of choices for the basis @xmath
with @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath which proves
(c).
Next working in a similar way as in assertion (b) of case (i), assertion
(d) follows.

Now from assertions (c) and (d), we see that the number of orthogonal
bases of 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given
by @xmath which proves assertion ( 9 ) when @xmath
(iii) Next suppose that @xmath Here working in a similar manner as in
case (i), we observe the following:

1.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath is given by @xmath

2.  The number of orthogonal bases of the type @xmath with @xmath as
    non-singular vectors of @xmath and @xmath containing a singular
    vector, is given by @xmath

Now from (e) and (f), it follows that the number of orthogonal bases of
2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given by @xmath
which proves assertion ( 9 ) when @xmath

Next we see that the number of Witt bases of the form @xmath with @xmath
as an orthogonal basis of a 2-dimensional anisotropic @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

From this, using ( 9 ), ( 10 ) and [ 18 , p. 141] , we get

  -- -- -- ------
           (11)
  -- -- -- ------

Next let @xmath denote the number of Witt bases of a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath of the form @xmath
where @xmath is an orthogonal basis of the 2-dimensional anisotropic
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath Here also, working in a similar manner
as above and by [ 18 , pp. 138-141] , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

Therefore the number @xmath of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
quadratic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath having Witt index as @xmath is
given by @xmath From this and using ( 11 ) and ( 12 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

B. Next let @xmath Here by [ 18 , p. 138] , any @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath has a Witt
decomposition of the form @xmath where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in
@xmath for @xmath Now working as in case A , we see that the number of
Witt bases of the form @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

This, by [ 18 , p. 141] , gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

Next when @xmath let @xmath denote the number of Witt bases of a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspace of @xmath having
Witt index as @xmath Here working in a similar manner as above and by [
18 , pp. 138-141] , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Therefore the number @xmath of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath having Witt index as @xmath is given by @xmath From
this and using ( 15 ) and ( 16 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now on substituting the values of @xmath and @xmath from ( 13 ) and ( 17
) in ( 8 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

Further, on substituting the values of @xmath from ( 7 ) and ( 18 )
(accordingly as @xmath is even or odd) in ( 2 ) and using equation ( 3
), the desired result follows. @xmath

By closely looking at the proof of Proposition 3.4 , we deduce the
following divisibility results:

###### Corollary 3.1.

Let @xmath be an odd prime power and @xmath be positive integers
satisfying @xmath Then we have the following:

-    If @xmath and @xmath is odd, then both @xmath and @xmath are
    integers.

-    If either @xmath and @xmath is even or @xmath then both @xmath and
    @xmath are integers.

###### Proof.

-   Let @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is an odd integer.
    Then by ( 3 ), we see that the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath
    Further, by ( 13 ), we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional
    non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath having Witt
    index as @xmath is given by @xmath from which it follows that @xmath
    is an integer. Moroever, using ( 17 ), we see that the number of
    @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspaces of
    @xmath having Witt index as @xmath is given by @xmath which implies
    that @xmath is an integer.

-   Let @xmath @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is an even integer when
    @xmath and @xmath is any integer when @xmath Here by ( 3 ), we see
    that the Witt index of @xmath is @xmath Further, by ( 13 ), we see
    that the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate quadratic
    @xmath -subspaces of @xmath having Witt index as @xmath is given by
    @xmath from which it follows that @xmath is an integer. Moroever,
    using ( 17 ), we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional
    non-degenerate quadratic @xmath -subspaces of @xmath having Witt
    index as @xmath is given by @xmath which implies that @xmath is an
    integer.

∎

Next we shall consider the case @xmath and @xmath is even. As @xmath
@xmath must be odd, which implies that @xmath i.e., @xmath is the only
choice. In the following proposition, we determine the number @xmath of
@xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath

###### Proposition 3.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be an even prime power. Then the number @xmath of
@xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath is given by

1.  @xmath if @xmath is odd.

2.  @xmath if @xmath is even.

###### Proof.

To prove this, for each integer @xmath let @xmath denote the number of
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath
Then we have @xmath For this, we first observe that @xmath So from now
onwards, we assume that @xmath By Remark 3.1 , we note that the number
@xmath is equal to the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath for @xmath To determine the numbers @xmath
for @xmath by Huffman [ 9 , p. 264] , we see that @xmath and @xmath
where @xmath In view of this, it is easy to observe that @xmath for all
@xmath From this, we observe that if two vectors @xmath are orthogonal
with respect to @xmath then the corresponding vectors @xmath are also
orthogonal with respect to ordinary trace bilinear form @xmath on @xmath
and vice versa. So for each integer @xmath the number @xmath of @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath with respect to
@xmath is equal to the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath with respect to @xmath on @xmath

In order to determine the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath with respect to @xmath let @xmath i.e.,
@xmath equals kernel of the trace map @xmath Then it is well-known that
@xmath is an @xmath -subspace of @xmath having dimension @xmath Now we
will distinguish the following two cases: @xmath is odd and @xmath is
even.
(a) Let @xmath be odd. Here we see that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath
which implies that @xmath Furthermore, by Huffman [ 9 , p. 280] , we see
that @xmath is a reflexive, non-degenerate and alternating form on
@xmath i.e., @xmath is a symplectic space over @xmath

We now proceed to count all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath with respect to @xmath To do so, we first observe
that any @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace of @xmath is I. either
contained in @xmath or II. contained in @xmath but not in @xmath i.e.,
it is of the type @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
I. As @xmath is a symplectic space, by [ 18 , p. 69] , we see that a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate (and hence symplectic) @xmath
-subspace of @xmath exists if and only if @xmath is even. Further,
working in a similar manner as in Proposition 3.3 and using the fact
that @xmath we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
(and hence symplectic) @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given by @xmath
when @xmath is even.
II. We will next count all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath where @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath

First let @xmath be even. Here when @xmath by applying Theorem 5.1.1 of
[ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of
@xmath is degenerate. Next let @xmath In this case, by Theorem 5.1.1 of
[ 17 ] again, we note that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath Now
working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 again, we see that the number of
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath
is given by @xmath Further, we observe that given any @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath there are
precisely @xmath distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath
Therefore when @xmath is even, the number of distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type
@xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath

Next let @xmath be odd. Here using Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that
when @xmath @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspace of @xmath if and only if @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath Now as @xmath is a symplectic
space over @xmath working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that
the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath is @xmath which is equal to the number of distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type
@xmath with @xmath for @xmath Next let @xmath be non-zero. In this case,
applying Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] again, we see that @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath if and only if
@xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of
@xmath Further, working in a similar way as in Proposition 3.3 again, we
see that the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath is @xmath Further, for a given @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath we need to count all
choices for @xmath that give rise to distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath To do this, using
Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where the @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath has dimension @xmath Therefore each @xmath can be
uniquely written as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath It is easy to see
that the subspace @xmath where @xmath We further observe that each
@xmath gives rise to a distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath and thus there are precisely @xmath
relevant choices for @xmath Therefore when @xmath is odd, the number of
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath
of the type @xmath with @xmath for @xmath is given by @xmath

On combining all the above cases, when @xmath is odd, for @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(b) Let @xmath be even. Here we have @xmath which implies that @xmath
Since the trace map @xmath is non-zero, there exists @xmath such that
@xmath Without any loss of generality, we assume that @xmath Now we
define @xmath It is clear that @xmath By Huffman [ 9 , p. 281] , we see
that @xmath is an @xmath -subspace of @xmath having dimension @xmath and
@xmath which implies that @xmath Further, we observe that @xmath is a
reflexive, non-degenerate and alternating form, that is, @xmath is a
symplectic space over @xmath In this case, for @xmath we see that any
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace of @xmath is III. either contained
in @xmath or IV. contained in @xmath but not in @xmath or V. contained
in @xmath but not in @xmath or VI. contained in @xmath but not in any of
the spaces @xmath @xmath and @xmath
III. To begin with, we shall first enumerate all @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath that are contained in the
symplectic space @xmath Here we must have @xmath When @xmath is odd, by
[ 18 , p. 69] , we see that there does not exist any @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate (and hence symplectic) @xmath -subspace of @xmath When
@xmath is even, working as in Proposition 3.3 , it is easy to see that
the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath is given by @xmath
IV. Next we proceed to enumerate all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath that are contained in @xmath but not in
@xmath For this, we observe that any such @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace of @xmath is of the type @xmath where @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath Here by applying Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , it is easy to observe
that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
degenerate when either @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is odd. Further, when
@xmath is even and @xmath the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now
when @xmath is even, working in a similar manner as in case II of part
(a), we see that the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath for @xmath is given by @xmath
V. Next we shall enumerate all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath that are contained in @xmath but not in @xmath To
do so, we observe that any such @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace of
@xmath is of the type @xmath where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath

First let @xmath be even. Here when @xmath by applying Theorem 5.1.1 of
[ 17 ] , it is easy to observe that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is degenerate. When @xmath the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and
only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate. Now working as in case II of part (a), we see that when
@xmath is even, the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath

Next let @xmath be odd. Here using Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that
when @xmath the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now as @xmath is a symplectic space,
working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that the number of such
spaces is given by @xmath When @xmath by applying Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17
] , we see that @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now working as in case II of part
(a), we see that the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the type @xmath with @xmath ’s in
@xmath is given by @xmath
VI. We next proceed to enumerate all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath that are not contained in any of the
subspaces @xmath @xmath and @xmath of @xmath Towards this, we first
observe that any such @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace of @xmath is
of the following two types:

-   @xmath where @xmath @xmath for @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath where @xmath @xmath for @xmath and @xmath

To begin with, we shall first count all @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the type @xmath where @xmath @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath

First let @xmath be even. When @xmath by applying Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17
] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of
@xmath is degenerate for each @xmath When @xmath by applying Theorem
5.1.1 of [ 17 ] again, we see that for each @xmath the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and
only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate. Now as @xmath is a symplectic space, working similarly
as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given by @xmath Further,
it is easy to observe that each @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace of @xmath gives rise to precisely @xmath distinct
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath Therefore when @xmath is even, the number
of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath of the type @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is given by
@xmath

Next let @xmath be odd. Here we observe, by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] ,
that when @xmath the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of
@xmath is non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate for each @xmath Now working
as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the symplectic space @xmath is given
by @xmath Further, we observe that each @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath gives rise to precisely @xmath
distinct @xmath -subspaces of the type @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath
and @xmath Therefore when @xmath the number of distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type
@xmath with @xmath in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath
when @xmath is odd. Next let @xmath be non-zero. Here using Theorem
5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that for each @xmath the @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if the
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate.
Now as @xmath is a symplectic space, working similarly as in Proposition
3.3 , we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given by @xmath Further, for a given
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath we
need to count all choices for @xmath that give rise to distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath for each
@xmath To determine the number of choices for such an element @xmath we
note that given any @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we can write @xmath where
@xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath having dimension
@xmath In view of this, each @xmath can be uniquely written as @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath It is easy to see that the subspace @xmath where
@xmath We further observe that for every @xmath , each non-zero @xmath
gives rise to a distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath and thus there are precisely @xmath relevant
choices for @xmath Moreover, each choice of @xmath gives rise to a
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of the type
@xmath Therefore the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath when @xmath is odd.

Henceforth we assume that @xmath Now we shall enumerate all @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the form
@xmath with @xmath where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath Here also, we
shall distinguish the cases: A. @xmath is even and B. @xmath is odd.

Case A. First let @xmath be even. When @xmath by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ]
, we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath
is non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now as @xmath is a
symplectic space, working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that
the number of such spaces is given by @xmath When @xmath and @xmath by
Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now
working as in case II of part (a), we see that the number of distinct
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the
type @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath When @xmath and
@xmath by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if the
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate.
Now working as in case II of part (a), we see that the number of
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath
of the type @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath Next
suppose that both @xmath are linearly independent over @xmath

For any even integer @xmath if @xmath @xmath and @xmath are Gram
matrices of @xmath @xmath and @xmath respectively, then we observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This, by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , implies that the @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if
either

1.  the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
    non-degenerate and the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath
    of @xmath is degenerate, or

2.  the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
    degenerate and the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of
    @xmath is non-degenerate, or

3.  both the @xmath -subspaces @xmath and @xmath of @xmath are
    non-degenerate with @xmath

We also observe that the condition @xmath trivially holds in the cases
(i) and (ii) .
(i) We shall first enumerate all @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspaces
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath For this, as @xmath
is a symplectic space, working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 , we see
that the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces
of @xmath is @xmath Now for each such @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath we need to count all choices for
linearly independent vectors @xmath such that the @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is degenerate and that give rise to
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces @xmath of
@xmath For this, by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where the
dimension of @xmath is @xmath In view of this, both @xmath can be
uniquely written as @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath It is easy
to observe that @xmath We further observe that each pair @xmath of
linearly independent vectors in @xmath gives rise to a distinct @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath
It is easy to see that @xmath This implies that @xmath Therefore by
Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is degenerate if and only if @xmath if and
only if @xmath As @xmath it has @xmath choices. Further, we note that
@xmath whose dimension is @xmath by Proposition 2.4 of [ 6 ] . Also as
@xmath we see that @xmath has @xmath choices, which implies that the
pair @xmath has @xmath choices. Therefore for an even integer @xmath the
number of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces
of @xmath of the form @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath is given by @xmath
(ii) Next we will enumerate all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath For this, as
@xmath is a symplectic space, working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 ,
the number of @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath is @xmath Working as in Proposition 3.3 again, we see that every
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath has
precisely @xmath distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces, which implies that the number of @xmath -dimensional
degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is given by @xmath Furthermore, we
observe that each such @xmath -dimensional degenerate @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath gives rise to precisely @xmath distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the form
@xmath satisfying @xmath Therefore for an even integer @xmath the number
of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of
@xmath of the form @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath is given by
@xmath
(iii) Finally, we will enumerate all @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath with
@xmath To do so, we see that as @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
symplectic space over @xmath working similarly as in Proposition 3.3 ,
the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspaces of @xmath is @xmath Next for each @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath we need to determine
choices for linearly independent vectors @xmath in @xmath such that the
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate and @xmath For this,
by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ] , we write @xmath where the dimension of
@xmath is @xmath So we need to choose vectors @xmath and @xmath from
@xmath and each pair @xmath of linearly independent vectors in @xmath
gives rise to a distinct @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath It is easy to see that @xmath which
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this, it follows that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if @xmath if and only if
@xmath Besides this, we note that @xmath if and only if @xmath if and
only if @xmath is not a hyperbolic pair in @xmath First of all, we shall
count all pairs @xmath of linearly independent vectors in @xmath
satisfying @xmath For this, as @xmath it has @xmath choices. Further, we
note, by Proposition 2.4 of [ 6 ] , that the dimension of @xmath is
@xmath From this, we see that @xmath has @xmath choices. This implies
that the number of pairs @xmath such that both the @xmath -subspaces
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath are non-degenerate, is given by @xmath On
the other hand, by [ 18 , p. 70] , we see that the number of hyperbolic
pairs in @xmath is @xmath which implies that the pair @xmath has @xmath
relevant choices. Therefore the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath such that
@xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of
@xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspace of @xmath with @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On combining cases (i)-(iii) , we see that the total number of @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type
@xmath with @xmath as linearly independent vectors over @xmath is given
by @xmath

Next let @xmath be linearly dependent over @xmath In this case, the
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is equal to the
@xmath -subspace @xmath for some @xmath Further, for each @xmath the
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate
if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath
is non-degenerate. Now working as in case II of part (a) and noting that
each @xmath gives rise to a distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate
@xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath the number of distinct @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type
@xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath

Case B. Let @xmath be odd. When @xmath by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we
see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
degenerate. When @xmath and @xmath by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see
that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate if and only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now working as in case II of part
(a), we see that the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath When @xmath and @xmath by Theorem
5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
@xmath of @xmath is degenerate. Let @xmath be linearly independent over
@xmath Here by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate if and
only if the @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath is
non-degenerate. Now as @xmath is a symplectic space, working similarly
as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that the number of @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is given by @xmath Further,
we see that each @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of
@xmath gives rise to precisely @xmath distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the type @xmath with @xmath for
@xmath Now for a given @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspace of the type @xmath with @xmath for @xmath we need to count all
choices for @xmath that give rise to distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces @xmath of @xmath For this, as @xmath is
a non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath by Proposition 2.9 of [ 6 ]
, we write @xmath where @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of
@xmath having dimension @xmath In view of this, each @xmath can be
uniquely written as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath Then it is
easy to see that @xmath where @xmath This implies that each @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath gives rise to a distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath Further, we observe
that @xmath This is because, if @xmath then @xmath This is a
contradiction, as @xmath are linearly independent vectors in @xmath From
this, we observe that @xmath has precisely @xmath relevant choices.
Therefore when @xmath is odd, the number of distinct @xmath -dimensional
non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath of the type @xmath with
@xmath ’s in @xmath is given by @xmath Next let @xmath be linearly
dependent over @xmath In this case, the @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace @xmath of @xmath is equal to the @xmath -subspace @xmath for
some @xmath Further, by Theorem 5.1.1 of [ 17 ] , we see that @xmath is
a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace of @xmath if and
only if @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspace
of @xmath for each @xmath Now as @xmath is a symplectic space, working
similarly as in Proposition 3.3 , we see that the number of @xmath
-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath is @xmath
Further, we observe that each @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath
-subspace of @xmath gives rise to precisely @xmath distinct
k-dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of the type @xmath with
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath Therefore when @xmath is odd, the number of
distinct @xmath -dimensional non-degenerate @xmath -subspaces of @xmath
of the type @xmath with @xmath ’s in @xmath and @xmath is given by
@xmath

Now on combining all the above cases, when @xmath is even, for @xmath we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof of the proposition. ∎

### 3.3 Determination of the number @xmath when @xmath

In the following proposition, we consider the case @xmath and enumerate
all pairs @xmath with @xmath as a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath
as a @xmath -subspace of @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath for each
@xmath

###### Proposition 3.6.

Let @xmath be fixed. For @xmath the number of pairs @xmath with @xmath
as a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath as a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath

To prove the above proposition, let @xmath be fixed from now onwards.
Throughout this section, we shall represent elements of @xmath as @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath On similar lines, we shall represent elements of
@xmath as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath We shall view @xmath as a
@xmath -module under the following operations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath               (19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

for each @xmath and @xmath

Next for each @xmath we observe that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all @xmath For each @xmath and @xmath let @xmath denote the
restriction of the form @xmath to @xmath Then we make the following
observation.

###### Lemma 3.3.

For each @xmath the following hold.

1.  @xmath is a free @xmath -module of rank @xmath

2.   For each @xmath the form @xmath is reflexive and non-degenerate.

3.   For each @xmath the form @xmath is Hermitian when @xmath and is
    skew-Hermitian when @xmath

###### Proof.

Proof is trivial. ∎

It is easy to see that both @xmath and @xmath can be viewed as @xmath
-submodules of @xmath with respect to operations defined by ( 19 ) and (
20 ). From this, we observe that if @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath then @xmath is a
@xmath -submodule of @xmath Further, if @xmath and @xmath then working
as in Theorem 6 of Huffman [ 9 ] , we see that the size of the smallest
generating set of @xmath is @xmath Further, for each @xmath the
orthogonal complement of @xmath denoted by @xmath is defined as @xmath
It is easy to see that @xmath is also a @xmath -submodule of @xmath
Further, the @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath is said to be
non-degenerate if the restricted form @xmath is non-degenerate, which is
equivalent to saying that @xmath The @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath
is said to be Hermitian (skew-Hermitian) if the restricted form @xmath
is Hermitian (skew-Hermitian). We will say that @xmath is a Hermitian
(skew-Hermitian) @xmath -space if @xmath is a non-degenerate and
Hermitian (skew-Hermitian) @xmath -submodule of @xmath In view of Lemma
3.3 , we see that @xmath is a Hermitian @xmath -space when @xmath and is
a skew-Hermitian @xmath -space when @xmath

In the following lemma, we observe that for each @xmath if @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath
satisfying @xmath and @xmath then @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath and vice versa.

###### Lemma 3.4.

Let @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath be a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and
@xmath be a @xmath -subspace of @xmath Then for each @xmath the
following hold.

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath and @xmath if and only if @xmath

3.  @xmath and @xmath if and only if @xmath

###### Proof.

Proof is trivial. ∎

Next we observe that any @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath can be
written as @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and
@xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath In view of this and Lemma 3.4 ,
we see that for each @xmath and @xmath the number of pairs @xmath with
@xmath as a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath as a @xmath -subspace
of @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath is equal to the number of
non-degenerate @xmath -submodules of @xmath with respect to @xmath
Further, we make the following observation.

###### Remark 3.2.

When @xmath by Lemma 3.3 , we see that @xmath is a non-degenerate and
skew-Hermitian form on @xmath In this case, we will first transform the
skew-Hermitian form @xmath to a Hermitian form @xmath as follows: Let
@xmath Then the corresponding element @xmath satisfies @xmath Now we
define the form @xmath on @xmath as @xmath for all @xmath It is easy to
see that @xmath is a non-degenerate and Hermitian form on @xmath
Further, as @xmath and @xmath are non-zero elements of @xmath and @xmath
respectively, we observe that if two elements in @xmath are orthogonal
with respect to @xmath then those two elements are also orthogonal with
respect to @xmath and vice versa. This implies that if @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath
then the dual code @xmath of the @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath with
respect to @xmath coincides with the dual code @xmath of @xmath with
respect to @xmath Therefore the number of non-degenerate @xmath
-submodules of @xmath with respect to @xmath is equal to the number of
non-degenerate @xmath -submodules of @xmath with respect to @xmath In
view of this, we will consider the Hermitian and non-degenerate form
@xmath on @xmath in lieu of the skew-Hermitian and non-degenerate form
@xmath from now onwards.

In order to enumerate the number @xmath for each @xmath we will first
prove that if @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath such that @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath with respect to @xmath for @xmath then @xmath Note
that for each @xmath the form @xmath is non-degenerate and Hermitian on
@xmath i.e., @xmath is a Hermitian @xmath -space.

###### Proposition 3.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath be a @xmath -submodule of
@xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath If @xmath is non-degenerate, then the @xmath
-dimension of @xmath is equal to the @xmath -dimension of @xmath

In order to prove this proposition, we need to define the following:

Let @xmath be a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath be a @xmath
-subspace of @xmath A non-zero element @xmath is said to be isotropic if
@xmath otherwise @xmath is called an anisotropic element of @xmath Note
that all the non-zero elements of @xmath and @xmath are trivially
isotropic. An isotropic element @xmath of @xmath is said to be
non-trivial if both @xmath are non-zero. We say that two non-trivial
isotropic elements @xmath and @xmath of @xmath form a hyperbolic pair if
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are multiplicative identities of @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Throughout this section, we will denote the
@xmath -submodule of @xmath generated by the elements @xmath by @xmath
Furthermore, it is easy to see that @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath
-subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath

In the following lemma, we will discuss the existence of a non-trivial
isotropic element and a hyperbolic pair in a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath

###### Lemma 3.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath having
dimension @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath having
dimension @xmath Then we have the following:

1.   There does not exist any non-trivial isotropic element in @xmath
    when either @xmath or @xmath

2.   There exists a non-trivial isotropic element in @xmath when both
    @xmath

3.   When both @xmath there exists a hyperbolic pair in @xmath

4.   The @xmath -submodule of @xmath generated by a hyperbolic pair is
    non-degenerate.

###### Proof.

1.  To prove this, without any loss of generality, suppose that @xmath
    Let @xmath be a non-zero element of @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
    Now @xmath is an isotropic element if and only if it satisfies
    @xmath which holds if and only if @xmath and @xmath which is
    equivalent to saying that @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath
    -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath We
    first assert that @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath To prove
    this assertion, we define a map @xmath as @xmath for all @xmath It
    is easy to see that @xmath is a non-zero vector space homomorphism
    and @xmath is the kernel of the map @xmath Now by Sylvester’s law of
    nullity, we have @xmath which proves the assertion. Working in a
    similar manner as above, one can show that if @xmath then @xmath
    Further, we observe that @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath From
    this, it follows that @xmath is an isotropic element of @xmath if
    and only if either @xmath and @xmath or @xmath and @xmath This shows
    that there does not exist any non-trivial isotropic element in
    @xmath when @xmath

2.  Suppose that both @xmath Let @xmath be an element of @xmath where
    @xmath and @xmath If @xmath is isotropic, then there is nothing to
    prove. Otherwise, we have @xmath By ( 21 ), we get @xmath Now by
    Lemma 3.3(v) of Sharma and Kaur [ 16 ] , Lemma 6(iv)-(v) of Huffman
    [ 9 ] and using Remark 3.2 , we see that @xmath This gives @xmath
    where @xmath Now consider the @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath It
    is easy to observe that @xmath Now working as in part (a), we see
    that @xmath and @xmath Using this, we see that there exist non-zero
    elements @xmath and @xmath which implies that @xmath Now if the
    element @xmath is isotropic, then we are through. Otherwise, using (
    21 ), we get @xmath Now by Sharma and Kaur [ 16 , Lemma 3.3(v)] ,
    Huffman [ 9 , Lemma 6(iv)] and using Remark 3.2 , we see that @xmath
    This implies that @xmath where @xmath Now it is easy to see that
    @xmath is a non-trivial isotropic element of @xmath

3.  As both @xmath by part (b), we see that @xmath has a non-trivial
    isotropic element, say @xmath Further, we have @xmath Working as in
    part (a), we see that @xmath and @xmath Now we choose a non-zero
    element @xmath and @xmath Then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath This
    gives @xmath Therefore, without any loss of generality, we assume
    that @xmath is such that @xmath
    If @xmath is an isotropic element, then we are done. Otherwise,
    using ( 21 ), we have @xmath Now by Sharma and Kaur [ 16 , Lemma
    3.3(v)] , Huffman [ 9 , Lemma 6(iv)] and using Remark 3.2 , we see
    that @xmath This implies that @xmath where @xmath Now it is easy to
    see that @xmath is a non-trivial isotropic element in @xmath On the
    other hand, we observe that @xmath which implies that @xmath and
    @xmath form a hyperbolic pair in @xmath

4.  Proof is trivial.

∎

The following lemma is quite useful in writing an orthogonal direct sum
decomposition of a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath

###### Lemma 3.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath and @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of
@xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath for each @xmath Then @xmath is a
non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows from Lemma 1.1 of Knebusch et al. [ 13 ] . ∎

In the following lemma, we write an orthogonal direct sum decomposition
of a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath

###### Lemma 3.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath
-submodule of @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and
@xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath Then the
following hold:

1.   When @xmath is even and @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath is a
    hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the
    @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath

2.   When @xmath is odd and @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath is a
    hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath @xmath is an anisotropic
    element of @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the @xmath -dimensional
    @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath

3.   When @xmath is even and @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath is a
    hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the
    @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath

4.   When @xmath is odd and @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath is a
    hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath @xmath is an anisotropic
    element of @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the @xmath -dimensional
    @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath

###### Proof.

1.  Suppose that @xmath is even and @xmath Let us write @xmath where
    @xmath is an integer. In order to prove (a), we will apply induction
    on @xmath

    First let @xmath In this case, by Lemma 3.5  (c) and (d), we see
    that @xmath has a hyperbolic pair, say @xmath and the @xmath
    -submodule @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now by Lemma 3.6 , we
    have @xmath where @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of
    @xmath Further, it is easy to see that @xmath We next observe that
    @xmath and @xmath This implies that @xmath Now let @xmath be a basis
    of the @xmath -subspace @xmath of @xmath It is clear that @xmath for
    all @xmath From this, we obtain @xmath Thus the result holds for
    @xmath

    Next let @xmath and suppose that the result holds for every
    non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of the type @xmath where @xmath is
    a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
    @xmath with @xmath and @xmath

    We will now prove the result for a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule
    @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a
    @xmath -subspace of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath By Lemma 3.5  (c)
    and (d), we see that @xmath has a hyperbolic pair, say @xmath and
    the @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath is non-degenerate. Now by
    Lemma 3.6 , we have @xmath where @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath
    -submodule of @xmath Further, we see that @xmath It is easy to
    observe that @xmath and @xmath Now by applying induction hypothesis,
    we have @xmath where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath for
    @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the @xmath -subspace @xmath of
    @xmath From this, we obtain @xmath where @xmath are hyperbolic pairs
    in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a basis of the @xmath -subspace
    @xmath of @xmath This proves (a).

2.  Suppose that @xmath is odd and @xmath Let us write @xmath where
    @xmath is an integer. Here we will apply induction on @xmath

    We first suppose that @xmath so that @xmath Here we assert that
    there exists an anisotropic element in @xmath To prove this, we
    choose @xmath It is easy to see that @xmath From this, we see that
    there exists @xmath so that @xmath This gives @xmath i.e., @xmath is
    an anisotropic element of @xmath Further, it is easy to observe that
    @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath By Lemma 3.6
    , we get @xmath where @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule
    of @xmath Next we observe that @xmath Working as in Lemma 3.5 (a),
    we see that @xmath and @xmath This implies that @xmath is a @xmath
    -subspace of @xmath and suppose that @xmath is its basis. As @xmath
    for all @xmath we have @xmath From this, we obtain @xmath Thus the
    result holds when @xmath

    When @xmath working in a similar way as in part (a) and using Lemmas
    3.5 and 3.6 , part (b) follows.

3.  Working in a similar manner as in part (a), part (c) follows.

4.  Working in a similar manner as in part (b), part (d) follows.

∎

Proof of Proposition 3.7 . It follows immediately from Lemma 3.7 and
using the fact that @xmath @xmath

###### Remark 3.3.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath where @xmath
is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath Then in view of Proposition 3.7 , we must have @xmath Further, it
is easy to see that @xmath is a free @xmath -submodule of @xmath having
rank @xmath When @xmath is even, by Lemma 3.7 (a), we see that @xmath
has an orthogonal direct sum decomposition of the type @xmath where
@xmath is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath for @xmath When @xmath is odd, by
Lemma 3.7 (b), we see that @xmath has an orthogonal direct sum
decomposition of the type @xmath where @xmath is a hyperbolic pair in
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath is an anisotropic element of @xmath It is
easy to see that @xmath is the set consisting of all the trivial
isotropic elements in @xmath From this, it follows that the number of
trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath When @xmath by
Lemma 3.5 (a), we see that there does not exist any non-trivial
isotropic element in @xmath

In the following proposition, we determine the number of non-trivial
isotropic elements in @xmath when @xmath

###### Proposition 3.8.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath where @xmath
is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath with @xmath Then the number of non-trivial isotropic elements in
@xmath is given by @xmath

In order to prove this proposition, we need to prove the following
lemma:

###### Lemma 3.8.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath where @xmath
is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath with @xmath Then the number of non-trivial isotropic elements in
@xmath is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

Since @xmath by Lemma 3.7 (a), we have @xmath where @xmath is a
hyperbolic pair in @xmath From this, we get @xmath @xmath @xmath and
@xmath Now any element @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath can be
written as @xmath where @xmath From this, we obtain @xmath and @xmath
Next we observe that @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath if and only
if @xmath
Now in order to count all the non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath
we will consider the following three cases separately: I. @xmath II.
@xmath and III. both @xmath and @xmath are non-zero.
Case I. Let @xmath that is, @xmath and @xmath Then we have @xmath and
@xmath This gives @xmath which is clearly a non-trivial isotropic
element for all @xmath and @xmath So in this case, there are precisely
@xmath such non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath
Case II. Let @xmath Then we have @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath which
is clearly a non-trivial isotropic element for all @xmath and @xmath In
this case also, there are precisely @xmath such non-trivial isotropic
elements in @xmath
Case III. Let @xmath and @xmath Then we see that @xmath is an isotropic
element if and only if @xmath if and only if @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and @xmath In this case, the
condition ( 22 ) is not satisfied, which implies that @xmath is an
anisotropic element of @xmath Next if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and
@xmath Here also, the condition ( 22 ) is not satisfied, which implies
that @xmath is an anisotropic element of @xmath Working in a similar
way, we see that the element @xmath is anisotropic when either @xmath or
@xmath (but not both) is zero. Finally, we assume that @xmath all are
non-zero. Then by equation ( 22 ), we obtain @xmath which implies that
the number of such non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by
@xmath

On combining all the above cases, we see that the total number of
non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath ∎

Proof of Proposition 3.8 . In order to prove this proposition, we will
apply induction on @xmath When @xmath by Lemma 3.8 , the result holds.
Now we assume that @xmath and suppose that the result holds for all
@xmath -submodules @xmath of @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace
of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath with @xmath Now let
@xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath where @xmath is a
@xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath
with @xmath

First of all, we assert that there exists an anisotropic element in
@xmath For this, we choose @xmath Working as in Lemma 3.5 (a), we see
that @xmath Thus there exists @xmath so that @xmath This gives @xmath
i.e., @xmath is an anisotropic element of @xmath Now as @xmath is a
non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath by Lemma 3.6 , we have @xmath
We observe that @xmath Working as in Lemma 3.5 (a), we get @xmath This
implies that @xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath
having rank @xmath

Now any element @xmath with @xmath and @xmath can be uniquely written as
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath We next observe
that @xmath if and only if @xmath while @xmath if and only if @xmath Now
in order to count all non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath we shall
distinguish the following two cases: I. @xmath and II. @xmath
Case I. Let @xmath Then we must have @xmath and @xmath So @xmath which
is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath having rank @xmath Now
by applying induction hypothesis, we see that the number of such
non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath
Case II. Let @xmath

If @xmath then @xmath @xmath and @xmath Now if @xmath then we see that
@xmath and clearly @xmath which implies that @xmath is a non-trivial
isotropic element for all @xmath and @xmath In this case, there are
precisely @xmath choices for @xmath and @xmath choices for @xmath So
there are precisely @xmath such non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath
On the other hand, if @xmath then for all @xmath we see that @xmath is
an isotropic element if and only if @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
non-trivial isotropic element in @xmath Now @xmath has @xmath choices
and by the induction hypothesis, the number of choices for a non-trivial
isotropic element @xmath is given by @xmath Thus in this case, the
number of non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath

Next suppose that @xmath so that @xmath Then @xmath and @xmath Now if
@xmath then we see that @xmath which is clearly a non-trivial isotropic
element for all @xmath and @xmath So the number of such non-trivial
isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath If @xmath then @xmath is
an isotropic element if and only if @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
non-trivial isotropic element of @xmath Now @xmath has @xmath choices
and by the induction hypothesis, there are precisely @xmath distinct
non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath So in this case, the number of
such non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath

Further, suppose that both @xmath are non-zero. Then @xmath and @xmath
Now @xmath is an isotropic element if and only if @xmath if and only if
@xmath if and only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

We observe that when both @xmath are zero, we have @xmath which is
clearly an anisotropic element. If either @xmath or @xmath (but not
both) is non-zero, then @xmath with @xmath for some @xmath Then by ( 23
), we see that @xmath is an isotropic element if and only if @xmath
which is not possible, and hence @xmath is an anisotropic element. Now
if both @xmath are non-zero, then by ( 23 ), @xmath is an isotropic
element if and only if @xmath We observe that as @xmath and @xmath all
are non-zero, we must have @xmath which implies that @xmath is an
anisotropic element of @xmath We also note that @xmath is determined
uniquely by @xmath and @xmath We see that @xmath has @xmath choices and
by the induction hypothesis, the number of anisotropic elements in
@xmath is given by @xmath Thus the number of such non-trivial isotropic
elements in @xmath is given by @xmath

On combining all the above cases, we see that the total number of
non-trivial isotropic elements in @xmath is given by @xmath which equals
@xmath after a simple computation. @xmath
In the following proposition, we determine the number of hyperbolic
pairs in a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath where
@xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace
of @xmath with @xmath

###### Lemma 3.9.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath where @xmath
is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of
@xmath with @xmath Then the total number of hyperbolic pairs in @xmath
is given by @xmath

###### Proof.

Since @xmath by Lemma 3.5 (a), @xmath has a non-trivial isotropic
element, say @xmath By Proposition 3.8 , the number of choices for
@xmath is given by @xmath Further by Lemma 3.5 (c) and (d), there exists
another non-trivial isotropic element @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath
is a hyperbolic pair in @xmath and the @xmath -submodule @xmath of
@xmath is non-degenerate. Now by Lemma 3.6 , we can write @xmath where
@xmath is a non-degenerate @xmath -submodule of @xmath Further, we
observe that @xmath where @xmath So any element @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath can be written as @xmath where @xmath @xmath and @xmath Note that
@xmath is a hyperbolic pair if and only if @xmath and @xmath Now @xmath
if and only if @xmath and @xmath which gives @xmath We also observe that
both @xmath and @xmath are non-zero. Further, we see that @xmath if and
only if @xmath if and only if @xmath Now we observe that @xmath is
determined uniquely by @xmath and @xmath Further, it is easy to see that
each of @xmath and @xmath has @xmath choices and @xmath has @xmath
choices. From this, it follows that the element @xmath has @xmath
choices for @xmath to be a hyperbolic pair in @xmath Therefore the total
number of hyperbolic pairs in @xmath is given by @xmath which equals
@xmath ∎

Proof of Proposition 3.6 . In view of Remark 3.2 , we need to consider
@xmath so that @xmath is a Hermitian @xmath -space having rank @xmath

Now to prove this proposition, for each integer @xmath let @xmath denote
the number of pairs @xmath with @xmath as a @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-subspace of @xmath and @xmath as a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -subspace
of @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath Then we have @xmath

To begin with, we note, by Lemma 3.4 (c), that for @xmath the number
@xmath is equal to the number of @xmath -submodules @xmath of @xmath
satisfying @xmath and @xmath that is, @xmath is equal to the number of
non-degenerate @xmath -submodules @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath
where @xmath is a @xmath -subspace of @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath
-subspace of @xmath

Here by Lemma 3.3 , we see that @xmath Further, for any integer @xmath
satisfying @xmath using Remark 3.3 , Proposition 3.8 and Lemma 3.9 and
working in a similar manner as in Proposition 3.2 , we see that @xmath
for @xmath From this, the desired result follows. @xmath
Proof of Theorem 3.1 . It follows immediately from Propositions 3.1 -
3.6 . @xmath