The aim of this thesis is to find a solution to the non-parametric
independence problem in separable metric spaces. Suppose we are given
finite collection of samples from an i.i.d. sequence of paired random
elements, where each marginal has values in some separable metric space.
The non-parametric independence problem raises the question on how one
can use these samples to reasonably draw inference on whether the
marginal random elements are independent or not. We will try to answer
this question by utilizing the so-called distance covariance functional
in metric spaces developed by Russell Lyons. We show that, if the
marginal spaces are so-called metric spaces of strong negative type
(e.g.â€‰ seperable Hilbert spaces), then the distance covariance
functional becomes a direct indicator of independence. That is, one can
directly determine whether the marginals are independent or not based
solely on the value of this functional. As the functional formally takes
the simultaneous distribution as argument, its value is not known in the
posed non-parametric independence problem. Hence, we construct
estimators of the distance covariance functional, and show that they
exhibit asymptotic properties which can be used to construct
asymptotically consistent statistical tests of independence. Finally, as
the rejection thresholds of these statistical tests are non-traceable we
argue that they can be reasonably bootstrapped.
