## 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Background

The properties of the isolated static quantum system in the equilibrium
state have been studied deeply. The studies of more general systems are
important, however, uncompleted and are actively being studied. This
thesis focus on the following three points of view. The first is (1)
time-dependence. In the isolated quantum system with time-dependent
parameters, the Berry phase [ 27 ] is important. The second is (2) open
quantum system. The quantum dot (QD) system coupled to several leads is
an instance of the open quantum system. A theoretical method to study
the open quantum system is the quantum master equation (QME). The third
is the (3) nonequilibrium steady state (NESS). The entropy production
under operations between NESSs of the classical system is being studied
actively.

In particular, in this thesis, we study the quantum pump and the excess
entropy production. In a mesoscopic system, even at zero bias, a charge
or spin current is induced by a modulation of the control parameters [
39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] . This
phenomenon, called the quantum pump, is theoretically interesting
because its origins are quantum effects and nonequilibrium effects. The
entropy production under operations between NESSs is composed of the
time integral of the instantaneous steady entropy production rate and
the excess entropy production. The excess entropy production is
intensively being studied as a generalization of the entropy concept.

Recently, Ref. [ 19 ] had been applied the Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman (BSN)
phase to the excess entropy production in the classical system. The BSN
phase is the “Berry phase” of the modified master equation including the
counting fields which is a tool of the full counting statistics (FCS).
For quantum system described by the QME, Ref. [ 23 ] had applied the BSN
phase using the FCS-QME [ 26 ] to study the quantum adiabatic pump. The
FCS-QME had also been applied the excess entropy production in the
quantum system [ 20 ] . However, we point out that this study has
serious flaws [ 98 ] .

### 1.2 Full counting statistics

In this section, we consider two terminals system. In a mesoscopic
system, we can see quantum properties through the conducting property.
By recent development of experimental techniques, the transfered charge
@xmath within a time interval @xmath and the variance @xmath and higher
cumulants can be measured ( @xmath is the statistical average). The
notion of obtaining all cumulants is called the full counting statistics
(FCS) [ 26 , 74 , 75 , 76 ] . The @xmath -th order cumulant @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is the cumulant generating function of @xmath . @xmath is the
probability distribution of @xmath . @xmath is called the counting
field. The cumulants up to fourth order are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The third and fourth cumulants describe the skewness and sharpness,
respectively.

The noise @xmath is composed of the thermal noise (the Johnson-Nyquis
noise) and the shot noise. The shot noise appears when @xmath where
@xmath is the voltage and @xmath is the temperature. The shot noise
@xmath relates with the current @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fano factor. For classical shot noise (Poisson
noise), @xmath holds. Then, effective charge @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath had been observed for the fractional quantum Hall state @xmath [
88 , 89 ] .

The FCS [ 26 , 74 , 75 , 76 ] is the method to calculate the generating
function. From the FCS of entropy production, the fluctuation theorem [
90 , 91 , 92 ] is derived [ 26 , 76 ] . The fluctuation theorem leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, the noise @xmath and the current @xmath are expanded as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

( 1.5 ) is the Johnson-Nyquist relation, which can be derived from the
linear response theory. ( 1.6 ) is a relation of the non-linear
response. This relation had been tested by experiments [ 93 , 94 ] .

### 1.3 Quantum adiabatic pump

In a mesoscopic system, even at zero bias, a charge or spin current is
induced by a slow modulation of control parameters [ 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 ,
43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] . This phenomenon, called the quantum
adiabatic pump, is theoretically interesting because its origins are
quantum effects and nonequilibrium effects. The quantum adiabatic pump
is also expected to be applied to the single electron transfer devices
and the current standard [ 50 , 51 ] .

#### 1.3.1 Closed system

For a closed quantum system, the Berry phase [ 27 , 95 ] appear when the
parameter of the Hamiltonian is changed adiabatically (slowly). The
quantization of the quantum Hall coefficient is proposed by Thouless et
al. [ 39 ] in 1982. In 1983, for the system which only the @xmath
-direction is periodic, Thouless showed [ 39 ] that the transfered
charge by the cyclic adiabatic modulation of the potential is quantized.

#### 1.3.2 Brouwer formula

The adiabatically pumped quantity is described by a geometric expression
in the control parameter space, although the pumped quantity coming from
second or higher order of the pumping frequency is not geometric. In
noninteracting systems, the quantum adiabatic pump had extensively been
studied by the Brouwer formula [ 31 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 ,
59 ] , which describes the pumped charge by the scattering matrix. The
Brouwer formula is discovered in 1998 by Brouwer [ 31 ] .

When @xmath -th control parameter @xmath is changed to @xmath , the
change of the average number of the electrons of the bath @xmath is
given by @xmath . @xmath is called emissivity. For absolute zero
temperature,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

holds [ 96 ] . Here, @xmath and @xmath are labels of electron in the
baths and @xmath is the scattering matrix. By slow modulation of the
control parameters between time @xmath and @xmath , the change of the
average number of the electrons of the bath @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The summation symbol @xmath is omitted. @xmath is the trajectory in the
control parameters. In particular, for cyclic modulation @xmath , using
the Stokes theorem,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

holds. @xmath is the surface enclosed by @xmath . @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If the electrons of the bath @xmath are labeled by @xmath and energy
@xmath and the scattering is elastic

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath at zero-bias is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the chemical potential of the baths.

On the other hand, it is difficult to calculate the scattering matrix in
the interacting systems. In the interacting system, the Brouwer formula
had only been applied in mean field treatments [ 60 , 61 ] or in the
Toulouse limit [ 62 ] .

#### 1.3.3 Recent studies of the quantum pump

Recently, the quantum pump in interacting systems have been actively
researched. There are three theoretical approaches. The first is the
Green’s function approach [ 32 , 63 , 64 , 99 , 100 ] . The second is
the generalized master equation (GME) [ 65 , 66 , 33 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70
, 71 ] approach which uses the GME that is equivalent [ 72 , 73 ] to the
quantum master equation (QME) derived using the Nakajima-Zwanzig
projection operator technique [ 28 ] . Particularly, Ref. [ 69 ] derived
a geometric expression similar to the Brouwer formula and the
Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman (BSN) vector explained later. The third is the
full counting statistics [ 26 , 74 , 75 ] (FCS) with quantum master
equation (FCS-QME, which is also called the generalized quantum master
equation [ 26 ] ) approach proposed in Ref. [ 23 ] .

The adiabatic modulation of the control parameters induces a
Berry-phase-like [ 27 ] quantity called the BSN phase in the FCS-QME
with the Markov approximation. Sinitsyn and Nemenman [ 22 ] studied the
adiabatically pumped charge using the FCS and had shown that it is
characterized by the BSN vector, which results from the BSN phase. The
BSN vector was applied to the spin boson system [ 77 ] . The FCS-QME
approach can treat the Coulomb interaction, which can not be treated in
the Brouwer formula. The derived formula of the BSN vector depends on
the approximations used for the QME. The Born-Markov approximation with
or without the rotating wave approximation [ 28 ] (RWA) is frequently
used. The QME in the Born-Markov approximation without RWA sometimes
violates the non-negativity of the system reduced density operator [ 78
] . The QME of the RWA or the coarse-graining approximation [ 29 , 30 ]
(CGA) is the Lindblad type which guarantees the non-negativity [ 28 ] .

Some recent papers [ 68 , 69 , 23 ] showed that the Coulomb interaction
induces the quantum pump. In Refs. [ 68 , 69 ] , it was shown that in a
one level interacting quantum dot (QD) weakly coupled to two leads, the
pumped charge (also spin in Ref. [ 69 ] ) induced by an adiabatic
modulation of the energy level of the QD and the bias between the two
leads vanishes in the noninteracting limit. In particular, Yuge et al. [
23 ] studied the pumped charge coming from the BSN curvatures by
adiabatic modulation of the thermodynamic parameters (the chemical
potentials and the temperatures) in spinless QDs weakly coupled to two
spinless leads and showed that the BSN curvatures are zero in
noninteracting QDs although they are nonzero for finite interaction.

### 1.4 Thermodynamic entropy

We review the thermodynamic entropy based on Ref. [ 97 ] .

#### 1.4.1 Principles of thermodynamics

A macro system @xmath is generally imposed internal constraints which
describe the characters of the internal structures. For instance, the
subsystem of @xmath is enclosed by the wall which does not transmit
heat. @xmath can be decomposed to the simple systems @xmath . The simple
system is the macro system which has not internal constraints and of
which spatial non-uniformity in the equilibrium state due to the
external fields is negligible. The equilibrium state is the state which
all macro variables of the system do not change (as functions of time).
As a principle, for arbitrary macro system @xmath , it is requested that
if @xmath is isolated (static external fields can exist) and is left
sufficiently long time, @xmath becomes the equilibrium state. As
principles, the followings are requested: (i) If @xmath is in the
equilibrium state, the entropy @xmath exist uniquely.
(ii) The entropy @xmath of @xmath is a function of the internal energy
@xmath of @xmath and the set of additive variables of @xmath , @xmath :
@xmath . @xmath are called the natural variables.
(iii) @xmath is continuously differentiable for the natural variables.
In particular, @xmath is positive and its lower limit is 0 and the upper
limit does not exist. Here, @xmath is the Boltzmann constant and @xmath
is the inverse temperature of @xmath .
(iv) @xmath is in the equilibrium state if and only if all @xmath are in
the equilibrium states and @xmath is maximized. The entropy @xmath of
@xmath is given by @xmath where @xmath is the maximization under the
permitted area. The values of the natural variables which provide the
@xmath are those in the equilibrium state.

#### 1.4.2 Heat and entropy

The work @xmath is the transfered energy described by the macro
variables. In general, @xmath is the summation of the mechanical work
@xmath and the work due to particle transfer @xmath and etc. The heat
@xmath is defined by @xmath where @xmath is the total transfered energy
from the external system. Because @xmath is the change of the internal
energy @xmath , @xmath holds.

The process in which a system @xmath can be regarded as always be in the
equilibrium state is called the quasistatic process for @xmath .

From the principles of § 1.4.1 , the following theorem is derived. We
consider a process that a general system @xmath receives the heat from
external systems @xmath , @xmath , @xmath exchanging mechanical work
with the external systems @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . When @xmath
contacts with @xmath , @xmath does not contact with @xmath . The set
@xmath may not be an empty set. We suppose that this process is
quasistatic process for @xmath . Then, the change of the entropy @xmath
of @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the inverse temperature of @xmath , and @xmath ( @xmath
) denotes the initial (final) state contacting @xmath . In particular,
the equality holds if the following conditions satisfy: (i) This process
is also quasistatic process for @xmath . (ii) While @xmath contacts to
@xmath , the inverse temperature of @xmath equals to @xmath .

In the following of this subsection, we consider a simple system @xmath
. We denote the natural variables of the entropy @xmath of @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath . From the principles of § 1.4.1 , @xmath is convex
upward for each natural variable. The equation @xmath can solve for
@xmath uniquely: @xmath . We introduce @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the
temperature of @xmath and @xmath holds with @xmath . If @xmath is the
total particle number @xmath , @xmath is the chemical potential.

We denote the work by changing of @xmath by @xmath . For a quasistatic
process for @xmath , the work is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath and the definition of the heat,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. This is called the Clausius equality. For the general system
(which is not simple system), the Clausius equality holds if the
temperature is uniform in the system. In particular, if @xmath holds,
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. Here and in the following this thesis, we set @xmath . In general
process, it is difficult to define the heat. For a quasistatic process
for @xmath , @xmath can be defined as explained above. In ( 1.15 ),
@xmath is defined by @xmath where @xmath is the heat to @xmath .

In the equilibrium classical (quantum) system, the entropy is given by
the Shannon entropy of the probability distribution (von Neumann entropy
of the density matrix) of states.

### 1.5 Nonequilibrium steady state

Let us consider a system @xmath coupled to the baths @xmath ( @xmath ).
We suppose that @xmath are the canonical baths and @xmath are the grand
canonical baths. We denote the inverse temperature of @xmath by @xmath
and the chemical potential of @xmath ( @xmath ) by @xmath . If all
@xmath and @xmath are the same ( @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for
all @xmath ), the total system is referred as zero-bias or equilibrium.
For the nonequilibrium total system fixing (control) parameters, if
@xmath is left sufficiently long time and becomes a steady state, this
state of @xmath or the total system is called the nonequilibrium steady
state (NESS). For quantum system described by the QME, the NESS exists
uniquely.

As the instance, we consider spinless one level QD coupled to several
leads. @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the state that the QD is empty
(occupied). The diagonal components @xmath ( @xmath ) of the system
state @xmath are governed by the master equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Liouvillian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the line-width function of the lead @xmath , @xmath is
the Fermi distribution function, @xmath is the energy level of the QD.
In this section the parameters are fixed. The solution of the master
equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first term of the RHS of ( 1.21 ) is the NESS.

### 1.6 Excess entropy

The investigation of thermodynamic structures of NESSs has been a topic
of active research in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics [ 1 , 2 , 3 ,
4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] . For instance, the extension of the relations
in equilibrium thermodynamics, such as the Clausius equality, to NESSs
has been one of the central subjects. Recently there has been a progress
in the extension of the Clausius equality to NESSs [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] (see
also Refs. [ 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] ). In these studies, the
excess heat @xmath (of the bath @xmath ) [ 2 ] , which describes an
additional heat induced by a transition between NESSs with
time-dependent external control parameters, has been introduced instead
of the total heat @xmath . The excess heat @xmath is defined by
subtracting from @xmath the time integral of the instantaneous steady
heat current from the bath @xmath . In the weakly nonequilibrium regime,
it is proposed that there exists a scalar potential @xmath in the
control parameter space which approximately satisfies the extended
Clausius equality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the inverse temperature of the bath @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath is the value of the set of the control parameters at time @xmath
, and @xmath and @xmath are initial and final times of the operation. In
classical systems, @xmath is the symmetrized Shannon entropy [ 11 ] . In
quantum systems with the time-reversal symmetry, @xmath is the
symmetrized von Neumann entropy [ 12 ] . In general, the left hand side
(LHS) of ( 1.23 ) is replaced by the excess entropy @xmath where @xmath
is the average entropy production and @xmath is the instantaneous steady
entropy production rate [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] . In the quasistatic operation,
the excess entropy is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a measure of degree of nonequilibrium and @xmath
describes the amplitude of the change of the control parameters. Sagawa
and Hayakawa [ 19 ] studied the full counting statistics (FCS) of the
entropy production for classical systems described by the Markov jump
process and showed that the excess entropy is characterized by the
Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman (BSN) phase [ 22 ] .

The method of Ref. [ 19 ] was generalized to quantum systems and applied
to studies of the quantum pump [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] . We explain the studies
of the quantum pump. At @xmath and @xmath , we perform projection
measurements of a time-independent observable @xmath of the baths and
obtain the outcomes @xmath and @xmath . The generating function of
@xmath is @xmath where @xmath is the probability density distribution of
@xmath and @xmath is called the counting field. To calculate the
generating function, the method using the quantum master equation (QME)
with the counting field (FCS-QME) [ 26 ] had been proposed. The solution
of the FCS-QME @xmath provides the generating function as @xmath .
@xmath denotes the trace of the system. The Berry phase [ 27 ] of the
FCS-QME is the BSN phase. The average of the difference of the outcomes
is given by @xmath where @xmath is the current of an operator @xmath .
If the state of the system at @xmath is the instantaneous steady state
and the modulation of the control parameters is slow, the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Here, the summation symbol for @xmath is omitted. @xmath is the
instantaneous steady current of @xmath and @xmath is the BSN vector
derived from the BSN phase. @xmath is @xmath -th component of the
control parameters, and @xmath is the trajectory from @xmath to @xmath .
The derived formula of the BSN vector depends on the approximations used
for the QME.

Because of ( 1.18 ), the entropy production rate of the bath @xmath is
@xmath where @xmath is the chemical potential of the bath @xmath , and
@xmath and @xmath are energy and particle currents from the system to
the bath @xmath , respectively. @xmath and @xmath are the Hamiltonian
and the total particle number of the bath @xmath , respectively. Then,
it is natural to identify @xmath with the average entropy production
rate of the system. @xmath is the average entropy production. Because of
( 1.25 ), @xmath holds with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the instantaneous steady currents of the
energy and particle from the system to the bath @xmath . @xmath and
@xmath are the BSN vectors of @xmath and @xmath . The excess entropy
production is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Yuge et al. [ 20 ] applied the FCS-QME approach to the excess entropy
production of the quantum system. They identified @xmath with the
average entropy production. Here, @xmath and @xmath are the outcomes of
@xmath at @xmath and @xmath . However, @xmath is not the average entropy
production @xmath . @xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath is the total system state and @xmath denotes the
trace of the total system. The integrand of the second term of the RHS
of ( 1.28 ) roughly equals to @xmath [ 36 ] . However, the physical
meaning of the first term is not clear. Then, because of the presence of
the first term, @xmath is concluded. Moreover, they improperly used the
FCS-QME applicable only for time-independent observable to calculate
@xmath although @xmath is time-dependent. These two issues are the
problems of Ref. [ 20 ] .

### 1.7 Aim of this thesis

There are several theoretical approaches to analyze the quantum pump.
However, the relations among these are not clear. Then, the first aim of
this thesis is to clarify these relations (in particular, the relation
between the FCS-QME approach and the GME approach). Moreover, in the
previous works, the charge pump had been studied mainly. However, for
applications to the spintronics and quantum information processing, the
spin degree of freedom is important. Then, we consider the spin degree
of freedom and study the spin pump.

Recently, the excess entropy of the classical system is established.
However, one for the quantum system is not sufficient as we explained in
§ 1.6 . The second aim of this thesis is to develop the excess entropy
of the quantum system. Moreover, we compare between our results and
previous results of both classical and quantum systems.

### 1.8 Outline of the thesis

The outline of the thesis is as follows. First, we review the FCS and
the FCS-QME (Chap. 2 ). In § 2.1 , we derive the modified von Neumann
equation including the counting fields. In § 2.2 , we derive and the
FCS-QME with the CGA. In § 2.3 , we explain the RWA. In § 2.4 , we
derive the detailed balance condition.

Next, we move to the original results (§ 3.2 ,§ 3.3 and before ( 3.21 )
are review parts). Chap. 3 and Chap. 4 are based on Ref. [ 25 ] . Chap.
6 , Chap. 7 and Chap. 8 are based on Ref. [ 98 ] . We apply the FCS-QME
to the quantum pump (Chap. 3 ). In § 3.1 , we derive the expression for
current without any approximation and introduce the BSN vector. The BSN
vector is also derived from the BSN phase (§ 3.2 ). In § 3.3 , we
introduce the BSN curvature used to cyclic adiabatic pump. In § 3.4 , we
expand the general solution of the QME @xmath by the modulation
frequency @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the instantaneous steady state of the QME, @xmath and
@xmath are calculable and order @xmath . @xmath is the coupling strength
between the system and the baths. @xmath exponentially damps as a
function of time. In the expansion ( 1.29 ), a pseudo-inverse of the
Liouvillian is used. In § 3.5 , we proof the expansion ( 1.29 ) is
independent of the choice of the pseudo-inverse. In § 3.6 , we show that
the GME provides an expansion corresponding to @xmath .

In Chap. 4 , we apply the FCS-QME with the RWA to the quantum adiabatic
pump of the quantum dots (QDs) coupled to two leads ( @xmath and @xmath
). In § 4.1 , we explain the model. We show that the pumped charge and
spin coming from the instantaneous steady current are not negligible
when the thermodynamic parameters are not fixed to zero bias in
noninteracting QDs (§ 4.2.2 ) and an interacting QD (§ 4.3.2 ). To
observe the spin effects, we consider collinear magnetic fields, which
relate to spins through the Zeeman effect, with different amplitudes
applying to the QDs ( @xmath ) and the leads ( @xmath and @xmath ). We
focus on the dynamic parameters ( @xmath , @xmath and the coupling
strength between QDs and leads, @xmath ) as control parameters. In one
level QD with the Coulomb interaction @xmath , we analytically calculate
the BSN curvatures of spin and charge of @xmath pump and @xmath pump for
the noninteracting limit ( @xmath , § 4.2.3 ) and the strong interaction
limit ( @xmath , § 4.3.3 ) at zero-bias. Moreover, we study the @xmath
pump for finite @xmath at zero-bias (§ 4.3.5 ).

We study the quantum diabatic pump for spinless one level QD coupled to
two leads (Chap. 5 ). We calculate @xmath , @xmath and particle current
up to 6th order and pumped particle numbers.

Next, we introduce the generalized QME (Chap. 6 ) used to analyze the
BSN vector of the entropy production. In Chap. 7 and Chap. 8 , we focus
on the RWA. In § 7.1 , the BSN vector @xmath in the equilibrium is
discussed. In § 7.2 , one of the main result of this thesis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

is derived without any assumption on the time-reversal symmetry [ 98 ] .
@xmath is the instantaneous steady state obtained from the QME with
reversing the sign of the Lamb shift term. In § 7.3 , we consider the
time-reversal operation. We show that if the time-reversal symmetry is
broken and the system Hamiltonian is degenerated, @xmath such that
@xmath dose not exist. This is the most important result of this thesis.
Next we mention the results in the Born-Markov approximation (§ 7.4 ).
In Chap. 8 , we compare preceding study on of the entropy production in
the classical Markov jump process [ 21 , 37 ] with ours.

At last (Chap. 9 ), we summarize this thesis. In Appendix A , the
Liouvillian for the Born-Markov approximation is discussed. In Appendix
B , the Liouville space [ 80 , 26 ] and the matrix representation of the
Liouvillian are explained. In Appendix C , we derive ( 3.23 ). In
Appendix D , we discuss the validity of the adiabatic expansion in Chap.
3 . In Appendix E , we discuss the derivation of ( 3.52 ). In the
Appendix F , we discuss the solutions of the GME expanded by the
modulation frequency and the coupling strength between the system and
the baths. In the Appendix G , we calculate the energy current operator.
In the Appendix H , we derive the formula of the derivative of the von
Neumann entropy. In the Appendix I , we proof ( 7.66 ). In the Appendix
J , we explain the definition of entropy production of the Markov jump
process and a result of Ref. [ 21 ] .

## 2 Full counting statistics and quantum master equation

### 2.1 Full counting statistics

We consider the system @xmath coupled with the bath system @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The bath system may contain several baths. The simultaneous eigenstate
of a set of the bath’s observables @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath denote the label of degeneracy, and @xmath is
the kronecker delta. The projection operator to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This has the following properties

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The total system state @xmath is governed by the von Neumann equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In this thesis, we set @xmath . The formal solution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the solution of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . At @xmath , we perform projection measurements of @xmath .
The probability getting @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes the trace over the total system. The state just after
measuring @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After the time evolution by ( 2.7 ), the state at time @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Under this condition, we perform projection measurements of @xmath at
@xmath . The probability getting @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The probability getting @xmath at @xmath and @xmath at @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The probability density distribution of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The generating function is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a real number called the counting field for @xmath .
@xmath denotes the set of the counting fields. The cumulant generating
function is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -th order cumulant @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In particular,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the average of @xmath .

Substituting ( 2.16 ) to ( 2.17 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 2.14 ) to the above equation, we obtain

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Now, we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Properties

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

lead

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, ( LABEL:Z_2 ) becomes

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we used ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ). Here and in the following of this
section, @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is governed by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a Hermitian operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From the Hermitian conjugate of ( 2.32 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.30 ), ( 2.32 ) and the above equation, @xmath is governed by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### 2.2 Quantum master equation with counting fields

#### 2.2.1 Derivation of FCS-QME

We consider system @xmath weakly coupled to several baths. The total
Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the system Hamiltonian and @xmath denotes a set of control
parameters of the system. @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the bath @xmath
and @xmath is a set of control parameters. @xmath is the coupling
Hamiltonian between @xmath and the bath @xmath , and @xmath is a set of
control parameters. We suppose that the states of the baths for @xmath
are the canonical distributions and these for @xmath are the grand
canonical distributions. We denote @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and
@xmath . We denote the inverse temperature of the bath @xmath by @xmath
and the chemical potential of the bath @xmath by @xmath . @xmath denotes
@xmath for @xmath and the set of @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . We
symbolize the set of all control parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ) by @xmath , ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) by @xmath , @xmath by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath by @xmath , and @xmath by @xmath . While @xmath
are dynamical parameters, @xmath are thermodynamical parameters. We
denote the set of all the linear operators of @xmath by @xmath .

The modified von Neumann equation ( 2.36 ) [ 26 ] is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is @xmath of § 2.1 . We suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
for @xmath . @xmath denotes the trace of the bath @xmath and @xmath (
@xmath ) is the total number operator of the bath @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

obeys. We suppose @xmath . We suppose that @xmath commute with @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, @xmath commutes with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds because ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ).

We defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provides the generating function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes the trace over all baths’ degrees of freedom. We assume
@xmath @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

First, we introduce the CGA. An operator in the interaction picture
corresponding to @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . The system reduced density operator in the interaction
picture is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is governed by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up to the second order perturbation in @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.54)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

using the large-reservoir approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and supposing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The arbitrary parameter @xmath @xmath is called the coarse-graining
time. The CGA [ 29 , 30 ] is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Schrödinger picture, ( 2.57 ) is described as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

At @xmath , this is the Lindblad type. If @xmath , the super-operator
@xmath is described as a function of the set of control parameters at
time @xmath . @xmath is the value of @xmath at time @xmath . In this
thesis, we suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, @xmath should be much shorter than the relaxation time of the
system, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the adiabatic modulation, @xmath should hold, then @xmath holds.

In general, the FCS-QME is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the initial condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath describes the coupling effects between @xmath and the bath @xmath
and depends on used approximations. In this thesis, we suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Born-Markov approximation without or within the RWA and the CGA
satisfy this equation. Then, the FCS-QME is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Liouvillian. Here and in the following, @xmath denotes an
arbitrary liner operator of the system.

The Born-Markov approximation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.2 Coarse-graining approximation

In general, the interaction Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is an operator of the system and @xmath is an operator of
the bath @xmath . We suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to ( 2.56 ). Then,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.69)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

holds. In the calculation of @xmath , the values of the control
parameters can be approximated by @xmath . Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.72)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath . Then, ( 2.69 ) becomes

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.75)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.76)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

holds. Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the solution of @xmath for @xmath . In the calculation of
@xmath , the values of the control parameters can be approximated by
@xmath . Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, the eigenoperator @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes the label of the degeneracy. @xmath is one of the
elements of
@xmath . @xmath and @xmath depend on @xmath . The eigenoperators satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.84)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In last two terms, we swapped @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the step
function.

Now, we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.86)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

holds. Here, @xmath denotes the Cauchy principal value and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.87)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 2.86 ) leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

holds. Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.91)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . The integrals for @xmath and @xmath are performed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.92)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

holds. Here, @xmath . The above equation can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.95)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.96)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (2.98)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . @xmath is the Lindblad type. By the way, from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath hold. Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

holds.

For super-operator @xmath , @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . If @xmath holds,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is obtained. Here, @xmath . ( 2.101 ) leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.104)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This leads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means the conservation of the probability.

#### 2.2.3 Concrete model

In this subsection, we consider @xmath . Now we suppose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are single-particle annihilation operators of
the system and of the bath @xmath . Using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.108)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.109)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The eigenoperators @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is one of the elements of @xmath . @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is total number operator of the system. Here and in the
following, we suppose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , existence of @xmath and the above equation are not required.
In ( 2.108 ) and ( 2.109 ),

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

and @xmath . Here, @xmath denotes one of @xmath , @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.115)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.116)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We set @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Whenever @xmath is an element of @xmath , we suppose @xmath are fixed.
We introduce the eigenoperator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath denotes the label of the degeneracy.
@xmath is one of the elements of @xmath . The relations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold. Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.122)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.124)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here, we used ( 2.120 ) and @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.127)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.129)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The latter is the Kubo-Martin-Schwinger (KMS) condition. ( 2.130 ) is
derived from
@xmath (derived from ( 2.121 )) and ( 2.124 ) and ( 2.125 ).

Here, we suppose the free Hamiltonian of the bath @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this case, @xmath can depend on time and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.133)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.134)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.135)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.136)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

hold. @xmath denotes the counting fields for @xmath . If the baths are
fermions, @xmath and @xmath . If the baths are bosons, @xmath and @xmath
.

( 2.106 ) can be generalized as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the eigenoperators.

### 2.3 Rotating wave approximation

In the CGA or Born-Markov approximation, the FCS-QME is described by
@xmath and @xmath @xmath . If @xmath is time dependent, the
generalization of usual RWA [ 28 ] with static @xmath is unclear. In
this thesis, the RWA is defined as the limit @xmath ( @xmath ) of the
CGA. In this limit,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold because of the fact that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath is time independent, this RWA is equivalent to usual RWA.
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a Hermitian operator describing the Lamb shift. @xmath
is called the Lamb shift Hamiltonian. @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.142)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.143)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Because of ( 2.83 ), @xmath commutes with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We introduce projection super-operators @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath . @xmath holds. Then, @xmath
and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold. This implies that the right eigenvalue equations ( 3.3 ) are
decomposed into two closed systems of equations for @xmath and for
@xmath . Thus, @xmath is an element of @xmath or @xmath . In particular,
@xmath . Then, the matrix representation of @xmath by @xmath is block
diagonalized. This implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For ( 2.106 ), @xmath in ( 2.141 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.148)
                                         
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The Lamb shift is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.149)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The second equation of ( 2.112 ) leads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 2.4 Detailed balance condition

In this section, we consider the RWA. If we suppose ( 2.106 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

holds using ( 2.130 ). This is the detailed balance condition. If we
suppose ( 2.137 ), the above relation also holds. From @xmath (see (
2.105 )) and ( 2.151 ) for @xmath lead

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using ( 2.144 ) and ( 2.150 ). If the bath @xmath is fermion, ( 2.106 )
or ( 2.137 ) are general.

In the following of this section, we consider canonical baths ( @xmath
). ( 2.143 ) leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.153)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.154)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

using ( 2.83 ). Then,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (2.155)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

holds. Here, we used

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.157)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.158)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.159)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.160)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Substituting this into ( 2.155 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting @xmath to this equation, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , we suppose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold. ( 2.164 ) is the detailed balance condition. Here, @xmath is an
arbitrary real number, and we used

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

derived from ( 2.163 ). ( 2.163 ) and ( 2.104 ) lead

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## 3 FCS-QME and quantum pump

### 3.1 Currents

Generally, @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath belong to @xmath and depend on @xmath , and
@xmath is a complex number which depends on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
If and only if @xmath , @xmath depends on @xmath . In this chapter, we
assume only Markov property (i.e., @xmath just depends on @xmath ). At
@xmath , the FCS-QME becomes the quantum master equation (QME)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath equals @xmath at @xmath . In the following, a symbol @xmath
without @xmath denotes @xmath .

In the Liouville space [ 25 , 26 ] , the left and right eigenvalue
equations of the Liouvillian are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the Liouville space, @xmath is described by @xmath . The inner
produce is defined by @xmath ( @xmath ). In particular, @xmath holds. A
super-operator which operates to a liner operator of the system becomes
an operator of the Liouville space. The left eigenvectors @xmath and the
right eigenvectors @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The mode which has the eigenvalue with the maximum real part is assigned
by the label @xmath . Because the conservation of the probability @xmath
leads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the limit @xmath , @xmath becomes @xmath and @xmath becomes @xmath
(i.e., @xmath is identity operator). In addition, @xmath determined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

represents the instantaneous steady state .

The formal solution of the FCS-QME ( 2.64 ) is

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the time-ordering operation. Using this, we obtain
the averages

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (3.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath when @xmath is an (super)operator or c-number. Here, we
used @xmath . Moreover, using @xmath , @xmath and ( 3.4 ), we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.10)
  -- -- -- --------

Here, @xmath is defined by @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. The current @xmath is given by [ 24 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The current can also be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the current operator defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., @xmath for any @xmath . Therefore, using ( 3.1 ), the current
operator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 3.10 ), the instantaneous steady current is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following, we suppose @xmath . In this case, as we will show,
@xmath holds where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In @xmath limit, we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.18)
  -- -- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the @xmath -th component of the control parameters,
@xmath is the trajectory from @xmath to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the BSN vector, and the summation symbol @xmath is omitted. As we
will show, the BSN vector is also given by [ 25 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the pseudo-inverse of the Liouvillian defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the research of adiabatic pumping, the expression of ( 3.19 ) is
essential. In Refs. [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] , ( 3.19 ) with ( 3.20 ) was used
to study the quantum pump. On the other hand, in Ref. [ 34 ] , ( 3.19 )
was derived using the generalized master equation [ 33 ] and without
using the FCS. In Ref. [ 34 ] , @xmath was described by the quantity
corresponding to the current operator and the pseudo-inverse of the
Liouvillian, as shown in ( 3.21 ). In this chapter, we show the
equivalence between the FCS-QME approach and the generalized master
equation approach (with the Born-approximation) for all orders of the
pumping frequency [ 25 ] (see also Ref. [ 35 ] ).

### 3.2 Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman phase

The expression of ( 3.19 ) was originally derived like the following.
The formal solution of the FCS-QME is expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath @xmath exponentially damps as a function of time, only
@xmath term remains if @xmath . Solving the time evolution equation of
@xmath in @xmath limit, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

using ( C.8 ) and the fact that the second term of RHS of ( C.8 ) for
@xmath exponentially damps as a function of time. Here, the argument of
the exponential function is called the BSN phase. Substituting this
expression and @xmath into ( 3.23 ), we obtain the expression of @xmath
which provides ( 3.19 ). However, when we consider only the average of
@xmath , the BSN phase is not essential. All informations of the
counting fields up to the first order are included in @xmath .

Substituting ( 3.24 ) and @xmath into ( 3.23 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

and the cumulant generating function @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

( 3.26 ) is the same with Yuge et al. [ 23 ] except for that @xmath
denotes a multi-counting field. The averages @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Here, we used @xmath because
@xmath . The integrand of the first time integral, @xmath , are the
instantaneous steady currents of @xmath at time @xmath ; if the control
parameters are fixed to @xmath and the state is @xmath , the current of
@xmath is @xmath . The third and fourth terms of the right side of (
3.27 ) cancel if the initial condition is the instantaneous steady state
@xmath .

### 3.3 Cyclic pump

For @xmath , the second term of the right side of ( 3.27 ) can be
described as a surface integral over the surface @xmath enclosed by
@xmath using the Stokes theorem :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the wedge product and the summation symbol @xmath is
omitted. BSN curvature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Yuge et al. [ 23 ] focus on only the second term of ( 3.28 ) subtracting
the first term, and they did not evaluate @xmath . In § 4.2.2 , we show
that this contribution is usually dominant if the thermodynamic
parameters are modulated although the steady currents @xmath are zero if
the thermodynamic parameters are fixed to zero bias.

### 3.4 Expansion by frequency

Applying the pseudo-inverse @xmath to the QME ( 3.2 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . One of the solution of ( 3.32 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath holds (we show this at § 3.5 ). The general solution of ( 3.32 )
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . By the way, applying @xmath to ( 3.22 ) from the left, we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.37)
  -- -- -- --------

Applying @xmath to ( 3.32 ) from the left and using the above relation
and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is the same form with the original QME. The solution is @xmath
with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath , @xmath is described as @xmath . This damps
exponentially as a function of time. Then, the state reaches to a
“steady state”

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the difference of the initial state from the “steady state”.
We introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The general solution of the QME is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath holds. The current @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Let’s consider the relation between ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.44 ). In § 3.2 , we
used @xmath -adiabatic approximation ( 3.25 ), which becomes @xmath at
@xmath . Substituting it to ( 3.13 ), we obtain @xmath . So, we cannot
obtain @xmath . However, from the @xmath derivative of ( 3.25 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to ( 3.27 ) for @xmath . ( 3.49 ) suggests

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, this is equivalent to @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

because of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are constants shown in ( E.10 ). We prove ( 3.52 ) in
Appendix E . ( 3.52 ) leads ( 3.21 ) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.53)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By the way, ( 3.12 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Substituting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

to the RHS of ( 3.54 ), @xmath provides @xmath and @xmath provides
@xmath . @xmath provides @xmath . @xmath provides @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.56)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

The third and fourth terms of ( 3.27 ), @xmath , result from this
relaxation. The contribution of @xmath from @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first term of the right side of ( 3.57 ) is @xmath . Because we can
obtain
@xmath from the normalization @xmath ,
@xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.58)
  -- -- -- --------

The second term of the right side of ( 3.57 ) is exponentially small
since @xmath . The order of the third term is @xmath with @xmath because
@xmath and the integral range is restricted up to @xmath since @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Appendix D , we discuss the reasonable range of @xmath of @xmath and
show that with the larger non-adiabaticity ( @xmath ), the reasonable
range becomes wider. We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above equations and @xmath lead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In particular, the contribution from the BSN vector is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, although the BSN phase is derived under the @xmath -adiabatic
condition which makes ( 3.24 ) and @xmath @xmath appropriate, its origin
is probably a non-adiabatic effect that comes from @xmath , because (
3.50 ) shows that the BSN phase has the information of the non-adiabatic
part of the QME @xmath .

For the RWA, at equilibrium (zero-bias) case, @xmath is the grand
canonical distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Cf.( A.11 ). Here, @xmath , @xmath is the inverse temperature of all
baths and @xmath is the chemical potential for @xmath . ( 3.67 ) is
derived from ( 2.152 ) and ( 2.165 ). At zero-bias, for pumping by only
@xmath ( @xmath are fixed), ( 3.20 ), ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.41 ) lead that
the pumping dose not occur in all orders of @xmath when @xmath are
fixed.

### 3.5 Arbitrariness of pseudo-inverse

General solution of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath is one of the solution of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath can depend on the initial values of the QME. In the following of
this section, we show that @xmath is independent of @xmath . Then,
@xmath and @xmath are independent of the choice of the pseudo-inverse.

@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (3.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Then, @xmath is independent of the choice of the pseudo-inverse. Next,
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

By the way, applying @xmath to ( 3.69 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

This leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the choice of the
pseudo-inverse. In fact,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

leads

  -- -- -------- -- -- --------
        @xmath         (3.75)
  -- -- -------- -- -- --------

Then, @xmath leads @xmath . Because of this and @xmath derived from (
3.70 ) and ( 3.73 ), we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.76)
  -- -- -- --------

This and ( 3.74 ) lead

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 3.6 Generalized mater equation approach

It is important to recognize the relations between the FCS-QME approach
and the GME approach [ 66 , 33 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 ] . In the GME
approach, @xmath are governed by the generalized master equation (GME)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the energy eigenstates of the system Hamiltonian. The
kernel @xmath can include the higher order contribution of the tunneling
interaction between baths and the system. In the GME, @xmath is given by
@xmath [ 66 , 33 ] . Moreover, @xmath and @xmath are expanded as @xmath
and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are of the order of @xmath . In
particular, @xmath is the kernel where the control parameters are fixed
to @xmath . Up to the second order of the tunneling interaction (in the
following we consider this level of approximation), we obtain (see
Appendix F ) [ 33 , 70 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the instantaneous Liouvillian corresponding to our @xmath . (
3.79 ) is just the definition of the instantaneous steady state @xmath ,
which satisfies @xmath . Additionally, @xmath for @xmath satisfies
@xmath . The conservation of the probability leads to @xmath , which
corresponds to our @xmath . The charge or spin current @xmath is given
by [ 69 , 70 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

corresponding to our ( 3.13 ). @xmath is the instantaneous current
matrix of @xmath in the present approximation, which corresponds to our
@xmath and is linear in @xmath (see ( 8.15 )). @xmath can be rewritten
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath corresponds to @xmath . Substituting @xmath into ( 3.82 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 3.80 ) for @xmath leads to [ 69 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the pseudo-inverse of @xmath corresponding to our @xmath
and it is given by [ 69 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 3.85 ) into ( 3.84 ), we obtain [ 69 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.87)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A similar method has been used in Ref. [ 66 ] . @xmath and ( 3.87 )
respectively correspond to our @xmath and ( 3.51 ). Moreover, ( 3.80 )
for arbitrary @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which corresponds to our ( 3.33 ). Because of these relations, the GME
approach is equivalent to the FCS-QME approach in the calculation up to
the second order of the tunneling interaction. Additionally, we discuss
corrections due to the non-adiabatic effect of the FCS-QME in Appendix D
. The first equation of ( D.7 ) is consistent with @xmath derived in
Appendix F . Here, @xmath is the relaxation time of the baths.

In this chapter, we proved the equivalence between ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.44 )
using a key relation ( 3.52 ) and showed the origin of the BSN phase is
a non-adiabatic effect, and connected the FCS-QME approach and the GME
approach [ 69 ] . These are among the most important results of the
first half of this thesis.

## 4 Quantum adiabatic pump

### 4.1 Model

In this chapter, we consider quantum dots (QDs) (denoted by a symbol
@xmath ) weakly coupled to several leads. The total Hamiltonian is
@xmath . Here, @xmath is the system (QDs) Hamiltonian, @xmath is the
Hamiltonian of the lead @xmath , and @xmath is the tunneling interaction
Hamiltonian between @xmath and the lead @xmath . To observe the spin
effects, we suppose that the leads and the system are applied to
collinear magnetic fields with different amplitudes, which relate to
spins through the Zeeman effect. The leads are noninteracting:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is spin label,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -factor of the lead @xmath , @xmath is the
Bohr magneton and @xmath is the strength of the magnetic field of the
lead @xmath . @xmath is the creation (annihilation) operator of an
electron with spin @xmath and momentum @xmath in the lead @xmath . The
system Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the creation operator of an electron with orbital @xmath
and spin @xmath . @xmath means the energy of the electron for @xmath and
the tunneling amplitude between orbitals for @xmath which depends on the
magnetic field of the system. @xmath denotes Coulomb interaction. The
tunneling interaction Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a dimensionless parameter, and @xmath is the tunneling
amplitude.

We assume @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are control parameters (denoted
@xmath and are called the dynamic parameters). The thermodynamic
parameters (the chemical potentials and inverse temperatures of the
leads, @xmath and @xmath ) are also considered as control parameters in
§ 4.2.2 and § 4.3.2 . We denote @xmath and @xmath . Yuge et al. [ 23 ]
chose the set of control parameters as only @xmath . However we are
interested in @xmath for the reason explained in § 4.2.2 .

We choose the measured observables @xmath with @xmath . The pumped
charge (spin) of the lead @xmath is given by @xmath . @xmath are
calculated by ( 3.28 ). In fact, what we call the pumped charge, @xmath
, is the pumped electron number (actual pumped charge is given by @xmath
, where @xmath is the elementary charge).

In § 4.2.3 and § 4.3 we consider a one level system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a special model of ( 4.3 ). Here, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the electron energy at @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath factor of the QD.

In the following of this chapter, we apply the FCS-QME with RWA.

### 4.2 Non-interacting system

In this section, we consider a noninteracting system ( @xmath ). The
system Hamiltonian ( 4.3 ) can be diagonalized

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

by a unitary transform @xmath . The tunneling interaction Hamiltonian (
4.4 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In § 4.2.1 , the Liouvillian and its instantaneous steady state are
explained. In § 4.2.2 , we consider the contribution of ( 3.29 ) and
show that this cannot be neglected in general if the chemical potentials
and the temperatures are not fixed. In § 4.2.3 , we calculate the BSN
curvatures for two combinations of modulated control parameters @xmath
and @xmath .

#### 4.2.1 Liouvillian

The Liouvillian in the RWA is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

if @xmath are not degenerated. Here, super-operator @xmath operates to
an arbitrary operator @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the Fermi distribution function, @xmath , @xmath is the
counting field for @xmath . The Lamb shift Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the Cauchy principal value. @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. The matrix representation of @xmath (see Appendix B ) by the
number states of @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ) is a @xmath matrix which
is block diagonalized to @xmath space and @xmath space. The @xmath part
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath part does not relate to the instantaneous steady state of @xmath
. The eigenvalue of the instantaneous steady state of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding left and right eigenvectors are @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath ,
@xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

At @xmath , @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath becomes @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2.2 Instantaneous steady currents

The instantaneous steady current is given by @xmath . ( 4.30 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are calculated from ( 4.26 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 4.18 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 4.24 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath vanishes at zero bias ( @xmath , @xmath ). Let us consider the
modulation of only the thermodynamic parameters ( @xmath ) similar to
Refs. [ 23 , 79 , 24 , 83 ] . The factor depending on @xmath of @xmath
is @xmath with @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is generally nonzero and is much lager than @xmath because the period
@xmath is large for adiabatic pumps. Similarly, we can show that @xmath
is generally nonzero for interacting system (§ 4.3.2 ). Reference [ 24 ]
considered special modulations of only thermodynamic parameters which
satisfy @xmath . In fact, the instantaneous steady currents are always
zero for arbitrary modulations of only the dynamics parameters at zero
bias.

The pumped charge and spin due to the instantaneous steady currents
(backgrounds) are generally nonzero even if the time averages of the
bias are zero.
References [ 68 , 69 ] (two leads case) chose @xmath as one of the
modulating parameters and considered a pumping such that @xmath and
@xmath . In such pumping, the (thermal or voltage) bias is effectively
nonzero.

Even if the backgrounds do not vanish, one can detect the BSN curvatures
by subtracting the backgrounds by using zero-frequency measurements or
by lock-in measurements. However, if one wants to apply the adiabatic
pump to the current standard [ 50 , 51 ] , the instantaneous steady
currents should be zero at all times because the backgrounds are
sensitive to the velocity of the modulation of the control parameters
and its trajectory. In contrast, the pumped charge and spin due to the
BSN curvatures are robust against the modulation of the velocity and the
trajectory. Hence, if one wants to directly apply the BSN curvatures to,
for instance, the current standard, one should fix the thermodynamic
parameters at zero bias.

#### 4.2.3 BSN curvatures

In the following of this subsection, we consider one level system of
which the Hamiltonian is ( 4.5 ) at @xmath . The instantaneous steady
state is given by @xmath because the Liouvillian is described by a
summation ( @xmath ). Similarly, the corresponding left eigenvalue is
given by @xmath . The BSN vectors are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath dose not depend on @xmath . @xmath leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation and ( 4.35 ) lead

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The RHS is @xmath times the change of the total electron average number
of the QD. The above equation describes the conservation of the total
electron number. ( 4.38 ) leads to an expression of the BSN curvatures

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We emphasize that ( 4.43 ) is consistent with the results of Refs. [ 68
, 69 , 23 ] , which showed that the pumped charge (and also spin in Ref.
[ 69 ] ) vanishes at the noninteracting limit in these settings. The set
of control parameters @xmath was @xmath (for Ref. [ 23 ] ) and @xmath
(for Refs. [ 68 , 69 ] ). If @xmath or @xmath is an element of @xmath ,
@xmath is consistently zero. In Refs. [ 68 , 69 ] , the line-width
functions were energy-independent, namely @xmath =constant. Hence @xmath
and @xmath hold consistently.

To calculate @xmath , we need to assume the energy dependences of @xmath
. For the simplicity, we assume that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are energy differential coefficients of the line-width
functions at @xmath . Namely, we disregard spin flips induced by
tunneling between the QD and the leads. ( 4.44 ) is always appropriate
when @xmath is satisfied. Additionally, we fix @xmath to zero bias (
@xmath , @xmath ), in which @xmath is given by @xmath with @xmath . In
the following this subsection, we suppose two leads ( @xmath ) case.
@xmath components of the charge and spin BSN curvatures of the lead
@xmath are

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath . The pumped charge (spin) induced by a slow
cycle modulation of @xmath ( @xmath ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are areas enclosed by the trajectories of @xmath . @xmath (
@xmath ) are invariant under the transformation @xmath , @xmath (for any
@xmath ). Hence relevant quantities are @xmath . The coupling strength
@xmath itself is not important. @xmath are proportional to @xmath and
@xmath are proportional to @xmath . The first terms of the right side of
( 4.2.3 ) and ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ) are dominant terms. In the limit
@xmath , @xmath and the second term of ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ) vanish;
however, the dominant term of ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ) remains. At @xmath ,
@xmath vanish. Hence, at @xmath , the dominant terms of the spin BSN
curvature of @xmath pump and the charge BSN of @xmath pump vanish. The
contour plots of these BSN curvatures are shown in Figs. 1 (a) and 1(b)
and Figs. 2 (a) and 2(b). The details are explained in § 4.3.3 .

It is important to remark that @xmath components of the charge and spin
BSN curvatures are zero at zero bias because, in ( 4.43 ), @xmath are
independent of @xmath and @xmath . As we showed in § 3.4 , for general
model, the pumping dose not occur for all orders of the pumping
frequency when @xmath are fixed.

### 4.3 Interacting system

In this section, we study the interacting system ( 4.5 ). First, we
explain the Liouvillian for @xmath (§ 4.3.1 ). Next, the instantaneous
steady charge and spin currents are calculated at @xmath (§ 4.3.2 ). In
§ 4.3.3 , we confirm the consistency between our results and Ref. [ 69 ]
for @xmath . The BSN curvatures corresponding to ( 4.2.3 ) and (
LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ) are calculated at @xmath and differences of the
results between @xmath and @xmath are discussed (§ 4.3.3 ). Finally, in
§ 4.3.5 , we study the pumping for @xmath in the wide-band limit (i.e.,
( 4.44 ) with @xmath ).

#### 4.3.1 Liouvillian

We explain the Liouvillian for @xmath , in which the Born-Markov
approximation is appropriate. The matrix representation of the
Liouvillian of the RWA by the number states @xmath ( @xmath are the
numbers of an electron with spin @xmath ) is a @xmath matrix which is
block diagonalized to the “diagonal” space (spanned by @xmath ) and the
“off-diagonal” space (spanned by
@xmath ). The “diagonal” block is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.49)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and @xmath . @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.52)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The off-diagonal block is a @xmath -diagonal matrix, which dose not
relate to the instantaneous steady state. At @xmath , @xmath becomes
@xmath , where @xmath are given by ( 4.25 ) and @xmath are identity
matrices. In the opposite limit @xmath , @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

because the density of states of the leads vanish at high energy (
@xmath

#### 4.3.2 Instantaneous steady currents for @xmath

In this subsection, we set @xmath . The characteristic polynomial of
@xmath is denoted as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of @xmath , @xmath is one of the solutions at @xmath . Now we
set @xmath as infinitesimal and other counting fields are zero. Then,
the eigenvalue corresponding to the instantaneous steady state is given
by @xmath . It leads to @xmath with @xmath , and we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . From @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The total instantaneous steady current vanishes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath @xmath describes @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
At zero bias, the instantaneous steady currents vanish. Similar to §
4.2.2 , @xmath are generally nonzero when @xmath is not fixed at zero
bias.

#### 4.3.3 BSN curvatures for @xmath

The instantaneous steady state @xmath and corresponding left eigenvector
@xmath are written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The BSN vectors are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It leads to the BSN curvatures

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We confirmed the consistency between our results and Ref. [ 69 ] , which
studied the similar system for @xmath using the wide-band limit. As we
explained in Chap. 3 , @xmath of ( 3.88 ) corresponds to @xmath , namely
@xmath . In the condition of the wide-band limit, we calculated @xmath
@xmath for @xmath and confirmed numerically the correspondence between
@xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath for the charge and spin pump.

Particularly, in the limit @xmath , @xmath vanishes and @xmath reduces
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the limits @xmath of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. From ( 4.53 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 4.57 ) leads @xmath . Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This equation and ( 4.57 ) lead

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The RHS is @xmath times the change of the total electron average number
of the QD. The above equation describes the conservation of the total
electron number. In the following of this subsection, we fix @xmath to
zero bias ( @xmath , @xmath ) and suppose ( 4.44 ). Then, @xmath equals
@xmath given by ( 4.39 ) and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We emphasize that @xmath can be obtained by just a replacement,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

in ( 4.43 ). In the following this subsection, we suppose two leads (
@xmath ) case. The charge and spin BSN curvatures of @xmath pump are
given by a replacement @xmath in ( 4.2.3 ) and ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ),
where @xmath . Similar to @xmath , the charge and spin BSN curvatures of
@xmath pump are zero.

In Figs. 1 (a)- 1 (d), we plot the BSN curvatures of @xmath pump
normalized by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath @xmath eV/T is the Bohr
magneton. For @xmath , the charge and spin BSN curvatures are shown in
Fig. 1 (a) and Fig. 1 (b), and for @xmath these are shown in Figs. 1 (c)
and 1 (d). The horizontal and vertical axes of these plots are the
strength of the magnetic fields @xmath and @xmath normalized by @xmath .
The values of the parameters used for these plots are @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (bulk GaAs). The BSN curvatures of
@xmath pump normalized by @xmath are shown similarly in Figs. 2 (a)- 2
(d). In all plots, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and other conditions are
the same as in Fig. 1 . In Figs. 1 and 2 , the maximum values of @xmath
are 0.44 and 0.22 ( @xmath 1), respectively. The pumped charges and
spins are given by ( 4.47 ).

Figure 3 (a) shows the instantaneous average numbers of the up spin
electron of the QD, @xmath defined by ( 4.92 ) at @xmath 0, 1.5, 3, 4.5,
6, 7.5, 9, @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In particular,
@xmath and @xmath hold. Because two electrons cannot occupy a QD at
@xmath , the magnetic field dependence of @xmath is more sensitive than
@xmath . Figures 3 (b) and 3 (c) show @xmath normalized by @xmath ,
where @xmath .

In Figs. 2 (a) and 2 (c), the charge BSN curvatures of @xmath pump
vanish at @xmath . This is because the first term of ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 )
vanishes since @xmath ( @xmath denotes @xmath or @xmath ) for @xmath and
the second term vanishes since @xmath for @xmath . Similarly, in Figs. 1
(b) and 1 (d), the spin BSN curvatures of @xmath pump vanish at @xmath .
The zero lines in these plots relate to the cancellation between the
first and second terms of ( 4.2.3 ). Figures. 1 (a), 1 (c) and Figs. 1
(b), 1 (d) are respectively symmetric and antisymmetric under the
transformation @xmath . Similarly, Figs. 2 (b), 2 (d) and Figs. 2 (a), 2
(c) are respectively symmetric and antisymmetric under the
transformation @xmath . We emphasize that pure charge and pure spin
pumps are respectively realized for @xmath pump and @xmath pump such
that the areas @xmath in ( 4.47 ) are symmetric under the above
transformations. An instance of symmetric area of @xmath pump is a disk
of which the center is @xmath .

In @xmath region, the larger @xmath , the less difference between @xmath
and @xmath becomes. The Coulomb interaction prevents two electrons from
occupying the QD. This effect is conspicuous in the @xmath region,
although it is not important in the @xmath region.

As shown in Figs. 1 (a), 1 (c) and Figs. 2 (b), 2 (d), the @xmath
dependence of the charge BSN curvature of @xmath pump and the spin BSN
curvature of @xmath pump at @xmath are more gentle than those at @xmath
. It results from the behavior of @xmath as shown in Fig. 3 (b).

As shown in Figs. 1 (b), 1 (d) and in Figs. 2 (a), 2 (c), the @xmath
dependence of the spin BSN curvature of @xmath pump and the charge BSN
curvature of @xmath pump are opposite. This is because the leading term
(in weak magnetic field region) of these are proportional to @xmath and
its @xmath dependence is opposite in @xmath and @xmath for @xmath as
indicated in Fig. 3 (b). This inversion is realized for only @xmath
region. At @xmath , @xmath vanish. In @xmath region, the signs of @xmath
and @xmath are the same.

In Figs. 1 and 2 , absolute values of the normalized BSN curvatures are
smaller than unity. However, we can improve this problem by tuning
@xmath factors. The first and second terms of the right side of ( 4.2.3
) are the second and third order in the @xmath factors, and the first
and second terms of the right side of ( LABEL:DL,BS,c,0 ) are the first
and second order in the @xmath factors. If all @xmath factors change to
@xmath (for example for the materials like InAs, InSb), the first,
second, and third order terms become about @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
times. In fact, for these values of @xmath factors, the assumption (
4.44 ) is not appropriate for magnetic fields that are not small; we
need concrete energy dependence of the line-width functions.

#### 4.3.4 Instantaneous steady currents

The characteristic polynomial of ( 4.48 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similar to ( 4.3.2 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.73)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.74)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.76)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath leads @xmath . At zero-bias, @xmath vanishes.

#### 4.3.5 BSN curvatures

@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we obtain @xmath @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the following of this subsection, we suppose zero-bias. Then, @xmath
and @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the following of this subsection, we suppose that the line-width
functions do not depend on the energy. Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.86)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting these two equations to ( 4.62 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the average number of the electrons in the QD with spin @xmath .
Because the line-width functions are energy-independent, the BSN
curvatures of @xmath -pump vanish. In the following this subsection, we
suppose two leads ( @xmath ) case. If we suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

the BSN curvatures of @xmath -pump are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.92)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath and @xmath , ( 4.91 ) confirms with the results of §
4.2.3 and § 4.3.3 . @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
                             
                 @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

In particular, at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath hold. ( 4.97 ) is called the half-filling condition.
Under this condition, pure spin pump is realized. @xmath is proportional
to @xmath . This factor becomes @xmath at @xmath and @xmath at @xmath .
If @xmath , @xmath holds and @xmath is negative for @xmath and 0 for
@xmath and positive for @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath is always positive.

We focus on a cyclic pump of an area @xmath , @xmath . The pumped charge
and spin are given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (4.98)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

In particular, if @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

holds. For instance, if the @xmath -factor of the system is negative and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

hold.

## 5 Quantum diabatic pump

### 5.1 Spinless one level quantum dot

In this section, we consider spinless one level QD coupled to two leads
( @xmath ). @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the state that the QD is empty
(occupied). The diagonal components @xmath ( @xmath ) of the system
state @xmath are governed by the master equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Liouvillian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the line-width function of the lead @xmath , @xmath is
the Fermi distribution function, @xmath and @xmath are inverse
temperature and chemical potential of the lead @xmath , @xmath is the
energy level of the QD. The right eigenvectors of the Liouvillian are
the instantaneous steady state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the eigenvalue @xmath . Here,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a specialty of this model, ( 5.4 ) is time-independent. We introduce
@xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ). @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We suppose @xmath . Then, @xmath holds. We choose the @xmath of ( 3.86 )
as the pseudo-inverse of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

From @xmath , we obtain @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

@xmath ( @xmath ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For by only modulating @xmath at zero-bias, the pump dose not occur for
all orders ( @xmath ) because @xmath dose not change.

We consider the particle current to the lead @xmath . From discussion of
§ 4.2.3 , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### 5.2 Numerical calculation

We set the time-dependence of the control parameters as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the numerical calculation, we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath of ( 3.17 ) is given by @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds.

For @xmath , the pumped particle numbers of the first one cyclic are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Figure 4 (b) shows that @xmath and @xmath , Fig. 4 (a) shows that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , and Fig. 4 (c) shows that @xmath and @xmath .

For @xmath , the pumped particle numbers of the first one cyclic are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Figure 5 (b) shows that @xmath and @xmath , Fig. 5 (a) shows that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , and Fig. 5 (c) shows that @xmath and @xmath .

## 6 Generalized quantum master equation for entropy production

### 6.1 Definition of entropy production

In this chapter and Chap. 7 and Chap. 8 , we suppose that @xmath are
time-independent.

It is natural to identify the average entropy production rate with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is given by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The average entropy production is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, we used ( 3.18 ) for @xmath . The excess entropy production is
defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

While we can calculate the average of the entropy production, our
formalism is not compatible to discuss the higher moments of the entropy
production. Although ( 3.19 ) is the average of the difference between
outcomes at @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , @xmath is not that of some
bath’s operator if @xmath are modulated.

### 6.2 Introduction of generalized QME

We consider a kind of generalized quantum master equation (GQME)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the initial condition @xmath . Here, @xmath is a single real
parameter. We suppose that the Liouvillian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

While @xmath of ( 3.1 ) depend on @xmath if and only if @xmath , @xmath
can depend on @xmath for all @xmath . We suppose that the solution of (
6.7 ) satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This condition is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let’s consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to ( 3.4 ) for @xmath . Similar to ( 3.16 ) and ( 3.20 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

hold. Although @xmath and @xmath depend on the choice of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath do not depend, as can be seen in the RHS of the ( 6.14 ) and
( 6.15 ). The LHS of ( 6.12 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this and ( 3.15 ), ( 6.12 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Infinite solutions of this equation exist. One choice of @xmath
satisfying this relation is @xmath (for all @xmath ) and @xmath (for
@xmath ) limit of @xmath .

“Higher moments” @xmath ( @xmath ) depend on the choice of @xmath and
seems have no physical meening. In contrast, the higher moments of the
entropy production could be considered for the classical Markov jump
process. In Appendix J , we review the entropy production of the Markov
jump process [ 21 , 37 ] , and in Chap. 8 , we compare that and ( 6.3 ).

### 6.3 Current operators

The particle and energy current operators from the system into bath
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are usually defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a super-operator @xmath , @xmath is defined by @xmath ( @xmath ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. @xmath is a Hermitian operator and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, for the RWA,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds (Appendix G ). For the Born-Markov approximation and the CGA,
@xmath . From ( 2.163 ), ( 2.166 ) and ( 2.167 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds for the RWA, the Born-Markov approximation, and the CGA. In the
following, we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we suppose ( 2.106 ) for @xmath . The generalization to ( 2.137 )
case is straightforward. For @xmath , ( 2.126 ) holds in ( 2.148 ). For
the Born-Markov approximation and the CGA, @xmath , however, @xmath .
For the RWA,

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

hold. Therefore, ( 6.2 ) and ( 6.18 ) imply that @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.28)
  -- -- -- --------

@xmath is an arbitrary real number.

## 7 Geometrical expression of excess entropy production

In this chapter and Chap. 8 , we focus on the RWA. We use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we suppose ( 2.163 ) for @xmath and ( 2.106 ) or ( 2.137 ) for @xmath
, these relations hold. If @xmath , existence of @xmath , ( 2.163 ), (
7.2 ) and ( 7.4 ) are not required and the system @xmath does not have
to be described by the annihilation and creation operators ( @xmath can
be spin chain or few level system, etc.). Using @xmath (see ( 2.105 ))
for ( 7.3 ) with @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, we used ( 2.144 ) and ( 7.4 ).

### 7.1 Equilibrium state

In this section, we consider equilibrium state @xmath (for all @xmath )
and @xmath @xmath , and @xmath denotes the set of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . We show that @xmath is a total derivative of the von
Neumann entropy of the instantaneous steady state. Differentiating (
6.13 ) by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the RHS, @xmath holds. The second term of the LHS is @xmath . ( 6.27
) leads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e.,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, ( 7.6 ) leads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.10)
  -- -- -- --------

i.e., @xmath where @xmath is unimportant complex number. By the way,
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This is derived from ( 7.5 ) (Cf.( A.11 )). Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Substituting this equation into ( 6.15 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

using ( H.1 ).

### 7.2 Weakly nonequilibrium regime

We introduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the reference values, which satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a measure of degree of nonequilibrium. We consider @xmath
regime. Now, we introduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and corresponding instantaneous steady state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a real parameter satisfying @xmath . @xmath holds. In
the following, we show

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the following notations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath .

We expand @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the same with @xmath and @xmath in
§ 7.1 .

First, we investigate @xmath in ( 7.22 ). ( 7.6 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds because @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in @xmath . Here, @xmath and @xmath . The first term of the LHS is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The third term of the LHS becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we used @xmath derived from @xmath . Then, ( 7.28 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, we show the relation between @xmath and @xmath . ( 7.18 ) leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

in @xmath . Here, @xmath . By the way, ( 7.5 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating this equation by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting these equations into ( 7.33 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now, we use ( 7.3 ), namely,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this relation, we rewire ( 7.36 ) and ( 7.37 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Multiplying @xmath from the right, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 7.38 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath by multiplying @xmath from the right. ( 7.43 ) leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . By the way, @xmath holds similarly to ( 2.147 ).
Differentiating this equation by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We used @xmath . In the first equality, we used that
@xmath commutes with @xmath and @xmath . ( 7.44 ) and ( 7.46 ) lead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this into ( 7.41 ) and ( 7.42 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Subtracting ( 7.48 ) (( 7.49 )) for @xmath from ( 7.31 ) (( 7.32 )), we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is unknown complex number. Using this relation, ( 7.22 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.52)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Substituting this equation into ( 6.15 ), we obtain ( 7.19 ). Here,
@xmath . We supposed @xmath , which leads @xmath . This supposition is
satisfied if @xmath (which leads @xmath ) or @xmath holds. If @xmath is
non-degenerate, @xmath holds, then @xmath , @xmath and ( 7.52 ) hold. If
@xmath , @xmath is replaced by the canonical distribution and ( 7.52 )
holds without any assumption.

If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds, @xmath is independent of @xmath ( @xmath ), then ( 7.19 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

using ( H.1 ). ( 7.53 ) holds if @xmath is non-degenerate. ( 7.54 ) can
be shown from @xmath , which is weaker assumption than ( 7.53 ) and is
derived from ( 7.53 ) for @xmath . If we neglect the Lamb shift
Hamiltonian, namely we consider the QME for @xmath , ( 7.54 ) holds
(with a replacement @xmath ). From ( 7.54 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . @xmath is typical value of the @xmath -th control
parameter.

Yuge et al. [ 20 ] considered the outputs of @xmath (for @xmath ) at
@xmath and @xmath as @xmath and @xmath , and errorneously identified
@xmath with the entropy production. To analyze @xmath , improperly, they
took @xmath and @xmath limit of the FCS-QME ( 2.64 ) only valid for time
independent observables. The obtained Liouvillian (of which the Lamb
shift Hamiltonian is neglected) incidentally satisfy ( 6.12 ). Using
that Liouvillian, for the time-reversal symmetric system, Yuge et al.
studied the relation between @xmath and the symmetrized von Neumann
entropy. In contrast, up to here, we do not suppose the time-reversal
symmetry. In § 7.3 , we consider the time-reversal operations and show
that the potential @xmath such that @xmath dose not exist if the
time-reversal symmetry is broken.

### 7.3 Time-reversal operations

We define the time-reversal operation. We denote the time-reversal
operator of the system by @xmath . We also define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a super-operator @xmath of the system. The time-reversal of @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

using ( 2.147 ). If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold, the above equation coincides with the equation of @xmath since
@xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. If the total Hamiltonian is time-reversal invariant, ( 7.59 )
holds [ 38 ] . If ( 7.59 ) holds and we neglect the Lamb shift
Hamiltonian, the instantaneous steady state is time-reversal invariant:
@xmath .

As we will show, for time-reversal symmetric system,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the symmetrized von Neumann entropy. Combining ( 7.19 ) with ( 7.60
), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, the equation ( 7.55 ) with @xmath holds. As analogy, we consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

for generally non-time-reversal symmetric system. The difference between
@xmath and the first term of the RHS of ( 7.19 ) is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (7.65)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

To calculate the RHS of this equation, we use formulas

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.66)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is small real number. We proof ( 7.66 ) in
Appendix I . ( 7.67 ) is derived from ( 7.66 ). @xmath holds because
@xmath . Then, the first term of the RHS of ( 7.65 ) is given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (7.68)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

The second term of the RHS of ( 7.65 ) is given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (7.69)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Here, we used @xmath and @xmath if @xmath is real. In general, the RHS
of ( 7.65 ) is not @xmath . However, if @xmath holds, the RHS of ( 7.65
) becomes @xmath since @xmath , then ( 7.61 ) holds. In the proof of (
7.61 ), Yuge et al. [ 20 ] used incorrect equations @xmath and @xmath .

We introduce the BSN curvature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and the existence of @xmath such that @xmath are equivalent. If
@xmath holds, @xmath does not exist. @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.73)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath hold. Because of @xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we used @xmath because @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are functions of
@xmath . Using @xmath if @xmath is real, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For time-reversal symmetric system, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath hold.
Then, the above equation becomes @xmath , namely, @xmath and @xmath
hold. However, if the time-reversal symmetry is broken, @xmath holds in
general. Then, @xmath namely @xmath hold. @xmath is not symmetric for
@xmath and @xmath . Then, if the time-reversal symmetry is broken and
@xmath is degenerated, @xmath dose not exist in general. This is the
most important result of this thesis.

### 7.4 Born-Markov approximation

We denote the BSN vector for the entropy production and instantaneous
steady state of the Born-Markov approximation by @xmath and @xmath .
Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

hold [ 20 ] . Here, @xmath and @xmath describes the order of @xmath .
Then, if ( 7.54 ) holds, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

For time-reversal symmetric system,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds.

## 8 Comparison of two definitions of entropy production

In this chapter, we compare preceding study on of the entropy production
in the classical Markov jump process [ 21 , 37 ] with ours. We consider
the Markov jump process on the states @xmath , where the definitions are
explained in Appendix J . The probability to find the system in a state
@xmath is @xmath and it obeys the master equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Liouvillian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath originates the couping between the system and the bath
@xmath . @xmath holds. We suppose that @xmath holds if @xmath for all
@xmath . The definition of the entropy production for each Markov jump
process ( J.1 ) is ( J.4 ). The average entropy production @xmath is
given by (see ( J.10 ))

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote the solution of the QME with RWA by @xmath . We suppose @xmath
is governed by ( 8.1 ) with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the energy eigenstate of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This supposition implies ( 7.53 ). A sufficient condition by which
@xmath obeys ( 8.1 ) is below: (1) @xmath is non-degenerate and (2)
@xmath are fixed. The eigenenergy can depend on @xmath . We show that
our average entropy production ( 6.3 ) is given by a similar expression
of ( 8.3 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because of ( 6.18 ), ( 6.3 ) and ( 6.26 ), the particle and energy
currents are given by @xmath with @xmath . ( 6.20 ) leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We suppose @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is a diagonal matrix, @xmath
is also a diagonal matrix. Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Substituting @xmath into ( 8.11 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This equation leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the local detailed balance condition derived from ( 7.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain ( 8.7 ). For @xmath , @xmath holds for @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath .

( 8.12 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This @xmath corresponds to @xmath of ( 3.82 ).

Now we introduce @xmath . From the assumption, @xmath holds. If we
suppose ( 2.163 ) for @xmath and ( 2.137 ) for @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Then, ( 8.14 ) means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

Now we introduce a matrix @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath was originally introduced by Sagawa and Hayakawa [ 19 ] . About
averages, our entropy production is the same with Sagawa and Hayakawa.

We show that the difference between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, @xmath can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

then we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are quadratic orders of @xmath . While the former
includes @xmath ( @xmath ) terms, the latter dose not. @xmath leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 8.14 ) leads @xmath is independent of @xmath . Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above relation and ( 8.26 ) lead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ( 8.20 ). ( 8.20 ) leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is given by ( J.13 ). Then, ( J.12 ), the result of Ref. [
21 ] , coincides with ( 7.55 ) when @xmath is governed by the master
equation ( 8.1 ).

## 9 Conclusion

### 9.1 General conclusion

In this thesis, for open systems described by the quantum master
equation (QME), we investigated the quantum pump and the excess entropy
production.

First, we investigated quantum pump using the FCS-QME (full counting
statistics with quantum master equation) approach. We studied the
non-adiabatic effect and the showed that the general solution of the QME
@xmath is decomposed as @xmath (Chap. 3 ). Here, @xmath is the value of
the set of the control parameters at time @xmath and @xmath is the
instantaneous steady state of the QME, @xmath and @xmath are calculable
and order @xmath where @xmath is the modulation frequency of the control
parameters and @xmath is the coupling strength between the system and
the baths. @xmath exponentially damps (like @xmath ) as a function of
time. We showed that the generalized mater equation (GME) approach
provides @xmath in the Born approximation (Appendix § F ). Here, @xmath
corresponds to the set of the diagonal components of @xmath in the
matrix representation by the energy eigenstates, @xmath corresponds to
@xmath and the the term @xmath originates from non-Markovian effects.
The FCS-QME picks out one higher order non-adiabatic piece of
information from the solution of the QME, namely, if we have @xmath ,
the FCS-QME method provides @xmath -th order pump currents. Moreover, we
showed that the Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman (BSN) phase derived under the
“adiabatic” condition which makes the Berry phase like treatment
appropriate has the non-adiabatic (first order of @xmath ) information.
We showed that the quantum pump dose not occur in all orders of the
pumping frequency when the system control parameters and the
thermodynamic parameters (the temperatures and the chemical potentials
of the baths) are fixed under the zero-bias condition.

Next, we studied the quantum adiabatic pump of the quantum dot (QD)
system weakly coupled to two leads ( @xmath and @xmath ) in § 4.2 and §
4.3 using the FCS-QME with the rotating wave approximation (RWA) defined
as the long coarse-graining time limit of the coarse-graining
approximation (CGA). We confirmed the consistency between the FCS-QME
approach and the GME approach for a QD of one quantum level with finite
Coulomb interaction (§ 4.2.3 and § 4.3.3 ). We showed that the pumped
charge and spin coming from the instantaneous steady current are not
negligible when the thermodynamic parameters are not fixed to zero bias
(§ 4.2.2 and § 4.3.2 ). To observe the spin effects, we consider
collinear magnetic fields, which affect the spins through the Zeeman
effect, with different amplitudes applying to the QDs ( @xmath ) and the
leads ( @xmath and @xmath ). We focused on the dynamic parameters (
@xmath , @xmath and the coupling strength between QDs and leads, @xmath
) as control parameters. In one level QD with the Coulomb interaction
@xmath , we analytically calculated the BSN curvatures of spin and
charge of @xmath pump and @xmath pump for the noninteracting limit (
@xmath ) and the strong interaction limit ( @xmath ) at zero-bias. The
difference depending on @xmath appeared through @xmath which is the
average number of the electrons with spin @xmath in the QD. For @xmath
pump, the energy dependences of the line-width functions are essential.
Moreover, we studied the @xmath pump for finite @xmath at zero-bias (§
4.3.5 ). The effect of @xmath appeared through @xmath . When
half-filling condition is satisfied, the charge pump does not occur.

We studied the quantum diabatic pump for spinless one level QD coupled
to two leads (Chap. 5 ). We calculated @xmath , @xmath and particle
current up to 6th order and pumped particle numbers.

In § 1.6 , we newly defined average entropy production rate @xmath using
the average energy and particle currents, which are calculated by using
the FCS-QME. Next, we introduced the generalized QMEs (GQMEs) providing
@xmath (Chap. 6 ). The GQMEs do not relate the higher moments (thus and
the FCS) of the entropy production. We can calculate only the average of
the entropy production. In § 7.2 , using the GQME, in weakly
nonequilibrium regime, we analyzed the BSN vector for the entropy
production, @xmath , which provides the excess entropy production @xmath
under quasistatic operations between nonequilibrium steady states as
@xmath , and showed @xmath . Here, @xmath is the set of the control
parameters and @xmath is @xmath -th component of the control parameters,
@xmath is the trajectory in the control parameter space, @xmath denotes
the trace of the system, and @xmath is a measure of degree of
nonequilibrium. @xmath is the instantaneous steady state obtained from
the QME with reversing the sign of the Lamb shift term. In general, the
potential @xmath such that @xmath dose not exist (§ 7.3 ). This is the
most important result of this thesis. The origins of the non-existence
of the potential @xmath are a quantum effect (the Lamb shift term) and
the breaking of the time-reversal symmetry. The non-existence of the
potential means that the excess entropy essentially depends on the path
of the modulation. In this case, it is important to consider the
generalization of the entropy concept. In contrast, if the system
Hamiltonian is non-degenerate or the Lamb shift term is negligible, we
obtain @xmath . Here, @xmath is the von Neumann entropy, @xmath and
@xmath are the initial and final times of the operation, and @xmath
describes the amplitude of the change of the control parameters. For
time-reversal symmetric system, we showed that @xmath is the symmetrized
von Neumann entropy. Additionally, we pointed out that preceding
expression of the entropy production in the classical Markov jump
process is different from ours and showed that these are approximately
equivalent in the weakly nonequilibrium regime. We also checked that the
definition of the average entropy production in the classical Markov
jump process by Ref. [ 19 ] is equivalent to ours.

### 9.2 Future perspective

@xmath and @xmath should be calculated for concrete model in which the
system Hamiltonian is degenerated or/and the time-reversal symmetry is
broken. For instance, multi-level QD system applying the magnetic field
is a candidate.

If @xmath does not exist, the path dependence of the excess entropy is
essential. The path dependence and the path of which the excess entropy
is minimized should be studied.

## Appendix A Born-Markov approximation

We denote @xmath in the Born-Markov approximation by @xmath . From (
2.66 ) and ( 2.75 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

@xmath damps exponentially as @xmath where @xmath is the relaxation time
of the bath @xmath . Then, in the calculations of @xmath and @xmath ,
the values of the control parameters can be approximated by @xmath .
Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

hold. Then, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.6)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For ( 2.106 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.9)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.10)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By the way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Here, @xmath . Because of ( 2.130 ), 1st and 7th terms of ( A.9 )
cancel in the LHS of ( A.11 ). Similarly, 2nd and 8th, 3rd and 5th, 4th
and 6th terms of ( A.9 ) cancel. If @xmath is negligible, @xmath becomes
( 3.67 ) at zero-bias.

## Appendix B Liouville space

By following correspondence, an arbitrary linear operator (which
operates to the Hilbert space) @xmath is mapped to a vector of the
Liouville space [ 26 , 80 ] , @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath               (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is an arbitrarily complete orthonormal basis. The inner
product of the Liouville space is defined by the Hilbert-Schmidt product
[( B.3 )]. The Hermitian conjugate of @xmath is defined as @xmath . An
arbitrary linear super-operator @xmath which operates to any operator (
@xmath ) is mapped to a corresponding operator of the Liouville space (
@xmath ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The matrix representation of @xmath (or @xmath ) is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the main text of this thesis, both @xmath and @xmath are denoted by
@xmath .

Generally, the Liouvillian @xmath operates to an operator @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the system Hamiltonian, @xmath is the dissipator, @xmath
, @xmath are operators, and @xmath is a complex number. The matrix
representation of ( B.7 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . Hence the matrix representation of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, we consider the current operators defined by ( 3.14 ). @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence the current operators defined by ( 3.14 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C The time evolutions of @xmath

In this chapter, we derive the time evolution equations of @xmath of (
3.23 ). The LHS of the FCS-QME, @xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

And the RHS of the FCS-QME is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Hence we obtain

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.3)
  -- -- -- -------

Applying @xmath to ( C.3 ), and using @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

By the way, the time derivative of ( 3.3 ), @xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Applying @xmath to this equation, we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
                             (C.6)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

and it leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Substituting this to ( C.4 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The above equation can also be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath is the trajectory from @xmath to @xmath , @xmath are the
@xmath -th component of the control parameters, and @xmath since @xmath
with @xmath . In the RHS of ( C.9 ), the dominant term is @xmath if
@xmath because Re @xmath . Using @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , ( C.12 ) is also derived from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.60 ).

## Appendix D The validity of the adiabatic expansion

In the derivation of the QME with CGA, when going from ( 2.57 ) to (
2.58 ), we used the following type of approximation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath is the control parameter trajectory and @xmath
is the trajectory which @xmath . @xmath is the relaxation time of the
baths. Similarly, in the Born-Markov approximation (BM), when going from

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (D.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

to ( 2.64 ), we used

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Considering the corrections of the above approximations, the QME is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath for CGA; @xmath for BM. @xmath corresponds to
@xmath of Appendix F . The discussions of § 3.4 are correct after
replacing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Here, @xmath and @xmath are
defined by @xmath and @xmath , respectively. ( 3.33 ) is corrected to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . The corrections are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, we consider the reasonable range of @xmath of @xmath . Because
@xmath and @xmath , the reasonable range is @xmath , where @xmath is
determined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us consider that reasonable concrete values of the parameters in the
model of § 4.1 : @xmath MHz, @xmath eV=0.116 K, @xmath ps, @xmath ps,
and @xmath ps. These values lead to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath means the biggest integer below @xmath . At @xmath , @xmath
(CGA), 1.67 (BM) and at @xmath , @xmath (CGA), 3.39 (BM). The larger the
non-adiabaticity ( @xmath ), the larger @xmath becomes.

## Appendix E Proof of (3.52)

First, using ( 3.22 ) and ( 3.16 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, @xmath , @xmath , and ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.14 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it leads to ( 3.52 ). To prove ( 3.52 ) only ( 3.22 ) is required
and @xmath is not necessary. Additionally, the pseudo-inverse of the GME
approach ( 3.86 ) satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which corresponds to our

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

( 3.52 ) is shown also as follows. ( 3.22 ) and @xmath lead to @xmath ,
which implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Applying @xmath to ( 3.22 ), we obtain @xmath , which is equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

By the way, differentiating ( 3.4 ) for @xmath by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Applying @xmath to this equation and using ( E.6 ) and ( E.7 ), we
obtain [ 19 , 84 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.9)
     @xmath   @xmath               (E.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( E.9 ) becomes ( 3.52 ) because of ( 3.14 ). Particularly, Yuge [ 84 ]
used

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which satisfies ( E.6 ) and ( E.7 ) with @xmath , @xmath and ( 3.22 )
(in Ref. [ 84 ] , @xmath was incorrectly set to @xmath ).

## Appendix F Generalized mater equation and frequency-expansion

The first half of this chapter is based on [ 33 ] . The GME is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . @xmath functionally depends on @xmath . We expand @xmath
and @xmath by the modulation frequency @xmath of the control parameters:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are proportional to @xmath . In general, @xmath should
contain a term which exponentially damps as @xmath . Here, @xmath is the
coupling strength between the system and the baths. However, this method
suppose @xmath . The RHS of ( F.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Then, ( F.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the summation over terms which have the same order with the
LHS. How to count the time derivatives of @xmath in this expansion
depends on the considered frequency regime. In this chapter, we consider
the regime @xmath , for which the system quickly relaxes to an
oscillatory steady state with the frequency of @xmath ; i.e., each time
derivative introduces one power in @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds.

Now, we expand @xmath and @xmath by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath indicates terms of order @xmath . This matching requires the
expansion for @xmath to start from @xmath . The matching condition for
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following, we consider the Born approximation: @xmath . Then, (
F.7 ) becomes @xmath . This can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The above equation and ( F.5 ) lead

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

First, we consider @xmath . Then, solution of ( F.9 ) is only @xmath .
Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Where, @xmath is function of only @xmath . Because the LHS of ( F.1 )
does not have terms of @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the definition of the instantaneous steady state.

Reference [ 33 ] considered only the solutions of @xmath . However, the
solutions of @xmath should also be considered. We consider @xmath .
Then, the solutions of ( F.9 ) are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. @xmath is the relaxation time of the baths. Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

( F.12 ) leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the pseudo-inverse of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( LABEL:p_-k^k+1 ) for @xmath leads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, we used @xmath . Then, considering @xmath smaller than @xmath is
meaningless. This result ( F.18 ) is the same order with that discussed
in Appendix D .

Under the Born approximation, the difference between the QME and the GME
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The origin of this is the non-Markovian property of the GME.

## Appendix G Energy current operator

Similar to ( 2.119 ), we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath denotes the label of the degeneracy.
@xmath is one of the elements of @xmath . We set @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds. Using this, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This means

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the RWA.

Using ( 2.153 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (G.6)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds.

## Appendix H Derivative of the von Neumann entropy

We show that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (H.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the definition of the von Neumann entropy, the LHS of the above
equation is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (H.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 7.67 ), the second term of the RHS of the above equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (H.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Then, we obtain ( H.1 ).

## Appendix I Proof of (7.66)

For an arbitrary operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (I.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds if the absolute value of a real number @xmath is sufficiently
small. Using this equation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (I.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

holds for an arbitrary operator @xmath which has @xmath . Here, we used
( I.1 ) for @xmath . For an arbitrary operator @xmath which has @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (I.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds for a real number @xmath . Using this equation for @xmath and
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (I.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using this equation and ( I.2 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (I.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Because the second and third terms of the RHS are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath . The above equation is ( 7.66 ).

We show ( I.6 ). Substituting @xmath to ( I.5 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (I.8)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using this equation for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (I.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which leads to ( I.6 ).

## Appendix J Definition of entropy production of the Markov jump
process

Except ( J.9 ), this chapter is based on Ref. [ 21 ] . We consider the
Markov jump process on the states @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total number of jumps. We denote the above path by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The probability to find the system in a state @xmath is @xmath and it
obeys the master equation ( 8.1 ). We suppose the trajectory of the
control @xmath is smooth. Now we introduce

  -- -- -- -------
           (J.3)
  -- -- -- -------

If @xmath , this is entropy production of process @xmath . The entropy
production of process ( J.2 ) is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the weight (the transition probability density) associated with a
path @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral over all the paths is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the expectation value of @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the instantaneous stationary probability distribution
characterized by @xmath . We introduce a matrix @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the @xmath -th order moment of the entropy production is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (J.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, the average is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (J.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (J.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Ref. [ 21 ] , for a quasistatic operation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (J.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (J.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath .
