The AdS/CFT correspondence states that the strong-coupling limit of four
dimensional Yang-Mills theory with @xmath supersymmetry can be
identified with the weak-coupling limit of type IIB supersymmetric
string theory compactified in @xmath and vice-versa. This correspondence
was later broadened to other compactifications like @xmath and @xmath .
As it relates theories at weak and strong-coupling, it allow us to
access the non-perturbative regime of gauge theories and string
theories. However its proof requires to face extremely complex problems,
e.g. computing the spectrum of conformal dimensions of a gauge theory or
quantizing type IIB string theory in a curved background.

Symmetries are a powerful way to simplify computations on those
theories, the most typical example of which is the exact conformal
symmetry of both the type IIB string theory in @xmath and the @xmath
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, which completely fixes the functional
form of the two and three-point correlation functions. Another important
simplification is the appearance of an integrable structure in the
correspondence. The presence of these structures gave rise to an
exhaustive exploration of the planar spectrum of anomalous dimensions of
gauge invariant operators and the spectrum of energies of rotating
strings in @xmath . Techniques based on integrability reported important
successes and even the possibility of performing interpolation between
both regimes in some particular cases.

In this dissertation we will present some computations made in both
sides of the AdS/CFT holographic correspondence, the string theory side
and the field theory side, using the integrability of both theories as a
starting point and a method to simplify these computations.

Regarding the string theory side, this dissertation is focused in the
computation of the energy spectrum of closed spinning strings in some
deformed @xmath backgrounds. In particular we are going to focus in the
deformation provided by the mixing of R-R (Ramond-Ramond) and NS-NS
(Neveu-Schwarz-Neveu-Schwarz) fluxes and the so-called @xmath
-deformation. These computations are made using the classical
integrability of these two deformed string theories, which is provided
by the presence of a set of conserved quantities called “Uhlenbeck
constants”. The existence of the Uhlenbeck constants is central for the
method used to derive the dispersion relations.

Regarding the gauge theory side, we are interested in the computation of
two and three-point correlation functions. At weak-coupling these
correlation functions can be obtained in a perturbative computation, but
it is also possible to use techniques derived from the integrable
structure of the theory. For that purpose, instead of using directly the
field theory formulation, we are going to use the isomorphism between
gauge-invariant single-trace operators in @xmath supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory and states of a @xmath invariant spin chain.
Concerning the two-point function a computation of correlation functions
involving different operators and different number of excitations is
performed using the Algebraic Bethe Ansatz and the Quantum Inverse
Scattering Method. These results are compared with computations done
with the Coordinate Bethe Ansatz and with Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
operators. Concerning the three-point functions, we will explore the
novel construction given by the hexagon framework. In particular we are
going to start from the already proposed hexagon form factor and rewrite
it in a language more resembling of the Algebraic Bethe Ansatz. For this
intent we construct an invariant vertex using Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
operators, which is checked for some simple cases.
