## Chapter 1 Overview of AdS/CFT, strings and gravitation

Everything in this thesis is directly or indirectly motivated by the
AdS/CFT correspondence. In its broadest, non rigorous form, it asserts
that string theory in AdS spaces can be described in terms of Quantum
Field Theory, and vice versa. We will provide now a historical
introduction to AdS/CFT and afterwards introduce the main problems
studied throughout the present work.

The history of AdS/CFT began with the attempt to unify Quantum Theory
and General Relativity. Let’s elaborate briefly on these two theories
before. Quantum Theory describes our most essential principles of the
very small scales, roughly ranging from molecular to known elementary
particles. Although it is fairly counterintuitive and abstract, its
success in explaining and predicting physical phenomena remains
unparalleled both in precision and applicability breadth. Apart from
explaining phenomena that classical physics could not (atom stability,
blackbody radiation, discreteness of spectra, photoelectric effect, … ),
it became the cornerstone in the following great domains:

-   Molecules and condensed matter.

-   Atoms.

-   Nuclei.

-   Elementary particles.

That short enumeration encompasses an absolutely huge variety of
physical effects tested in experiments of all sorts. We will be more
concerned in this introduction with advances in the high energy regime.
In particular, its description requires of the other great revolution of
the 20th century Fundamental Physics: Relativity. The principles of
Quantum Mechanics and Special Relativity were successfully combined in
Quantum Field Theory, and the so called electromagnetic, weak and strong
interactions were explained using it.

Nevertheless, the Special Theory of Relativity needed extension to be
consistent with non-inertial frames and gravity; this was the birth of
Einstein’s theory of General Relativity. Apart from solving theoretical
inconsistencies and although less thoroughly tested than Quantum Theory,
it has its own explained non-Newtonian phenomena, including:

-   Anomalous precession of orbits.

-   Light deflection near very massive bodies, gravitational lensing and
    Shapiro time delay.

-   Gravitational frequency shift.

-   Gravitational waves (measured recently by the LIGO collaboration [ 2
    ] ),

-   Universe expansion. ¹ ¹ 1 The theory allows a simple mathematical
    model of expansion through the so-called cosmological constant.
    Nevertheless, astronomical observations indicate that the value of
    the constant is many orders of magnitude smaller than the estimated
    using modern theories of elementary particles. This is known as the
    cosmological constant problem, and it remains one of the main
    unsolved puzzles of contemporary fundamental Physics [ 203 ] .

Despite this success of General Relativity, we know it cannot the
ultimate theory of gravity, as it generically predicting singularities
of spacetime in the interior of BHs and at the beginning of Big Bang.
When we try to combine it with Quantum Field Theory for very short
distances, it becomes not renormalizable, losing its predictive power.
This is one of the main open problems in contemporary Fundamental
Physics: the quantization of gravity. In this situation is where string
theory enters our discussion, and ends up leading to AdS/CFT.

In early 1970’s String Theory changed fundamental point particles for
extended strings to reproduce the Veneziano amplitudes, a proposed
description of strongly interacting mesons. Such a radical program was
nearly abandoned when Quantum Chromodynamics explained the strong force;
however strings would be thoroughly reconsidered. In 1974 Scherk and
Schwarz found a spin 2 particle and the Einstein equations of motion in
the low energy limit of the theory: strings implied gravity! At the same
time it contained other lower spin particles. Meanwhile, Supersymmetry
was a popular idea trying to unify fermions and bosons. Its application
to strings brought Superstring theory, that eliminated some
inconsistencies of bosonic case while demanding a 10-dimensional
spacetime. Superstrings showed potential way to quantize gravity and
unify interactions.
With such exciting panorama, the consistent possibilities were quickly
explored, and the first theories given the unpretentious names of Type
I, Type IIA and Type IIB. In 1984 anomaly cancellation through
Green-Schwarz mechanism ignited the so called ’first Superstring
revolution’, which unveiled heterotic @xmath and heterotic @xmath as new
string theories. Moreover, it was possible to reproduce the gauge groups
@xmath of the Standard Model. To carry experimental agreement further,
the 10 spacetime dimensions had to be lowered down to 4. The number of
possible ways to do so was estimated of order @xmath , with no clear
reason to discard many of them. No surprisingly, enthusiasm diminished
due to this enormous ”vacua landscape”. Furthermore, five string
theories were already known at the time, somewhat in contradiction with
the pretensions of being a final theory of interactions.

And yet, strings multiplicity would not last for long, since Witten
alleviated it while prompting the ’second Superstring revolution’ in the
mid 90’s: he and others shown that the so called S,T,U ’dualities’
relate the five Superstring theories! They are five perturbative
expansions of an underlying M-theory in different regimes. For example,
S-duality relates the strong coupling regime of Type I to the weakly
coupled of @xmath ; T-duality reveals the equivalence of type IIA on a
cylinder of radius @xmath and type IIB in radius @xmath ; and U-duality
is a combination of both T and S. Although M-theory reduces to 11D
Supergravity at low energy, the full theory is not yet completely
understood.

The dualities not only cured strings multiplicity but also shown
D-branes necessity, eventually leading to AdS/CFT. ² ² 2 They also allow
extremal BH microstate counting in subsequent agreement with
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, among other virtues. Branes in general are
non-perturbative dynamical hypersurfaces that join strings as dynamical
objects in the theory. In particular D-branes (where D stands for
Dirichlet) are hypersurfaces to which open strings attach their ends.
Non-trivially, the massless modes of the open strings realize gauge
theories. From another point of view, D-branes are also sources to
closed strings and modify the spacetime. That means that the gauge
theory from the open string description is related to the spacetime of
the closed one. This observation by Maldacena in 1997 starts the
ongoing, AdS/CFT-motivated era of string theory.

The canonical example of the correspondence happens between strings on
AdS @xmath S @xmath that is related to D3 branes and @xmath SYM at
@xmath in 3+1 dimensions. The D3 brane description is weakly coupled and
the computations are feasible, while the CFT is strongly coupled.
Despite it, the maximal Supersymmetry makes the computations possible in
the gauge theory, and both sides yield the same result for explicit
calculations. This was the first and so far best established instance of
AdS/CFT correspondence.

In rough terms, the interest on the correspondence is easy to justify.
While the field theory is strongly coupled and no perturbative treatment
applies, its gravitational dual interacts weakly and perturbation theory
is readily available.

The gauge/gravity correspondence has been extended to much more general
cases. Some of these extensions and their intended applications (along
with a few representative works or reviews) are:

-   Other integrable cases, partly to test the explicit matching of both
    side results [ 18 ] .

-   Reduction of the amount of SUSY (notably @xmath in Klebanov-Witten
    field theory) [ 69 ] , RG flows and different representations and
    gauge groups to approach more realistic phenomena; for example for
    QCD one can check [ 188 , 180 , 28 , 73 , 12 , 50 ] ,

-   Higher and lower spacetime dimensions,

-   Higher derivative corrections in the gravity action [ 33 , 116 , 47
    ] ,

-   Higher spin theories [ 201 , 89 ] ,

-   Non-equilibrium situations, for example for thermalization in QFT [
    53 , 54 ] ,

-   Non-stringy actions that allows to handle simpler dynamics in the
    gravity side and to tune them for more specific purposes. This is
    called the called bottom-up approach, and it has become very popular
    for all kind of purposes,

-   Non-relativistic Physics to tackle condensed matter problems [ 104 ,
    103 , 112 , 75 , 51 ] . This typically involves a change of
    spacetime boundary from AdS to Lifshitz spaces [ 131 , 197 ] ),

-   Low energy limit of the QFT, giving rise to the fluid/gravity
    correspondence [ 119 ] ,

-   Going beyond classical strings in the AdS side, for example for
    applications to black hole Physics [ 24 ] ,

-   Quantum information theory for many body systems and spacetime
    emergence from it [ 183 ] ,

-   …

This list is not even complete due to extensive research during the last
20 years. The original work on AdS/CFT by Maldacena [ 162 ] is the most
cited article in inSPIRE with nearly 13000 citations, even more than
collaborations like WMAP, RPP and the Higgs discovery by ATLAS and CMS.
Even though the latter are more recent, it clearly signals the
importance reached by the correspondence in contemporary High Energy
Physics.

In addition, the number of QFT quantities computable from the AdS side
has also grown in time, leading to a respectable maturity: amount of
SUSY, n-point functions, thermodynamic quantities, transport
coefficients, Wilson loops, central charges, entanglement entropy and
other information measures, etcetera.

At this point it is also fitting to remark the main limitations of the
correspondence:

-   The dual field content and action are almost never known. This may
    cast some doubts on whether the results correspond to any field
    theory, although typically they satisfy general physical
    expectations even for bottom-up approach.

-   Due to to the previous issue, extracting numerical predictions for a
    realistic given system seems far from feasible at the moment ³ ³ 3
    One notable exception is the value of @xmath of the quark-gluon
    plasma, where @xmath are the shear viscosity and entropy density. .
    As stated before, the main goal so far is to obtain qualitative
    insights about strongly coupled phenomena.

-   Finite @xmath or finite coupling effects are normally difficult or
    impossible to compute.

The standard approach is to start with a gravity theory and compute the
dual holographic quantities corresponding to strongly coupled phenomena.
Any result from them is of interest as in general little is known about
strongly coupled Physics. In most of this presentation we have
emphasized the applications for strongly coupled systems, but it is not
its only interest. On the one hand, AdS/CFT can also be used to learn
new things about gravity. On the other hand this provides an additional
strong motivation to further investigate GR and its modifications, as
any progress will be followed by a question about its implications in
the dual CFT. We will approach the study of gravity using stringy
effective actions. There are several reasons to do so:

-   String theory already provides a candidate description of
    microscopic gravitational degrees of freedom. Among other, the
    explicit reproduction of Bekenstein-Hawking entropy for an extremal
    black hole stands out. [ 194 ] .

-   One does not deal directly with hypothetical components of
    spacetime, but with effective actions than can be more easily
    compared to General Relativity. Furthermore, it is much simpler to
    study classical gravity than its quantum processes. Finally,
    classical gravity is almost always used in the AdS side of the
    correspondence.

-   Consistency of stringy effective actions can be explored (causality
    for example), [ 44 ] .

-   The bosonic string gravity truncation to order @xmath is the LGB
    gravity theory, that belongs like GR to the Lovelock family. The
    latter is a special set of theories with a great deal of previous
    literature, even from the holographic point of view.

-   Stringy dualities like T-duality can be applied to generate new
    solutions.

In the following page, we will summarize how the present thesis
contributed to the topics above.

### 1.1 Scope and organization of this thesis

The goal of this thesis is to make progress in AdS/CFT concrete
problems, with the common motivation of testing and extending its domain
of applicability. The main text of it is based on the articles [ 46 , 16
, 10 ] . The organization is the following:

-   Chapter 1 contains the present motivation and overview of AdS/CFT
    and gravity.

-   Chapter 2 contains a few pages of non-formal introduction to the
    AdS/CFT topics discussed in the following chapters alongside a brief
    overview of the main results.

-   In chapter 3 we find phase transitions between AdS and dS geometries
    in the Gauss-Bonnet theory of gravity. They are mediated by bubble
    nucleation and do not require addition of any matter. The phenomenon
    is strongly expected to be generic in higher curvature theories of
    gravity. As dS/CFT correspondence is not as well developed as its
    AdS counterpart, the holographic interpretation of the final state
    and the transition as a whole remains unclear.

-   In chapter 4 non-Abelian T-duality (NATD) is applied to generate new
    Supergravity backgrounds and study their holographic duals. The
    solutions upon which NATD is used are @xmath supersymmetric
    deformations of Klebanov-Witten background flowing from AdS @xmath
    to AdS @xmath in the IR. In particular, new regular @xmath
    supersymmetric AdS @xmath fixed points are constructed. The new
    solutions seem to be dual to long linear quiver gauge theories.

-   In chapter 5 we holographically derive the Ward identities of a 1+1
    QFT. This is achieved by holographic renormalization with
    appropriate boundary conditions. The resulting Ward identities are
    the same as in higher dimensions and they show the expected
    spontaneous symmetry breaking for large @xmath .

-   Chapter 6 contains the summary and conclusions of the previous
    results.

## Chapter 2 Introduction

This thesis is intended to contribute to the very general goal of
understanding and extending the applicability of the AdS/CFT
correspondence. Although many new physical situations and observables
have been described in its 20 years of development, there is still much
ongoing research oriented to a better comprehension of the
correspondence itself (specially including quantum gravity effects) and
to realistic modeling of strongly coupled systems. We have contributed
with the investigation of three different topics:

-   In the first we studied the role of higher curvature gravity
    corrections on thermal phase transitions between AdS and dS
    geometries. This research may also be helpful to clarify the
    correspondence in the case of dS geometries, which is not as well
    developed as its AdS counterpart.

-   The second concerns new solutions of Supergravity found using
    Non-Abelian T-duality, a generating technique based on string
    theory. Such new solutions are dual to supersymmetric RG flows, and
    we investigate the effects of the Non-Abelian T-duality on the
    holographic observables. There is also a (super)gravity motivation,
    because the solutions generated are highly non-trivial, and can fall
    outside existing classifications of backgrounds. Apart from being
    potentially interesting in themselves, the new field theories may
    help to understand the effect of Non-Abelian duality on the string
    theory sigma model, its supergravity approximation and its generic
    interplay with AdS/CFT.

-   In the third we extend holographic renormalization to reproduce the
    Ward identities of spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1
    holographic superconductor. The model could find application in
    AdS/CMT. Furthermore, the use of a bottom up model correctly
    reproduced the Ward Identities, confirming for this the validity of
    the conjecture outside SUGRA and in this peculiar dimension.

In the following few pages we introduce these problems in more detail
and mention the main results.

### 2.1 AdS to dS phase transitions in higher curvature gravity

We have analyzed the role of higher curvature gravity corrections on
thermal phase transitions between AdS and dS geometries. Apart from the
gravitational interest, this research may also be helpful to clarify the
correspondence in the case of dS geometries, that is less developed than
it AdS counterpart. The details can be found in chapter 3 .

Higher curvature corrections to gravity are studied for a variety of
reasons: as possible corrections to GR coming from some UV completion
candidate (like string theory), to examine their cosmological effects,
to explore their holographic meaning, etcetera. Among such theories,
Lovelock family of actions have some unique properties, as the absence
of ghosts around flat space and second order EoM in general. We will
focus on the simplest non-GR case of Lovelock family, known as
Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity ( cf . 3.1 ), the unique quadratic action
with no ghosts around flat space as well as the (heterotic) string
theory effective action correction to GR. EoM differ from those of GR
only in more than four bulk dimensions, bringing another piece of
interest for higher dimensional gravity besides holography and a richer
phase diagram.

Despite this interest in higher curvature theories, gravitational phase
transitions already occur in GR. One of the best known examples is the
Hawking-Page transition [ 106 ] , in which thermal AdS decays to a BH
above a certain temperature. Furthermore, it is certainly possible for a
phase transition in GR to change spacetime asymptotics when matter is
added . A simple way is the quantum or thermal fluctuation between the
different non-degenerated minima of a scalar potential. After spending
some time in a metastable minimum, the field nucleates to a more stable
one [ 56 ] . Transitions changing the value of asymptotic curvature have
been studied in relation to the cosmological constant problem for
decades.

Due to the effect of higher curvature corrections, these transitions can
happen between AdS geometries of different curvature radius even in the
absence of matter [ 43 ] . The transitions are mediated by a thermalon,
i.e. the euclidean section of a bubble (which we describe in the next
paragraph). To understand the phenomenon it is important to know that
higher curvature gravities have several different maximally symmetric
spacetimes (vacua), instead of the unique one in GR. The endpoints of
the transitions are metrics asymptoting to different vacua. In the
particular case of LGB there are only two possible metrics for spherical
black hole ansatz, and each of them asymptotes to one of the two
possible vacua. These two different type of solutions for BH ansatz are
called branches.

The interior of the bubble is given by the branch of the final vacuum
and it is glued to an exterior solution with the initial asymptotics.
For the whole configuration to be a solution of the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet
EoM, the so called junction conditions must be satisfied. They are
similar in spirit to the Israel-Darmois matching equations, but the
physical implications are very different.

The thermalon forms when it has lower free energy than thermal AdS, like
any other thermodynamical phase. In our case, it is unstable against
small metric perturbations and will either collapse or expand. The
latter possibility gives rise to the desired change of geometry from AdS
to dS. Let us remark that the metric is continuous at the junction but
the derivatives are not; despite it such solution must be considered as
a legitimate competing saddle in the path integral approximation to the
free energy [ 43 ] .

We can summarize our procedure and final results saying that we found a
phase transition from AdS to dS geometry in Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet
gravity. The transition happens through the formation of a bubble with a
dS black hole in the interior and an AdS metric in the exterior.
Afterwards it can expand filling the spacetime and eventually changing
the geometry. No matter fields are required to match both sides of the
bubble due to the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet junction conditions. For other
higher curvature corrections we generically expect the same phenomenon.

The precise holographic meaning of the geometry change from AdS to dS,
if any, is unknown to us. Our work was the continuation of previous
studies of transitions between different AdS vacua in the Lovelock
theory, which in turn are thought to be dual to quantum quenches.
Holographically, the peculiar interest of our case is that a physical
process is changing the geometry from AdS to dS dynamically . A proper
interpretation may help to advance the dS/CFT correspondence.

### 2.2 Deformations of Klebanov-Witten CFT and AdS@xmath backgrounds
via NATD

We found new solutions of Supergravity using Non-Abelian T-duality
(NATD), a generating technique based on string theory. Such new
solutions represent supersymmetric RG flows, and we investigate the
effects of the Non-Abelian T-duality on the holographic observables. The
problem also present a pure (super)gravity interest, as the generated
SUSY solutions can fall outside known classifications. Apart from their
intrinsic interest, the new field theories may help to understand the
effect of Non-Abelian T-duality on the string theory @xmath - model, its
supergravity approximation and its interplay with AdS/CFT.

Non-Abelian T-duality (or NATD) can be seen as a SUGRA solution
generating technique. As such, it is a powerful instance in which
knowledge on (super)gravity leads to novelty in QFT through holography.
It is not known if the @xmath -model partition function is invariant
under NATD, as it is in the case of Abelian duality. The effect on
holographic observables may help to clarify this issue. [ 128 ] .

We can make a one paragraph summary of the results presented in chapter
4 in the following terms: there are deformations of Klebanov-Witten
background AdS @xmath T @xmath flowing to an AdS @xmath factor in the
IR. We generate new examples applying Non-Abelian T-duality to the
previous ones. We finally compare the holographic observables of the
generated solutions with those of the original RG flows.

Let us explain general aspects of the transformation, that will be
extended in section 4.1.2 . NATD is the non-Abelian version of standard
Abelian T-duality, and when applied to a background with non-Abelian
isometry the resulting one is guaranteed to be a solution of SUGRA. When
the non-Abelian isometry is @xmath (as in our case), it relates
backgrounds in IIA with backgrounds in IIB. The @xmath symmetry is
always destroyed and it cannot be used a second time. In this regard it
is very different of Abelian T-duality, that yields the same result when
applied twice. Not surprisingly, the reduction of spacetime symmetry can
lead to SUSY reduction. Another important difference is that the range
the dual coordinates is not fixed by the generating technique. This is
turns implies the the dual field theories are not fully determined.

For the Neveu-Schwarz sector of SUGRA non-Abelian T-duality was
discovered in 1993 [ 63 ] as a symmetry of the string sigma model.
However, the implications for AdS/CFT were not examined until 2010, when
Sfetsos and Thompson [ 191 ] extended the transformation to the
Ramond-Ramond sector. Although we do not know yet if it is a duality for
the full (perturbative) string theory, the use as a generating technique
does not rely on it.

Typically the solutions produced are highly non-trivial although they
always have closed expressions; one cannot reasonably expect to find
them via an ansatz as there is dependence on several coordinates. When
applied to AdS @xmath S @xmath , the generated background is dual to a
@xmath known field theory [ 191 ] ; however, in less symmetric seed
backgrounds it is usually impossible to fully identify the dual field
theory of the new solution. Nevertheless, one can compare the
holographic observables of the initial background and those of its
non-Abelian T-dual to get relevant information of the generated field
theory.

Having already summarized the technique, we introduce the backgrounds on
which we will apply it (seed backgrounds). All of them are
holographically dual to compactifications of Klebanov-Witten (KW) CFT [
136 ] on a spacelike 2-surface @xmath . Let us remember that KW CFT it
is a @xmath @xmath SUSY field theory with gauge group @xmath , and one
of the very few instances in which both sides of the correspondence are
known explicitly. The holographic dual is given by a type IIB background
with geometry AdS @xmath T @xmath , where T @xmath is a Sasaki-Einstein
manifold given by @xmath , supported by an @xmath RR field. Its
non-Abelian T-dual was already known [ 160 ] , although the holographic
analysis was not complete.

The KW deformation duals on which NATD is applied can be separated into
two groups: (see table 4.1 for a summary and section 4.5 for details).
The first is given by the duals of some 4d QFT when placed on a manifold
@xmath of constant curvature; in particular an @xmath SUSY flow with
@xmath and non-SUSY fixed points with @xmath ; we called them twisted
solutions. The second kind is the deformation of KW found in [ 66 ] by
Donos and Gauntlett (DG), we present it in section 4.5.2 . This last
background was chosen as a seed of the generating technique for several
reasons, that include:

1.  It interpolates between KW in the UV and AdS @xmath S @xmath S
    @xmath in the IR. It is a type IIB solution where @xmath and @xmath
    are turned on. (They vanish in the twisted solutions).

2.  It can be embedded in @xmath @xmath gauged SUGRA.

3.  (0,2) SUSY is preserved all along the flow; in the IR it enhances to
    (4,2) superconformal SUSY. The solution is regular everywhere.

4.  It is related by two Abelian dualities to AdS @xmath S @xmath S
    @xmath S @xmath . The presence of additional @xmath symmetries
    allows the combination of NATD with further Abelian T-duality.

For the flowing backgrounds above ( @xmath and DG solution), the
Non-Abelian T-dual preserves SUSY and smoothness of the seed solutions;
the generated backgrounds are shown in sections 4.6.1 and 4.6.2 .

We have also analyzed the Page charges, c-function, entanglement entropy
(EE) on a strip and a rectangular Wilson loop (WL), before and after
applying NATD. This calculation suggests that the new backgrounds’ dual
field theories is related to an infinitely long linear quiver gauge
theory, as the dependence of central charge is cubic in the number of
NS5 branes. The c-function, EE and Wilson loop change by a constant
factor along the RG flow under the effect of the duality. See 4.11 and
4.12 for more details.

### 2.3 Holographic Ward Identities in 1+1 QFT

We have studied the extension of the AdS/CFT correspondence, in
particular the holographic renormalization procedure, to reproduce the
Ward identities of spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1 holographic
superconductor, which is a bottom up model. The result could be of
interest for one-dimensional condensed matter applications. A peripheral
motivation is to know if the bottom up model we use behaves in
physically sensible manner for this low dimension. A final goal is to
explore what is the role of peculiarities of three dimensional gravity
in the bulk. This content is presented in chapter 5 .

Spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) is important in High Energy Physics
as well as in Condensed Matter. A key result about it is the Goldstone
theorem: there is a massless boson (called Goldstone boson) for every
given generator whose global symmetry is spontaneously broken. The
properties of symmetry breaking are reflected on the Ward identities:
the one point value signals SSB whereas the 2 point correlator contains
the Goldstone boson as a massless pole. The Goldstone theorem does not
apply directly to QFT in 1+1 dimensions: at finite @xmath SSB and
Goldstone bosons are not possible (Coleman theorem); this restriction
disappears in the strict large @xmath limit.

Holographically, symmetry breaking has been described in several
previous works with the double motivation of writing the
holographic dictionary and applying it to the less understood case of
strong coupling. In particular, the authors of [ 11 ] found the Ward
Identities and an analytic pseudo-Goldstone bosons in 2+1. An
introduction of the relevant aspects is in sections 5.1 and 5.2 .

In this chapter, we extend [ 11 ] and holographically derive Ward
identities of concomitant symmetry breaking in a 1+1 QFT. The gravity
side is a (bottom up) holographic superconductor (eq ( 5.3 )); its
@xmath symmetry is broken. In the 2+1 dimensional bulk, the holographic
description of conserved current requires an alternative
quantization for the @xmath vector field, as explained in sections 5.3.2
and 5.3.3 . The essential reason can be summarized as follows. In any
dimension, the current couples to the constant, gauge-dependent term in
the near horizon expansion of @xmath . Therefore, that mode must be a
source in our on-shell action. In higher dimension such mode is the
leading one, whereas in 2+1 bulk it is the subleading. In this last
case, the holographic renormalization needs different boundary terms for
that mode to become a source. Such choice of the subleading mode as a
source, and the addition of the required different boundary terms is
what we mean by alternative quantization.

Once the whole procedure is carried out, the standard higher dimensional
field-theoretic Ward identities ( 5.4.98 ) are recovered. Furthermore, a
Goldstone boson pole appears analytically for the spontaneous symmetry
breaking case, see section 5.5 . This is not in contradiction with the
Coleman theorem because holographically we are in the strict large
@xmath limit.

## Chapter 3 AdS to dS phase transitions in Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity

This chapter covers the phase transitions between AdS and dS thermalons
than can happen in Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet (LGB) gravity. We begin
introducing the LGB action as a member of the Lovelock family. In the
second section we define the thermalon configurations that mediates the
transition, as well as its dynamics and Thermodynamics. The next
sections contain the original results. Finally we have added an appendix
with some generalities of euclidean on-shell action formalism for BH
Thermodynamics.

### 3.1 Lovelock and Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity

#### Bulk action

In this section we introduce the Thermodynamics of Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet
(LGB) theory of gravity, the simplest member of the Lovelock family
different from GR. We will show the action with the appropriate boundary
terms, the branches of vacua and black holes and finally some general
remarks about its Thermodynamics.

Let us start with the motivation: why to consider higher curvature
corrections to gravity at all? The covariance under general changes of
coordinates is a fundamental principle behind the description of
gravity, but it can be satisfied with an infinite number of gravity
actions. In fact, any general tensorial expression that is fully
contracted will be invariant by diffeomorphisms, and higher curvature
corrections are a distinguished particular case. In the following we
give some more specific motivations to study the role of higher
curvature corrections:

1.  We know that GR is not complete. Nevertheless, given its theoretical
    and experimental successes it is natural to consider perturbative
    corrections around it.

2.  Any higher energy gravity proposal, no matter how different from the
    geometric setup of GR, will have to reproduce it in the classical
    limit and also give some higher derivatives terms as leading
    corrections.

3.  For some Superstring theories, such (leading order) corrections are
    known. It is interesting to test the consistency of those truncated
    approximations. In particular, for heterotic and bosonic string
    theories, the pure gravity first correction in @xmath to GR is given
    by the LGB term ( 3.1.4 ) [ 167 ] .

4.  Do the corrected actions satisfy basic physical requirements like:
    causality, absence of ghosts, uniqueness of initial value problem,
    sensible BH Thermodynamics, cosmic censorship, … ?

5.  We desire to understand the implications on the AdS/CFT dual field
    theory.

Among the modifications of Einstein-Hilbert (EH) action without
introduction of matter fields (what we call pure gravity theories), the
Lovelock family have some unique properties. Let us begin explaining the
defining one. If one demands second order equations of motion in four
dimensions to be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a local, symmetric and conserved tensor (i.e. @xmath ),
Lovelock [ 151 ] established that the only possibility are the standard
Einstein equations of motion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As it is well known, these EoM can be derived from the Einstein-Hilbert
action:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Another way to single out EH gravity in any dimension is to demand
linearity of the equations in the second derivatives of the metric. This
can be slightly relaxed to quasi-linearity: there are not squared or
higher order terms in second derivatives, more details on this condition
can be found in [ 64 ] . If in five dimensions we require again having
second order EoMs with local, symmetric and conserved @xmath , we end up
with the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet theory in five dimensions [ 142 , 143 ] ¹
¹ 1 This work was performed by Cornelius Lanczos, although the name
Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet is not found often in the literature. :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , which guarantees that the equations of motion are second
order in @xmath spacetime dimensions. A normalized characteristic length
@xmath is introduced defining the bare cosmological constant @xmath as
@xmath , and we are left with a single dimensionless coupling, @xmath .
The adjective bare is used because the asymptotic curvature of the
vacuum will no longer be proportional to @xmath as in GR. Actually,
there are in general two different vacua and not just one. @xmath is the
sign of the bare cosmological constant @xmath . We will always use
@xmath which is the natural sign inherited, for instance, from string
theory embeddings of ( 3.1.4 ).

Generalizing for any dimensions and quasi-linear second order EoMs,
Lovelock [ 151 ] found all the possibilities, that are henceforth known
as the Lovelock family. For any given order in the curvature, there is a
new Lovelock term, and the sum of them also fulfills the special
properties demanded above. The quadratic Lovelock (Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet)
is topological for dimension 4, the cubic Lovelock for dimension 6, and
the @xmath -th for dimension @xmath . The particular case of GR is of
this kind for @xmath , and it is indeed topological in 2 dimensions as
follows from the 2 dimensional Gauss-Bonnet theorem.

An additional important property of the Lovelock family is the absence
of higher derivative ghosts [ 151 , 210 ] . Indeed, when one consider
gravitons around flat space, the LGB term ( 3.1.4 ) is the only
quadratic in Riemann action with that property. It must be stressed,
however, that the theory can present ghosts around non-flat solutions
despite having second order equations, as it will appear later under the
name of Boulware-Deser instability. Finally, LGB requires at least
dimension five to not be topological, what is a motivation for higher
dimensions in addition to AdS/CFT.

#### Boundary terms

As explained in the appendix 3.A , the Euclidean path integral requires
an action that is stationary under metric variations with a certain
restriction on the boundary; in our case that we will fix the induced
metric on the boundary. Now we will introduce the terms corresponding to
that condition that are required for the Lovelock family and for LGB in
particular.

To discuss boundary terms, it is convenient to write the LGB action (
3.1.4 ) using the vierbein formalism. ² ² 2 We are not going to consider
connections with torsion, and therefore the results in this section will
be the same found with the metric formalism. . This language allows to
quote the form of the entire Lovelock family of actions, as the
expression is very systematic for the different Lovelock orders:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath being the Newton constant in @xmath spacetime dimensions. @xmath
are the couplings with length dimensions @xmath , @xmath is a length
scale related to the (bare) cosmological constant (as explained after
eq. ( 3.1.4 )) and @xmath is the maximum value of @xmath for which
@xmath is not a boundary term, given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

labeling the highest non-vanishing coefficient, i.e. , @xmath . @xmath
is simply:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita symbol. The zeroth and first term in (
3.1.5 ) correspond, respectively, to the cosmological term and the
Einstein-Hilbert action. The first Lovelock term beyond GR only
contributes for dimensions larger than four and corresponds to the LGB
coupling @xmath as given in ( 3.1.4 ). The Lovelock actions defined by (
3.1.5 ) are not stationary under Dirichlet boundary conditions. The
situation can be more clearly understood with a one-particle analogy
taken from [ 45 ] . Consider the following free particle action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This action is stationary under Dirichlet boundary conditions ³ ³ 3 In a
single particle system, fields only depend on one coordinate @xmath .
The boundary is the initial and final values of it, not a spatial
region. , namely, fixing @xmath at initial and final times, @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore for a solution of the equations of motion @xmath the action is
stationary, @xmath . But we can also consider the action:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that still has the same equations of motion of ( 3.1.8 ). Nevertheless
its variations no longer fix the position in the extremes of the time
interval:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We need to add a boundary term, the analogue of Gibbons-Hawking term, in
order to fix the metric in GR. In this example, it is not difficult to
see that the @xmath is related to @xmath by integration by parts, the
difference being a total derivative (i.e. a boundary term in 0+1 case):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The variation of @xmath cancels the first two terms in ( 3.1 ) and adds
up to the other two such that we get the original result ( 3.1 ). In our
Lovelock case, the bulk action ( 3.1.4 ) behaves like ( 3.1.10 ). In the
following we introduce the necessary total derivatives (analog to @xmath
) necessary to have Dirichlet boundary conditions, following the results
of [ 169 ] .

To introduce the necessary boundary terms that make the action
stationary under Dirichlet boundary conditions, we define first the spin
connection difference @xmath with respect to a reference connection
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath is typically taken to correspond to the product metric that
agrees with @xmath in the boundary. The result is independent of the
@xmath choice. For more details see [ 169 ] .

With @xmath definition we can already quote the boundary term for any
general Lovelock action with coupling constants @xmath as defined by (
3.1.5 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The total action with Dirichlet boundary conditions is just:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(notice the @xmath sign). For the GR and LGB cases ( @xmath
respectively), the boundary terms can be simplified to:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

#### LGB black holes and their Thermodynamics

###### Branches of vacua and black holes

One of the central aspects of interest for any gravity theory are the
black hole solutions. We restrict ourselves to spherically symmetric
ansatz:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the metric of a unit sphere. Notice that this ansatz is
of the form ( 3.A.3 ) we calculated the temperature for, and it is given
by eq. ( 3.A.7 ). The equations of motion of ( 3.1.4 ) can be readily
solved and two branches of solutions characteristic of LGB emerge [ 31 ,
204 , 205 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where M @xmath is the (properly normalized) mass parameter of the
spacetime [ 31 ] . The dS case under consideration has been analyzed in
detail in [ 40 ] . Notice that the only branch admitting a black hole
solution ( i.e. , a smooth event horizon) is that with the minus sign.
Each of the two branches in ( 3.1.21 ) is associated with a different
value of the effective cosmological constant,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is very important to keep in mind the existence of several vacua in
higher curvature theories of pure gravity. This property allows new
physical processes, in particular the phase transition between different
vacua. For @xmath , that will be our case of interest, observe how
@xmath behave in the GR limit @xmath : @xmath while @xmath . So we see
how the @xmath branch of vacua is continuously connected with the EH
one. This also happens for the black holes in eq. ( 3.1.21 ).

The AdS vacuum @xmath is afflicted by the so-called Boulware-Deser (BD)
instability [ 31 ] . This means that the gravitational perturbations
around it present ghosts, and therefore @xmath is not a healthy vacuum.
⁴ ⁴ 4 We will elaborate on this point when needed in our original
results presentation.

###### General aspects of LGB BH Thermodynamics

The laws of BH Thermodynamics for GR are established in all generality (
cf. section 3.A.1 ). But some of the proofs depend on the form of the
action, and even perturbative corrections may induce unphysical
Thermodynamics. Given the remarkable properties of LGB, the study of
this issue in it has been more profound than in generic theories of
gravity. Nevertheless, the results are not as sound as in GR, as
explained in the following paragraphs.

The zeroth law is satisfied for matter respecting the dominant energy
condition [ 189 ] , the same as in the Einstein-Hilbert case. The first
law is also verified, as expected on general grounds at least since the
work of Wald in [ 202 ] . Indeed, it was established before for Lovelock
in [ 170 ] and further investigated in [ 130 ] . As it happens
generically in gravity with higher curvature corrections, the entropy is
no longer given by the area of the horizon; instead for particular case
of LGB we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the higher order coupling as defined in ( 3.1.4 ) and
@xmath is the intrinsic scalar curvature of the horizon. Generic
corrections to area law do not depend only on intrinsic geometry (notice
that GR is a member of the Lovelock family and also fulfills this
property). If the horizon is compact ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is not always the case,
for example in black funnels [ 118 ] . , the correction to area law in
four dimensions will depend only of the horizon topology. A particular
problem in LGB is that the entropy can become negative in some cases,
therefore incompatible with the entropy of any physical system. This
cannot happen in GR, though.

Another key result is the second law. It has been shown that it also
holds for general Lovelock theories in a number of cases [ 4 , 190 ] .
An interesting physical process version has been analyzed in [ 139 ] .
Nevertheless the present results are not as general as Hawking area
theorem for GR. Some study on the third law was performed in [ 199 ] .

Given that state of affairs, we will take the usual thermodynamic
interpretation for granted but always keeping in mind that the second
law is not fully proven. Our completely solid identification of the
Noether charge with entropy is based only in the first law.

### 3.2 Gravitational phase transitions mediated by thermalon

##### Previous bibliography

Concerning the macroscopical properties of any system, it is of the
greatest relevance to know the different possible phases and the
transitions among them. This applies for black holes as well. For the
asymptotically flat BHs of GR in 4D, the possible phases allowed by the
Einstein-Maxwell equations are well known. An stationary BH is specified
uniquely by the three extensive parameters of the first law @xmath [ 123
, 122 , 49 ] . For asymptotically AdS solutions in four dimensions,
thermal AdS can decay to an AdS black hole at a certain temperature.
This is known as the Hawking-Page transition [ 106 ] . Another important
factor that makes the phase diagram richer is the number of spacetime
dimensions. When equal to five, the BH uniqueness turns into
multiplicity. For example, for @xmath and a given mass there are black
holes and black rings solutions, that are different even in the topology
of the horizon [ 71 ] .

As we are interested in LGB we have to consider @xmath , otherwise the
LGB term does not contribute to the EoM. Furthermore, a new dimensionful
quantities is introduced as a coupling constants. We therefore expect in
general rather non-trivial phases diagram in this context, and indeed we
do not intend an exhaustive investigation. We are exclusively concerned
with a transition between pure thermal AdS and a dS BH in the absence of
matter. In this section we are going to present the mechanism that makes
it possible, namely the nucleation of spacetime bubbles.
Before describing in some detail the bubbles and their formation,
dynamics and Thermodynamics, let us clarify a point that may confuse the
reader familiar with gravitational phase transitions. Once we choose the
canonical ensemble, the competing phases must have the same temperature,
charges ( @xmath ) and asymptotics. But we said that the transition
would lead from AdS to dS asymptotics.Then, how can we compare their
free energies? The answer is that we will not compare them directly.
Thermal AdS will compete with a bubble that contains dS BH in its
interior with AdS asymptotics; only in that way their free energies can
be compared. After the bubble is formed, it can expand in a purely
dynamical manner dictated by the EoM and eventually change the boundary
to dS.

In the following we expose the essentials of previous literature dealing
with gravitational phase transitions mediated by a thermalon. Due to the
cosmological constant problem, some attention has been devoted to phase
transitions that can change its value and therefore may justify its
abnormally large value. In this instances, the existence of several
possible values of asymptotic curvature in EH gravity comes from the
different vacua of matter. Although we do not have a cosmological
motivation, we will rely on the bubble nucleations mechanism they
proposed, but we will not require the addition of matter.

The first step is to illustrate bubble nucleation in everyday systems,
say water. When the temperature gets close to evaporation threshold,
bubbles of the new phase (steam) appear. The same can happen in quantum
field theory: bubbles of true vacuum can appear inside a metastable one.
The actual mechanism can includes thermal and quantum fluctuations, and
we will focus on the former, that was studied in gravitational context
by [ 138 , 93 ] . They found that the probability of bubble nucleation
goes as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the euclidean action difference between initial and
bubble state. The euclidean section of that bubble is what we call
thermalon, and we say that the transition is thermalon mediated. Notice
the peculiarity that this transition can happen even when @xmath .
Therefore we can say that the initial state is indeed metastable . Other
examples related to instanton mediated phase transitions in gravity are
[ 35 , 36 ] , in relation to the cosmological constant problem. In the
case of [ 93 ] , pure de Sitter ends up in a dS black hole after the
thermalon decay, somewhat reminiscent of Hawking-Page transition.
Normally the change is from dS (higher vacuum energy) to AdS (lower
vacuum energy), but there are instances where the opposite happens as in
[ 58 , 175 , 134 , 100 ] .

Now that we summarized the previous works using EH actions, let us
introduce the higher curvature corrections. The difference with the
previous cases is that in LGB the thermalon can be the result of
matching the two different black hole branches ( 3.1.21 ), without any
matter in the junction [ 94 , 82 ] ; this is impossible in EH gravity.
One of the branches is in the interior and the other in the exterior of
the bubble; we will sometimes say junction to refer the bubble’s
surface. The existence of several branches and the the possibility of
gluing them together without matter is not specific of LGB, but fairly
generic; therefore we strongly expect that this kind of phase transition
is generic. For the LGB case, the Thermodynamics for the two
asymptotically AdS branches was investigated in detail in [ 43 ] with
the main results:

-   Generic Lovelock matching conditions, dynamics and Thermodynamics
    are analyzed for spherical thermalons.

-   Thermalon is indeed the dominant phase in LGB and cubic Lovelock at
    a certain temperature.

-   The change of asymptotics takes place through the expansion of the
    bubble, when it is dynamically unstable and can reach the boundary.

-   Lovelock parameters constraints to avoid some pathological
    configurations.

-   Discussion of bubble collapse and naked singularities formation.

In the present chapter we extend their work for LGB to include similar
transitions from AdS to dS asymptotics. There are several motivations.
The first is that we consider the problem is potentially interesting
holographically, as a physical process would be dynamically substituting
the AdS boundary for dS. Moreover, the most frequently studied
transitions are from dS to AdS and not vice versa; finally there is the
additional interest of using higher curvature corrections and not
matter. In the following subsection we describe the thermalon
configuration formally.

##### Thermalon configuration and dynamics

Before going into details, we make a clarification about terminology. A
source of possible confusion to the reader is the somewhat exchangeable
use of the words bubble and thermalon. Being precise, the thermalon is
the euclidean section of a static bubble . In strict sense, when we talk
about dynamics (expansion or contraction, normally) we are always
referring to the bubble. When we consider the bubble as a thermodynamic
phase, we are really meaning the thermalon. With this in mind, let us
formally characterize the thermalon, following [ 43 ] .

First we start with the physical intuition for the static case, a
depiction of the setup can be found in figure 3.1 . We will have a
timelike closed surface, that in coordinates will be given by @xmath .
For @xmath we choose as metric one the branches explained in ( 3.1.21 ),
and the other for @xmath . The equations of motion are satisfied for all
@xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 Of course, the solutions ( 3.1.21 ) are only defined for
@xmath when they have horizons, but let us forget about that subtlety
for the sake of simplicity. , because both branches are solutions. For
the whole metric to be a distributional solution of LGB action, we must
impose the so called junction conditions . Those will constraint the
three free parameters @xmath , and the match may not even be possible in
some cases. If we success in satisfying the junction conditions, we
ended up with a new solution by matching two previous solutions
together. For the non-static bubbles, the idea is the same except that
now @xmath is time dependent.

Now we describe the thermalon configuration in slightly more precise
terms. Let us consider a manifold that at least outside horizons will be
globally covered by one chart with coordinates @xmath . We work in
euclidean signature so @xmath is spacelike but its Lorentzian
counterpart is timelike. We divide the manifold into two disjoint
regions @xmath and @xmath , that we call interior and exterior
respectively. Here comes the difference with the previous paragraph: we
will not associate exactly the solutions in ( 3.1.21 ) to the
interior/exterior. Instead, we will associate the following metrics
diffeomorphic to them:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath must be determined afterwards. The functions @xmath should
not be confused with temperatures, and are nothing but the effect of
time coordinate redefinition in each of them. The position of the bubble
at a given time corresponds to @xmath . Using the same @xmath
coordinates to cover the bubble, the metric pullback on it becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first junction condition is to have continuous @xmath across the
bubble, and that is the reason why we introduced the functions @xmath .
If we had taken simply @xmath , the metric would be discontinuous. We
avoid that problem with the requirement:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that guarantees the desired continuity of @xmath across the bubble.
These choice must be explicitly checked once the @xmath is found to
verify its consistency.

In addition to the continuity of induced metric across the junction (
3.2.27 ), there is another junction condition in the absence of matter
fields in the bubble, namely the continuity of momenta:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are the canonical gravitational momenta @xmath , and
@xmath indices refer to the directions of the junction surface (not
necessarily flat indices): @xmath , @xmath refer to the
interior,exterior side of the bubble.

Although in GR the second condition can also be phrased as momentum
continuity ⁷ ⁷ 7 The matching equations of Einstein-Hilbert action are
the so-called Israel-Darmois conditions [ 121 ] . They imply the
continuity of induced metric and momenta in both sides of the junction.
( 3.2.28 ), the different expression of @xmath in LGB leads to very
different implications. In particular, it allows to glue solutions with
different metric derivatives in each side with no matter in the
junction. Indeed, in Einstein-Hilbert action the momenta @xmath are in
one-to-one correspondence with the velocities @xmath . If the momenta
are continuous in the junction, so are the velocities. But with higher
curvature corrections, for the same momenta in both sides of the
junction there may be two or more different velocities. In this way, the
discontinuity of metric derivative is compatible with the momenta
continuity without matter, while it is not in Einstein-Hilbert. Let us
illustrate with an explicit one-particle example how the higher order
corrections can induce multivaluedness of the velocities [ 110 ] .
Consider a free particle lagrangian containing higher powers of
velocities such as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The EoM is given by @xmath . @xmath is a multivalued function, as can be
seen in figure 3.2 :

Even further, the solution to the variational principle is not unique.
If we fix boundary conditions @xmath , an obvious solution would be
constant speed @xmath For this lagrangian it is possible to have two
velocities @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . As the momentum is the same
for both velocities, we can glue them despite the discontinuous
velocity, forming the trajectory:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

If we choose @xmath such that @xmath , we have found another solution to
the variational problem because the boundary conditions are fulfilled
and the momentum @xmath is conserved. Then, as we have two solutions
fulfilling the EoM and boundary conditions, what is the actual physical
solution of the variational problem? The answer is given by the absolute
minimum of the action, and it can be the discontinuous one in some cases
[ 45 ] .

Now we compare back the free particle with the gravitational case. The
interior/exterior of the bubble @xmath are the analog of the different
velocity pieces of ( 3.2.31 ). The bubble sides can be matched despite
having different velocities because @xmath ( 3.2.28 ), this is analog to
equality of momenta @xmath in eq. ( 3.2.31 ). In both gravity and
particle case, different velocities can be matched because they have the
same momentum. This is possible due the higher curvature corrections in
( 3.2.29 ), that make @xmath multivalued.

So we conclude that a priori non-continuous solutions in the absence of
matter like the thermalon ( 3.2.25 ) could exist; and actually they do [
94 , 82 ] . It is important to realize that they are another competing
saddle and may become the dominant one as in [ 43 ] . Indeed that is our
mechanism of phase transition from AdS to dS we present in this chapter.
The phenomenon of solution with discontinuous derivatives is expected
generically in higher curvature theories in addition to LGB gravity.

The junction conditions ( 3.2.28 ) for our spherical bubble ( 3.2.25 )
turn out to have only one independent component @xmath . The rest are
related to that one as [ 61 , 94 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore if @xmath verifies ( 3.2.28 ), all the components
automatically do. We will therefore focus on @xmath , with expression
given by [ 43 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we ignored some factors as they are the same for both @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath is an important polynomial defined for any Lovelock
action ⁸ ⁸ 8 This quantity appears often in many Lovelock applications,
including Thermodynamics, presence of ghosts, dynamics, etc…, cf . [ 45
] . (see ( 3.1.5 )):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the highest Lovelock order present in the action and the
expression at the right is the value for our LGB choice of parameters.
From now on we avoid the use of indices i.e. @xmath . Let us define
@xmath ; the junction equations are rewritten as @xmath . After we
introduce the auxiliary quantities:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can recast the momenta as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where it becomes clear that all the information about the branches is
contained only in @xmath , that can be found using ( 3.1.21 ).

As mentioned before, it is possible to rewrite the condition ( 3.2.28 )
as the dynamics of one particle with an effective potential @xmath [ 45
] constrained to have a vanishing Hamiltonian, namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the derivative with respect to euclidean time @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath . The precise form of @xmath clearly must depend on @xmath
and it will be given for our problem later in eq. ( 3.3.48 ).

Now that we have specified the dynamics of time dependent bubbles, we
particularize for the thermalon, that is static. It has seven unknowns:
@xmath and @xmath . In the previous, @xmath are the mass parameters
implicit in @xmath , @xmath is the usual inverse Hawking temperature of
the inner solution while @xmath is the one seen by the asymptotic
observer (that it is in the outer region); @xmath is the location of the
thermalon (the subindex @xmath means that it is the static value). Four
constraints are given by ( 3.2.27 ) and the r.h.s. of ( 3.2.37 ). As we
are in static configuration, they can be simplified to:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.38)
     @xmath      (3.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A fifth constraint is given by the absence of conical singularity in the
horizon, fixing @xmath in the usual way. The sixth and last is enforced
by the continuity of the total length of the thermal circle across the
junction:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Only one degree of freedom remains, and we choose it to be the
temperature at infinity @xmath . Namely, if we consider the canonical
ensemble at temperature @xmath , the corresponding thermalon phase has
@xmath . It must be stressed that not any choice of @xmath will allow
the existence of a thermalon. In our case they shall exist only below a
certain temperature (see figure 3.3 ).

We have so far described the thermalon to which our initial thermal AdS
will decay. To finish the transition to dS geometry, the bubble must
expand. Such expansion is a purely dynamical process determined by the
right hand side of ( 3.2.37 ). For the expansion to happen, the
thermalon must sit in the maximum of the real time potential @xmath ⁹ ⁹
9 Notice that the euclidean evolution has the opposite potential of real
time. . Once it has been formed, the bubble will either expand or
contract due to small metric fluctuations. If it contracts, nothing will
happen at large scale ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 For a discussion on possible naked
singularity formation see [ 43 ] . , as the bubbles are formed all
throughout space very much like they do in boiling water. If it expands,
the dS phase in the interior will expand eventually reaching the
cosmological horizon. At that point, an observer in the interior of the
cosmological horizon will measure the Thermodynamics of a dS space.

###### Thermodynamics of the thermalon

In this subsection we address how to compute free energy of the
thermalon in LGB gravity. A more detailed treatment for the whole
Lovelock family and more general thermalon configurations can be found
in [ 43 ] .

We will use the Euclidean on-shell action method described in the
appendix of this chapter, section 3.A .The main difference with standard
BH Thermodynamics is that surface terms of the action must be included
at the junction . The action for the whole thermalon can be split as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the standard bulk action to be integrated in @xmath .
@xmath is integrated in @xmath . @xmath includes on the one hand the
boundary terms necessary for good variational principle ( 3.1.19 ) and
the other the subtraction of the @xmath vacuum, necessary to make the
action finite. The non-standard piece @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

this is, the boundary terms ( 3.1.19 ) evaluated in both sides of the
junction @xmath . Such term is necessary for the thermalon to be a
distributional solution satisfying the variational principle, and
therefore it is not added ad-hoc only to compute free energy. Notice
that it must be included despite the absence of matter in the junction.

Before we continue, let us define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

that is the familiar contribution to @xmath of the interior black hole.
The evaluation of @xmath is possible for generic Lovelock gravity [ 43 ]
, and the result is remarkably neat:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

With it, the whole action becomes simply:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

meaning that the junction contributes as mass but not as entropy. Both
@xmath are the quantities corresponding to the exterior observer.

### 3.3 Thermalon configuration and AdS to dS phase transition

From now on, we introduce the original results based on the previous
work summarized above. As mentioned before, we are interested in
studying AdS to dS phase transitions. It turns out [ 42 ] that
thermalons connecting AdS to dS are not possible with @xmath (remember
that @xmath ), therefore we have to consider @xmath , i.e. positive bare
cosmological constant. To make things more concrete, we explicitly state
now all the parameters we are choosing in the action ( 3.1.4 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With these choices @xmath is the only remaining tunable parameter in the
theory. It is important to note that the @xmath vacuum (given by (
3.1.22 )) is Boulware-Deser unstable. @xmath is our initial state, and
therefore strictly speaking our results are unphysical. The reason why
we overlook that fact is because we want to show that a thermalon
configuration that expands yielding dS asymptotic can be
thermodynamically preferred. We strongly expect the existence of similar
transitions between healthy vacua in higher order Lovelock theories.
Indeed, for Ads to AdS transition, it was found to be possible in higher
order Lovelock in [ 43 ] , becoming clear that the transition is not
caused by the unhealthy vacuum. Furthermore, the vacua curvature are
given by the real roots of @xmath polynomial defined in ( 3.2.34 ). If
@xmath is positive on them, they are Boulware-Deser stable. In LGB, as
@xmath is quadratic, both solutions cannot have positive derivative. But
in higher order Lovelock, @xmath is a higher order polynomial and it is
possible to find two different vacua with positive derivatives, and
therefore both are Boulware-Deser stable. We think that more general
higher order gravity theories will also display the desired transitions
AdS to dS transition.

The thermalon we are considering is exactly of the form explained in the
previous sections. To determine its dynamics using the r.h.s. of (
3.2.37 ), we compute the momenta @xmath using ( 3.2.33 ). The result in
Lorentzian signature is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can work out now the explicit form of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As explained in the thermalon configuration section, there is one degree
of freedom in the thermalon configurations. We take it to be @xmath as
we are going to work in the canonical ensemble. Following the discussion
of subsection 3.2 we can compute the thermodynamic free energy at
temperature @xmath . We also have checked that the relation between the
various quantities do satisfy the first law of Thermodynamics.

The free energy as a function of the temperature is depicted in figure
3.3 , where we can analyze the global and local stability of the
different solutions.

For each value of the temperature, the saddle with the lowest value of
the free energy will be the dominant one. The first thing we notice is
that the thermalon configuration exists only for a limited range of
temperatures for each @xmath . Above some threshold temperature, @xmath
, which decreases with @xmath , the thermal AdS vacuum would be the only
available static solution, thus being in this respect stable. We again
should remind the reader that in our toy LGB action the AdS vacuum
@xmath is Boulware-Deser unstable.

Maximal temperature for the thermalon @xmath happens when the mass of
the interior spherically symmetric black hole with dS asymptotics
reaches its upper bound given by the Nariai threshold [ 41 ] . This
phenomenon only occurs in the @xmath case we explored in our original
results.

Regarding the sign of the free energy, we can distinguish two different
regimes depending on the value of the LGB coupling (see Figure 3.4 ).
For small enough values, @xmath , the free energy of the thermalon is
positive at low temperatures, while it changes sign as we go to higher
temperatures. For higher values of @xmath , on the other hand, the free
energy remains positive for the whole range of temperatures of the
thermalon. In the latter case, then, the dominant saddle is always the
@xmath vacuum, whereas in the former it is so except for a limited range
of intermediate temperatures, @xmath . In this range the thermalon is
the dominant saddle and the nucleation process is favored. Notice that
despite having @xmath , the thermalon phase may form at low temperature.
The probability of bubble formation in this situation is not zero but
roughly @xmath [ 144 , 148 , 149 , 149 , 3 ] . Waiting long enough the
bubble will form and mediate a transition to the healthy branch of
solutions. In this respect, we may say that thermal AdS is metastable.

The only range of temperatures for which there is no transition is that
of high temperatures for which the thermalon configuration does not even
exist. The threshold temperature for this regime diverges as we approach
small values of @xmath . At the same time, the free energy becomes lower
and lower in the range in which it is positive. This means that the
thermalon is more easily excited (the nucleation probability grows) as
we go to lower values of @xmath , and that this configuration is
available for all temperatures in the limit of very small @xmath . This
is a strong indication that the AdS vacuum is more and more unstable as
@xmath .

When reaching the critical temperature the thermalon will form, but it
will not remain in equilibrium for long. Even though thermodynamically
stable, this configuration is dynamically unstable. Our bubble sits at a
maximum of the potential @xmath given by ( 3.3.48 ). Eventually expands
reaching the asymptotic region in finite proper time, thus changing the
effective cosmological constant of the whole spacetime.

We may wonder what happens when the bubble expansion reaches the
boundary. In asymptotically AdS spacetimes, boundary conditions are of
paramount importance. In the case of transitions between two AdS vacua
of different radii, one may argue that fixing the asymptotics (by means
of reflecting boundary conditions) would make the bubble bounce back and
collapse. In the case of AdS to dS transitions, though, this is actually
impossible since the formation of a dS horizon makes the expansion of
the bubble irreversible from that moment onwards [ 43 ] .

We may summarize that the thermalon effectively effectively changes from
branch of solutions to another. This is important because the final (dS)
branch does not suffer from the pathologies characterizing the unstable
LGB AdS branch that was our initial asymptotics.

As an aside comment figure 3.4 seems to entail the occurrence of
so-called reentrant phase transitions , ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 We thank David Kubiznak
and Robert Mann for pointing out this interesting possibility to us. a
familiar phenomenon in chemical physics that was earlier observed in the
context of black hole Thermodynamics [ 76 , 5 ] . There is, however, an
important subtlety hidden in the fact that Figure 3.4 is not comparing
two different stable thermodynamical configurations. Instead, one of
them –the thermalon – is a finite temperature instanton describing an
intermediate state, a bubble of true-vacuum that grows after popping-up,
filling space with the new phase that changes the asymptotics to dS.
Once this happens, we cannot refer any longer to the same diagram.
Therefore, we cannot reverse the process by changing the temperature, as
required to have reentrant phase transitions.

### 3.4 Discussion and outlook

Higher curvature gravity, such as GB, do typically posses several vacua.
Gravitational phase transition among them is in principle possible
despite the change of boundary curvature. In particular, we have shown a
case where there a sing change in these curvature.

We have described a novel scenario for transitions between AdS and dS
asymptotics in higher-curvature gravity, without involving any
additional matter fields. The phenomenon discussed in the present
chapter is expected to take place in any higher-curvature theory as long
as AdS and dS branches are allowed at the same time. The framework
described here is general enough as to accommodate any series of
higher-curvature terms, we would only need to adequately generalize the
junction conditions.

For illustrative purposes we have chosen LGB gravity as the minimal
model where this kind of transition takes place. For this theory we have
all the necessary ingredients without the usual complications of
higher-derivative terms. In particular, we have explicit junction
conditions (given by momenta conservation in the Hamiltonian formalism)
that enable us to construct the thermalon configuration. Nonetheless,
this example has to be taken with a grain of salt, as a simple toy
model, given that the theory has well known issues; namely, it
generically violates causality ¹² ¹² 12 This signals the existence of an
infinite tower of higher-spin particles whose presence does not
necessarily affect the gravitational phase transitions discussed in this
chapter. [ 44 ] .

We are also truncating the effective string theory action and analyzing
the regime where the higher-curvature corrections become of the same
order as the Einstein-Hilbert term, precisely where the rest of the
higher-curvature series becomes relevant as well. In particular, the
unstable vacuum curvature diverges as we take the LGB coupling to zero.
All these concerns would be dealt with in a brane setup in string
theory, where a consistent field theory limit is taken. In that respect,
the LGB action is a promising candidate given that it arises both in
heterotic string theory and in type II Superstrings in the presence of
wrapped probe D-branes.

This model might have as well interesting applications in the context of
the gauge/gravity duality. In addition to the well known AdS/CFT
correspondence there is a proposal for a dS/CFT duality [ 193 ] . The
transition mechanism presented in this chapter suggests a possible
avenue for a deeper understanding of both formulations by means of a
framework where both types of asymptotics appear on equal footing in a
given gravitational theory. Notice, nonetheless, that in all cases
studied so far one of the vacua is unstable for some reason and we can
always argue that we have to stick to the other asymptotics. There may
be more general cases of transitions involving two perfectly healthy
vacua in Lovelock theory.

The approach considered here is very different to other AdS/CFT
descriptions of similar transitions (see, for instance, [ 78 ] ) where
the boundary in which the CFT lives is always unchanged, the transition
taking place in the other asymptotic region of an eternal black hole.
Our description is completely insensitive to this other side and even if
we try to describe it, the same transition would happen there as well.

## Appendix 3.A Introduction to black hole Thermodynamics

In this appendix we introduce the main concepts of BH black hole
Thermodynamics we have used in the chapter. The topic of black hole
Thermodynamics is so far the main window to quantum gravity, and its
importance cannot be overemphasized. Furthermore, it is in this context
where the holographic principle by t’Hooft [ 195 ] appeared, of which
AdS/CFT is a much more concrete and developed realization. Any Quantum
Theory of Gravity must be able to reproduce the laws of BH
Thermodynamics. Finally, it is crucial in holographic applications
involving thermal properties in the dual field theory.

#### 3.a.1 History

Back in the 1970s, Bekenstein [ 19 ] conjectured that black holes should
have entropy. The basic reasoning is as follows: consider matter before
and after falling into a black hole. At the beginning of the process,
matter has some entropy, after it, the matter is no longer there and
therefore the total entropy of the universe would be reduced. To avoid
this violation of the second law of Thermodynamics, black hole entropy
must be taken into account. But what is the actual amount of entropy
that the BH should have? The right answer turns out to be proportional
to the area of the horizon, not the volume as in standard
Thermodynamics. Motivated by this proposal, Hawking proved that the
total area of horizons cannot decrease over time and the area-entropy
identification became very strong.

This was in itself an impressive feat, but it raised an important
question: if BHs are thermodynamical objects, they should also have a
temperature and radiate; ironically they would no longer be black. Using
quantum field theory on curved spacetime, Hawking [ 105 ] showed a
microscopic description of BH radiation linking the temperature @xmath
with the purely geometrical surface gravity @xmath ; indeed Hawking
radiation is closely related to the Unruh effect, in which accelerated
observers perceive a non-vanishing temperature [ 200 ] [ 60 ] .
Surprisingly enough, using this temperature one could proof the first
law of Thermodynamics for BHs [ 14 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the mass, @xmath is the angular velocity at the horizon
and the angular momentum , @xmath are the electric potential and
electric charge.

From this point on, the thermodynamical properties of the horizon allow
to ask thermodynamical questions like in more down to earth systems. In
particular, Nernst version of third law was also proved to hold [ 14 ] .
It must be honestly remarked that until less than a year ago there was
no experimental evidences concerning BH Thermodynamics. Recently, the
LIGO collaboration made the first direct observation of gravitational
waves of a black hole merger [ 2 ] , and with it, the area law can be
checked in that particular BH merging, being fulfilled.

This description of Thermodynamics explained above can be extended to
more general spacetime dynamics: higher dimensions, different actions
and/or matter fields. If we change the action, some the expressions
entering the first law of Thermodynamics will also be different: this is
the case in particular for the extensive quantities @xmath . For
example, the entropy will no longer be given by the horizon area.
Despite this, Iyer and Wald [ 202 , 129 ] found a generalization of the
entropy formula still satisfying the first law. The key is the
identification of the entropy as a Noether charge. With it, one can in
principle compute the thermodynamical quantities for very general
actions. An even more general approach is [ 79 ] , based on conical
singularity method, although it is more difficult to use.

It must be stressed that the second law is not guaranteed in general
theories of gravitation, like the first is after Iyer-Wald work. In
particular, it is not fully established for the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet (
cf. section 3.1 ). In what follows we will introduce the euclidean
formalism to compute the partition function of a BH in the canonical
ensemble.

#### 3.a.2 Euclidean path integral formalism. Temperature and free
energy

In the previous section we introduced the elementary notions of black
hole Thermodynamics. At the beginning, area law for the entropy was an
heuristic conjecture. Nevertheless, it is possible to derive it as well
as the free energy of the canonical ensemble from the so-called
euclidean path integral formalism [ 88 ] , which is also a formal
approach to quantum gravity. After its introduction, we will in
particular emphasize how to compute the temperature and the free energy,
as they will be essential for the phase transitions in the present
chapter. We will be exclusively in the canonical ensemble.

As the name already explains, the method is based in the path integral
approach to Quantum Field Theories. For real Lorentzian metrics @xmath
and real matter fields the action @xmath will be real. The real action
path integral (whose integrand is essentially @xmath ) will then
oscillate and it is not clear whether it converges. To describe systems
at a fixed temperature (like in the canonical ensemble), imaginary time
@xmath is introduced. We can write the canonical partition function as [
88 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is called the Euclidean action, @xmath is the energy of the
@xmath -th eigenstate, and @xmath and @xmath are the Wick rotated metric
and matter fields. There are several important remarks concerning this
formula:

1.  The first equality is essentially a formal definition, impossible to
    fully compute in practice. The second is just a path integral
    representation of the former.

2.  The action variations must yield the desired boundary conditions of
    the variational principle, typically of Dirichlet type. To achieve
    it, extra boundary terms in the action might be needed. This is the
    reason why the Gibbons-Hawking term was added to the EH term in GR
    in the first place. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Modified theories of gravity do often
    require modified GH-like terms. For our case of Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet
    and Lovelock gravity, we introduced them section 3.1 . In all the
    cases in this thesis the asymptotic geometry will be of constant
    curvature: AdS or dS.

3.  The path integral is taken over all fields @xmath in the Euclidean
    section and periodic in imaginary time with period @xmath . We
    explain how to compute the range of @xmath for a spherical BH in the
    next paragraph.

Let us explain how to relate the range of @xmath , @xmath , with the
temperature @xmath of the canonical ensemble in the case of a spherical
black hole ansatz:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For asymptotically flat spacetime, one takes the null vector generating
the horizon @xmath , normalized so that @xmath at infinity. Let’s remark
(this vector is null only at the horizon). For metrics of the form (
3.A.3 ) with @xmath , @xmath .

To begin with, we take the euclidean section of ( 3.A.3 ). The first
step is replacing @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we allow any range of @xmath , the metric will generically display
conical singularities in the horizon. Indeed the second step is to
expand the metric near the horizon:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath is the derivative with respect to the radial
coordinate @xmath . Then, to avoid conical singularity at @xmath we must
impose:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as @xmath as implied by the euclidean path integral formalism. From it
we immediately identify the temperature:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For asymptotically AdS spacetimes, it is customary to normalize as
@xmath . We will be concerned with asymptotically AdS or dS geometries.

Now that we specified the range of @xmath in terms of the temperature,
the question is how to obtain physical quantities from ( 3.A.2 ). As
stressed before the expression in the right of ( 3.A.2 ) is a formal
one: we do not have any hope to compute it. Instead, we use the so
called saddle point approximation restricting our integration to the
classical solution of the EoMs instead of all possible metrics:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the subscript @xmath represents the classical (euclidean) solution
of temperature @xmath and desired boundary conditions. When one does
this in practice, the integral of @xmath is typically divergent and some
renormalization is necessary. Often, the criterion is to compute the
difference with respect to some reference solution, typically the
maximally symmetric solution with the desired boundary conditions (for
example thermal AdS at the temperature fixed by the canonical ensemble).
We will indeed follow this procedure.

The relation of @xmath with Thermodynamics is given by the standard
canonical ensemble statistical mechanics:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Once a finite expression for @xmath has been achieved, it must be
written as a function of @xmath and the conserved charges fixed by the
canonical ensemble ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The most common ones are the electric charge
and the angular momentum, but others are possible: magnetic charge,
winding charge, extra angular momenta for dimensions higher than four,
etc… . Then we can obtain thermodynamic quantities from @xmath in the
standard manner, for instance the mass @xmath and the entropy @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

## Chapter 4 Deformations of KW CFT and new AdS@xmath backgrounds via
non-Abelian T-duality

We start by briefly reviewing the topic of T-duality (both Abelian and
non-Abelian) that will become central in our study. After it we include
basic review of the concepts of Wilson loop, entanglement entropy and
central charge. Furthermore, a brief review of AdS/CFT and NATD research
is included. The original results will start in section 4.3 .

### 4.1 T-duality as a generating technique

#### 4.1.1 Abelian T-duality

In this section we briefly state the basics of Abelian T-duality as a
SUGRA solution generating technique. As mentioned in the motivation of
chapter 1 , T-duality was introduced in string theory in the late
eighties. Consider a particular string theory (say for example type IIA)
@xmath -model on a background with a @xmath symmetry. T-duality relates
it with another @xmath -model on a different background. The dual @xmath
-model belonging to another (potentially the same) different string
theory (for example type IIA related with IIB). To be more concrete,
consider as @xmath -model the Polyakov action defined on a purely
geometrical ( @xmath ) Neveu-Schwarz background with a compact direction
of radius @xmath (in units @xmath ). Via T-duality, it is equivalent to
the same @xmath -model on a background of radius @xmath and @xmath .
This is the simplest instance of the duality. What is common to all
forms of Abelian T-duality is the key requirement of having a global
@xmath symmetry for all the fields in the background. ¹ ¹ 1 For
Non-Abelian T-duality the requirement will be a non-Abelian isometry,
and we will take @xmath .

So far we elaborated on the equivalence of different strings theories in
different backgrounds. But it turns out that T-duality applies also to
the low energy description of strings theories given by SUGRA. In the
present work we will be concerned mostly with T-duality relating
backgrounds of type IIA and IIB SUGRA, we will say the backgrounds are
dual to each other. This is made precise in the subsequent paragraphs.

Let us start from a type IIA/IIB SUGRA background with a global @xmath
-isometry, which leaves invariant not only the metric but all the fields
of the solution. We will employ coordinates @xmath , @xmath adapted to
the @xmath isometry; therefore the Killing vector is just @xmath . The
form of the dual background is given by the Buscher rules [ 38 , 39 , 23
] . For the NSNS sector they read:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the hatted fields are those of the dual background; such notation
will apply not only to fields but to any kind of quantities related to
the dual background. For the RR sector let us define:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Then, the T-duality rule is given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath refers to a vierbein defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath .
The NS Buscher rules can be derived dealing directly with the Polyakov
action, via a gauging procedure (for more details on this as well as a
general review of NS Abelian and non-Abelian T-duality, see for example
[ 6 ] ). The idea is to start from the sigma model action for the NSNS
fields, and gauge the @xmath isometry: @xmath introducing a gauge field
@xmath . Then, a Lagrange multiplier term is added, ensuring that the
field strength vanishes. Finally, integrating out the gauge field we are
left with the dual action, from which the dual metric and KR 2-form
@xmath are read. The Lagrange multiplier acts as the new coordinate.
Notice in ( 4.1.1 ) that also the dilaton @xmath is also modified. Its
proof in the general case is much more involved and can be found in [
179 ] .

Two relevant features of Abelian duality will appear in chapter 4 :

-   If the initial background is in type IIA, the dual is in IIB and
    viceversa. The dual background is guaranteed to be a solution of its
    corresponding SUGRA. Therefore the Buscher rules above ( 4.1.1 ), (
    4.1.3 ) are a solution generating technique. This also happens for
    NATD, and it is what makes the present chapter possible.

-   To completely specify the dual background it is necessary to fix the
    range of the new dual coordinate @xmath , guaranteeing in that
    manner that the @xmath -model on the new background is equivalent
    the one in the original background; this is achieved when [ 185 ] :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.1.8)
      -- -------- -- ---------

Having introduced the Abelian T-duality, especially as a solution
generating technique in SUGRA, we proceed now with its non-Abelian
generalization, that will focus most of our attention.

#### 4.1.2 Non-Abelian T-duality (NATD)

When the isometry of the background is given by some non-Abelian Lie
group, there exists an analog solution generating technique called
Non-Abelian T-duality (NATD). The whole present chapter is based upon
this. This section will introduce the transformation rules and some
relevant properties. As in the Abelian case, all the fields must be
invariant under the symmetry, that we will always restrict to be @xmath
for simplicity. The non-Abelian T-duality for the Neveu-Schwarz sector
was originally presented in [ 63 ] .

We begin with a brief overview of the procedure yielding NATD
transformation rules (we will follow the notation and conventions of [
126 ] ). Let us consider a IIA/IIB SUGRA background with @xmath
isometry. If @xmath are the @xmath left invariant Maurer-Cartan
one-forms, we can write the metric and NSNS @xmath form as:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Let us define:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and from them the following block matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . We can identify the dual metric and @xmath field as the
symmetric and antisymmetric components, respectively, of:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath with @xmath are the new dual coordinates. Moreover, one finds
that the dilaton receives a contribution at the quantum level just as in
Abelian case:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again the dual fields are denoted with a hat. ( 4.1.13 ) and ( 4.1.15 )
yield the dual NS sector but the transformation of RR fluxes is also
needed. This was discovered much more recently in [ 191 ] , and
reignited interest in this technique for holographic applications.
Surprisingly, the solution starts in very much the same way as the
Abelian case, by defining the polyforms @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Then, the dual RR fluxes are obtained from:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . The only
difference with the Abelian transformation ( 4.1.3 ) is that @xmath
matrix becomes more involved. With ( 4.1.13 ), ( 4.1.15 ) and ( 4.1.17 )
we can calculate the non-Abelian T-dual of a given background.

Before discussing some essential properties, let us sketch how to obtain
the NSNS Buscher rules ² ² 2 The rules of NATD transformation are
sometimes referred to as Buscher rules, due to the original
transformation rules discovered by Buscher in the Abelian case. above
from the T-dual action. They are similar in spirit, although the
non-Abelian isometry introduces more indices and other complications.
The lagrangian density for the NSNS sector reads:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . We then gauge the @xmath isometry by replacing the
derivatives by covariant derivatives @xmath . Afterwards we add a
Lagrange multiplier term to constrain the gauge fields to be pure gauge:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After a gauge fixing, we can choose the 3 Lagrange multipliers @xmath as
the new coordinates. The last step is to integrate out the gauge fields,
obtaining the dual lagrangian density:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Despite some obvious similarities, there are some
differences with the previous Abelian transformation of section 4.1.1 :

-   When Abelian T-duality is applied twice, the original background is
    recovered. Nevertheless, when NATD is applied for the first time,
    the @xmath isometry is destroyed, and therefore cannot be applied
    again.

-   For compact commuting isometries T-duality is a perturbative (in
    both @xmath and @xmath ) duality of the string partition function [
    185 ] ; meanwhile NATD may well be a symmetry only for SUGRA.

-   The range of the dual coordinates that makes the transformation a
    string duality is known for the Abelian case ( 4.1.8 ). For NATD is
    not even known if it is a string duality.

The last point is relevant for holographic application, as several
physical quantities depend on the range of dual coordinates as it,
entanglement entropy and c-function described in sections 4.2.2 , 4.2.3
. Such slight limitation will become manifest in our results, and
eventually prompted further understanding of the field theory effect of
NATD in later papers [ 156 , 153 , 155 , 124 ] .

There are more aspects of NATD that we ignored in this short
introduction. The interested reader might check [ 91 , 30 , 181 ] for
some reference works and lectures. For more holography oriented
application, [ 126 ] has a very good balance of NATD fundamentals,
previous literature, and citations.

### 4.2 Selected holographic observables

To learn about Quantum Field Theory using AdS/CFT we have to relate
gravitational quantities with boundary observables. In the following
three sections we elaborate on three remarkable field theory side
quantities that can be computed without any need of correlators and
holographic renormalization: Wilson loop, entanglement entropy and
c-function.

#### 4.2.1 Wilson loop

The Wilson loop is one of the oldest but most relevant gauge invariant
operators in the study of non-Abelian gauge theories. It was introduced
in [ 206 ] in connection with the crucial phenomenon of confinement.
Here we give a review of its most basic aspects that will be enough for
the present thesis. Let’s start with its definition in the field theory
side. For a non-Abelian gauge theory with gauge field @xmath , the
Wilson loop is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the path ordering operator along @xmath .
@xmath is a closed contour in the (field theory) spacetime.

In this work, the contour of integration will always be a rectangle,
with length @xmath in the time direction and @xmath in some spatial one.
In more physical terms, it represents the amplitude of propagation of a
@xmath pair separated by distance @xmath . In the limit of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the energy of the @xmath pair at distance @xmath . When
the field theory is confining (meaning that quarks cannot be isolated at
long enough distances), the energy grows linearly:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using this in the previous equation, we quickly find:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

because @xmath is the area of the rectangle enclosed by @xmath . This
fact is referred as the Wilson loop area law. It must be emphasized that
determining whether a gauge theory is or not confining is of great
physical interest.

On the other, AdS/CFT allows its computation (as usual for the
correspondence, for large @xmath and strong coupling) [ 161 , 184 ] . A
key point to keep in mind is that the open string ending on a D-brane is
dual to a quark [ 161 , 184 ] . This allows to conjecture that the
Wilson loop is dual to an open string with worldsheet boundary @xmath
given by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the pair of quarks to be non-dynamical, the D-brane to which the
string is attached must lie on the boundary, thus fixing the boundary
conditions for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the on-shell string action (that we will compute using
the Nambu-Goto action). Therefore, we end up with the relation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If one computes @xmath it will diverge in the UV. To make physical sense
of it, it is necessary to renormalize it, normally by subtracting the
quarks infinite mass (as they are non-dynamical). In practice, the
on-shell embedding problem is straightforward to pose yet it may need
numerical methods to solve, particularly in time dependent backgrounds.
For some simple detailed examples, see [ 182 ] and references therein. A
last basic but relevant case is the conformal field theory, in which:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

due to conformal invariance. The precise coefficient depends on
spacetime dimensionality. We will use that dependence to probe the
effective dimension in a holographic situation where it is not obvious,
as shown in eq. ( 4.12.2 ). In that case, two dimensions of spacetime
become very small along the RG flow, so the actual CFT dimension is not
totally obvious. The Wilson loop and entanglement entropy results are
consistent with a reduction of field theory dimension from four to two.
A notable holographic application of Wilson loop to jet-quenching was
discovered [ 150 ] .

#### 4.2.2 Holographic entanglement entropy

Before introducing the entanglement entropy (EE), let’s define the
Shannon entropy @xmath of a discrete probability distribution ³ ³ 3
Normally the Shannon entropy is defined with logarithms to the base 2 as
it is counting bits.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are the probabilities of each outcome. The Shannon
entropy is a key measure appearing in classical information theory, and
equals the natural logarithm of the effective number of possible
outcomes of a probability distribution. In this regard, it is totally
analogous to Statistical Mechanics Gibbs’ entropy.

Similarly, the von-Neumann entropy of a finite density matrix @xmath is
defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Notice that when the matrix is normalized, the eigenvalues are all
non-negative and sum up to 1, thus forming a discrete probability
distribution. Therefore, it equals the Shannon entropy computed with the
eigenvalues of @xmath . If the @xmath correspond to a pure state, @xmath
, and @xmath otherwise.

So far we discussed discrete quantum systems, but in an holographic
context, we are almost always concerned about quantum fields that are
spatially extended. Let us clarify how we define the entanglement
entropy in those systems for time independent situations. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Time
dependent covariant formulation for holographic entanglement entropy is
also available [ 120 ] , but we are not going to consider this more
involved situation. We choose a region with some closed contour in space
at fixed time, defining in this way a subset of the degrees of freedom.
After that, we define the entanglement entropy of the region bounded by
the contour to be the von-Neumann entropy of its reduced matrix. The
calculation of EE in QFT is normally very difficult, and typically
achieved through the so-called replica trick.

A relevant generic fact of entanglement entropy in QFT is the so-called
area law: for local interactions, the EE is proportional to the boundary
of the region, not its volume. This obviously resembles the area law of
BH Thermodynamics with one crucial difference: it is fairly
counterintuitive in gravity, but relatively intuitive in field theory.

A very important application of entanglement ⁵ ⁵ 5 Another crucial one
is the entire field of Quantum Information. is to the theory of quantum
many body systems appearing in Condensed Matter Physics. is the
comprehension of different phases. Even being quantum mechanical
systems, some of the phases can be easily understood with classical
descriptions and order parameters; this is known as the Landau-Ginsburg
paradigm, originally developed for superconductivity. Nevertheless this
theory is not adequate when strong quantum effects are present, for
example in fractional quantum Hall effect and quantum magnets. The key
insight here is that entanglement entropy can be used as a meaningful
parameter order to distinguish these very non-classical phases. This
effect is particularly dramatic in fractional quantum Hall, where at low
energy the theory behaves as a topological field theory, and the
correlations are not only not useful as order parameter but actually
trivial.

Related to this, and more quantitative, is the amount of numbers
required to specify the state of a quantum system, and to evolve it on a
computer. This will justify the relevance of the von-Neumann ( 4.2.30 )
and EE definitions. As the dimension of the Hilbert space of a system
grows exponentially with the number of particles, brute force
diagonalization of the Hamiltonian is impossible even for moderate
number of particles. But it was eventually recognized that for not very
excited states, the scaling of entanglement entropy with size of the
region is directly related to the number of effective d.o.f. necessary
to characterize the phase. This is for example applied in the density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method. This somehow endows the EE
definition with quantitative physical relevance. It is also at the core
of another group of closely related methods collectively called tensor
networks, which sharpened the connection to entanglement in AdS/CFT.
Being quantitatively relevant and fairly universal as it does not refer
to a particular observable but to the quantum state itself, we expect
the same for the holographic description of field theories at large
@xmath and strong coupling.

Now we turn again to AdS/CFT. How can we compute EE in the holographic
description of the field theory? To do this, consider a minimal surface
attached to the contour defining the space region at the boundary. This
surface is typically called entangling surface. The surface minimizes
the value of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula [ 187 , 186 ] , which in string
frame is given in [ 174 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the total spacetime dimension, @xmath is the metric pull
backed to the minimal surface @xmath . There are several similarities
with Wilson loops: we have to find a minimal surface attached to a
contour on the boundary, renormalization in the UV is needed, and it can
be used to signal confinement/deconfinement transition [ 174 , 135 ] .
Some of this similarities will show up in our examples in section 4.12 .
Like in the Wilson loop, the main practical difficulty is to solve the
differential equation of the extremization.

The holographic entanglement entropy proposal is very firmly established
at this stage, with many non-trivial tests satisfied: general quantum
mechanical properties of (strong) subadditivity [ 109 ] , fixed point
behaviour and area law derivation [ 187 ] , recovery the 2d CFT result [
187 ] , EE equality in complementary regions of globally pure state [
187 ] , consistent relation to central charges in even dimensions [ 186
] …, and also a number of equally working extensions: Renyi entropies [
108 ] , time dependent situations [ 120 ] , relative entropy [ 29 ] ,
mutual information [ 107 ] , higher curvatures gravity corrections [ 65
] … Finally, the Ryu-Takayanagi prescription was derived in [ 145 ] .

Indeed, quantum many-body systems are not the only motivation of EE in
QFT. It is expected that entanglement between inside and outside of the
BH is relevant to understand the BH entropy, and of course there are
some formal similarities regarding the area law. This motivations of
course get even stronger in the presence of AdS/CFT. This important
subfield of holographic EE is under strong development at the moment,
but we are not going to use it in this thesis. The reader interested in
general aspects of holographic EE may check [ 173 ] for a middled-size
review. A longer one, more recent and more oriented to quantum gravity
is [ 183 ] .

In this thesis, the use of entanglement entropy will be rather modest,
both in extension and depth (see section 4.12 ). But the wealth of past
literature, physical applications and future potential more than
justifies this lengthy introduction about it.

#### 4.2.3 Central charge and c-function

In the forthcoming section, we will introduce the basic ideas behind
this important observable of the field theory. Roughly, it is intended
to count the effective volume of the phase space diminishing along the
RG flow.

In the case of CFTs in 1+1 dimensions, the d.o.f. in the theory are
proportional to the central charge of the Virasoro algebra. Consider a
flowing theory (perhaps trivially as in the conformal case), and call
@xmath with @xmath an energy scale. Therefore the renormalization group
flow corresponds to increasing values of @xmath . When we are at a
conformal point, the couplings do not depend on @xmath @xmath . Hence,
the beta functions @xmath are the ’velocities’ of the motion towards the
IR. It is interesting to define a ’c-function’ @xmath , constant for
CFT’s and equal to its central charge, and decreasing along the flow to
lower energies:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This @xmath is somehow intended at counting the d.o.f. of the theory at
different values of @xmath . The idea that it will decrease is
essentially motivated by the fact that relevant deformations will lift
part the massless modes and the RG flow will coarse grain some of them
without creating new ones. These intuitions have been made precise and
proved to be true in two different situations. The first is the two
dimensional case, with Zamolodchikov’s definition of @xmath [ 209 ] .
The second is the four dimensional case, where Cardy’s conjecture for
the ’a-theorem’ [ 48 ] was proven by Komargodski and Schwimmer in [ 140
] , although that proposal does not apply to odd dimensional cases.
There are different versions of the c-theorem, varying in ’strength’ and
generality. A basic summary can be found in [ 15 ] .

Now let us turn to its calculation in the bulk. For conformal field
theories there exists a well-established formalism to calculate central
charges using its relation with the Weyl anomaly @xmath in the QFT when
placed on a curved space. This was first discovered in [ 34 ] and a
complete holographic understanding was developed in [ 111 ] . For
conformal field theories in two and four dimensions holographically
described by SUGRA, the relations are respectively as follows:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -- -------- -- ----------
        @xmath      (4.2.34)
  -- -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the Riemann and Ricci tensors and
scalar of the boundary metric. The coefficients @xmath are equal in the
large @xmath approximation captured by the leading order supergravity,
but this is not true in holographic field theories described by higher
derivative gravities in the bulk.

Now we finally introduce the holographic c-function for flowing field
theories in the spirit of eq. ( 4.2.32 ). Surprisingly, it is possible
to define it satisfying the correct monotonicity on-shell (under some
very generic conditions of positivity of energy [ 77 ] ). First, we
introduce the result for a very simple yet relevant case is a metric of
the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the proposed c-function with the correct monotonicity is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Another step forward was taken by Klebanov, Kutasov and Murugan [ 135 ]
, who found a similar result for the following very general ansatz in
SUGRA:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the dilaton. Finally, when the @xmath depend also in the
internal coordinates @xmath , the same proposal was also used with
sucess in [ 160 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

### 4.3 Some aspects of NATD in AdS/CFT

In this section we briefly mention the main conclusions of some previous
papers applying NATD to SUGRA and AdS/CFT, and the outline of how our
work extends them. The general notions of Abelian and NATD have been
explained in sections 4.1.1 , 4.1.2 .

The organization of this chapter is as follows. In the first part of
this work, covered in sections 4.5 to 4.8 , we present type IIB
backgrounds that are already known and the new ones (in type IIA, IIB
and M-theory) that we construct using NATD. Table 4.1 summarizes these
solutions. In the second part of this work, starting in section 4.9 , we
begin the study of the field theoretical aspects encoded by the
backgrounds presented in the first part. Section 4.10 deals with the
quantized charges, defining ranks of the gauge groups. Section 4.11
studies the central charge computed holographically, either at the fixed
points or along the anisotropic flows (where a proposal for a c-function
is analyzed). This observable presents many clues towards the
understanding of the associated QFTs. Section 4.12 presents a detailed
study of Wilson loops and entanglement entropy of the QFT at the fixed
points and along the flow. We discuss the results in section 4.13 . The
computations of the supersymmetry preserved by the solutions is
relegated to appendix 4.A.3 .

NATD was used for the first time in the context of the gauge/gravity
duality in the paper [ 191 ] . Indeed, Sfetsos and Thompson applied NATD
to the maximally supersymmetric example of AdS @xmath S @xmath , finding
a metric and RR-fields that preserved @xmath SUSY. When lifted to eleven
dimensions, the background fits (not surprisingly) into the
classification of [ 147 ] . What is interesting is that Sfetsos and
Thompson [ 191 ] generated a new solution to the Gaiotto-Maldacena
differential equation [ 81 ] , describing @xmath SUSY CFTs of the
Gaiotto-type [ 80 ] , [ 196 ] . This logic was profusely applied to less
supersymmetric cases in [ 127 , 125 ] ; finding new metrics and defining
new QFTs by the calculation of their observables.

An important aspect of the generated solution is the supersymmetry; it
can be partially broken even for Abelian T-duality [ 68 ] . For NATD,
the transformation may also lower it (for example the case of AdS @xmath
S @xmath goes from @xmath to @xmath . [ 191 ] ) ⁶ ⁶ 6 Or break it
completely. This happens for example when the symmetry is @xmath instead
of @xmath , as NATD can be generalized for cosets, cf. [ 157 ] . , as
mentioned in the paragraph above. It is possible to know the amount of
SUSY preserved after NATD without explicitly computing the
supersymmetric variations ( 4.A.190 ) or ( 4.A.2 ) [ 191 , 133 ] . To do
it, it is necessary to compute the Lie-Lorentz-Kosmann derivative [ 141
, 177 ] of the Killing spinor along the Killing vector that generates
the isometry of the NATD transformation. We will also rely on this
technique, as the SUSY of the SUGRA background is extremely useful to
identify candidates for the dual field theory, as well as to determine
the stability of the generated solution.

Nevertheless, various puzzles associated with NATD remain. As explained
in 4.1.2 , the global properties of the new manifold remain still
elusive. In more concrete terms, the ranges of the dual coordinates (the
Lagrange multipliers in the @xmath -model) are not known. For this
reason, the precise field theory dual to the backgrounds generated by
NATD is not fully determined by the transformation rules.

### 4.4 Summary of results

In this chapter we present possible solutions to these puzzles— at least
in particular examples. Our study begins with type IIB backgrounds dual
to a compactification of the Klebanov-Witten CFT [ 136 ] to a 2-d CFT.
We will present these backgrounds for different compactifications and
perform a NATD transformation on them, hence generating new smooth and
SUSY solutions with AdS @xmath -factors in type IIA and M-theory.
Application of a further T-duality generates new backgrounds in type IIB
with an AdS @xmath -factor which are also smooth and preserve the same
amount of SUSY. We will make a proposal for the dual QFT and interpret
the range of the dual coordinates in terms of a field theoretic
operation.

The picture that emerges is that our geometries describe QFTs that
become conformal at low energies. These CFTs live on the intersection of
D2- and D6-branes suspended between NS5-branes. While crossing the
NS5-branes, charge for D4-branes is induced and new nodes of the quiver
appear. We will present the calculation of different observables of the
associated QFTs that support the proposal made above. These calculations
are performed in smooth supergravity solutions, hence they are trustable
and capture the strong dynamics of the associated 2-d CFTs.

The work performed in this chapter is a continuation of the previous
works of Sfetsos-Thompson [ 191 ] and Itsios-Nunez-Sfetsos-Thompson
(INST) [ 127 , 126 ] . The connection between the material in this work
and those papers is depicted in Fig. 4.1 below.

In the following (sections 4.5 to 4.8 ) we will exhaustively present a
large set of backgrounds solving the type IIB or type IIA supergravity
equations. Most of them are new, but some are already present in the
bibliography. New solutions in eleven-dimensional supergravity will also
be discussed. These geometries, for the most part, preserve some amount
of SUSY.

The common denominator of these backgrounds will be the presence of an
AdS @xmath sub-manifold in the ten or eleven-dimensional metric. This
will be interpreted as the dual description of strongly coupled two
dimensional conformal dynamics. In most of the cases, there is also a
flow, connecting from an AdS @xmath fixed point to an AdS @xmath , with
boundary @xmath . The manifold @xmath will be a constant curvature
Riemann surface. As a consequence we conjecture that the full geometry
is describing the strongly coupled dynamics of a four dimensional QFT,
that is conformal at high energies and gets compactified on @xmath while
flowing to the IR (typically preserving some amount of SUSY). The QFT
flows at low energies to a 2-d CFT that is also strongly coupled.

The solutions that we are going to present in the next section, can be
found by inspection of the type II equations, but requires a quite
inspired ansatz. More practical is to search for solutions of this kind
in five dimensional gauged supergravity, see the papers [ 37 , 83 ] for
a detailed account of the lagrangians. Some other solutions are
efficiently obtained by the use of generating techniques, for example a
combination of Abelian and non-Abelian T-duality, that are applied to
known (or new) backgrounds, as we show below.

### 4.5 Simple flows from AdS@xmathT@xmath to AdS@xmathM@xmath in type
IIB

We start this section by proposing a simple background in type IIB. In
the sense of the Maldacena duality, this describes the strongly coupled
dynamics of an @xmath SUSY QFT in four dimensions, that is compactified
to two dimensions on a manifold @xmath . In order to allow such a
compactification we turn on a 1-form field, @xmath , on the Riemann
surface @xmath . Motivated by the works [ 37 , 83 ] , where the authors
consider dimensional reductions to five dimensions of type IIB
supergravity backgrounds on any Sasaki-Einstein manifold, we propose the
following ansatz,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.44)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

We will focus on the case in which the Sasaki-Einstein space is @xmath ,
hence the Kähler-Einstein manifold is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have defined,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.5.46)
  -- -- -- ----------

The forms @xmath and @xmath verify the relation @xmath . The range of
the angles in the @xmath and the @xmath —the left invariant forms of
@xmath — is given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath satisfy
@xmath . We also defined a one form @xmath , that verifies @xmath . As
usual @xmath is the metric of the two dimensional surface of curvature
@xmath , denoting a sphere, hyperbolic plane ⁷ ⁷ 7 To be precise, we do
not consider the hyperbolic plane @xmath , as it has infinite volume.
What we consider is a compact space @xmath obtained by quotient by a
proper Fuchsian group [ 132 ] , and its volume is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the genus of @xmath . or a torus respectively. In local
coordinates these read,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A natural vielbein for the metric ( 4.5.44 ) is,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.48)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

with @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

As anticipated, the background above describes the strong dynamics for a
compactification of a four dimensional QFT to two dimensions. In the
case that we are interested in this work — in which the Kähler-Einstein
manifold is the one in eq. ( 4.5.45 )— the four dimensional QFT at high
energy asymptotes to the Klebanov-Witten quiver [ 136 ] on @xmath . As
it will be clear, most of our results will be valid for the case of a
general @xmath or any other Sasaki-Einstein manifold and their
associated QFT. Indeed, these solutions can be obtained by lifting to
type IIB, simpler backgrounds of the five-dimensional supergravity in [
83 ] . In fact, the 5-d supergravity lagrangian was written for any
Sasaki-Einstein internal space.

Assuming that the functions @xmath depend only on the radial coordinate
@xmath , we can calculate the BPS equations describing the SUSY
preserving flow from AdS @xmath T @xmath at large values of the radial
coordinate to AdS @xmath M @xmath . The end-point of the flow will be
dual to a 2-d CFT obtained after taking the low energy limit of a
twisted KK compactification of the Klebanov-Witten QFT on @xmath .
Imposing a set of projections on the SUSY spinors of type IIB—see
appendix 4.A.3 for details— we find,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.5.49)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the upper signs are for @xmath , the lower signs for @xmath , and
@xmath for both cases. In the case of the torus the variation of the
gravitino will force @xmath , obtaining @xmath , which does not permit
an AdS @xmath solution. We now attempt to find simple solutions to the
eqs.( 4.5.49 ).

#### 4.5.1 Solution of the form AdS@xmath, with ’twisting’

At this point we are going to construct a flow between AdS @xmath T
@xmath and AdS @xmath M @xmath . To simplify the task, we propose that
the functions @xmath are constant, then the BPS equations imply that
@xmath , leaving us—in the case of @xmath with,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that can be immediately integrated,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One of the integration constants associated with these solutions
corresponds to a choice of the origin of the holographic variable and
the other constant, @xmath , sets the size of the three dimensional
space ( @xmath ). We will choose @xmath in what follows.

In the limit @xmath (capturing the UV-dynamics of the QFT) we recover a
Klebanov-Witten metric

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whilst in the limit @xmath (that is dual to the IR in the dual QFT) we
obtain a supersymmetric solution of the form AdS @xmath H @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us write explicitly this background using eq. ( 4.5.45 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.5.54)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution above was originally presented in [ 85 ] .

We consider now the case of @xmath . With the same assumptions about the
functions @xmath , the BPS equations ( 4.5.49 ) read:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These can also be immediately integrated (with a suitable choice of
integration constants),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This solution seems to be problematic close to @xmath . Indeed, if we
compute the Ricci scalar we obtain @xmath , nevertheless, @xmath close
to @xmath . The solution is singular and we will not study it any
further.

It is interesting to notice that a family of non-SUSY fixed point
solutions exists. Indeed, we can consider the situation where @xmath and
@xmath are constant. For @xmath and @xmath , we find then that the
Einstein equations impose @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The solution is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the @xmath case the range of parameters is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while for @xmath we find,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that in the case of @xmath , there is a non-SUSY solution with
@xmath , hence no fibration between the hyperbolic plane and the Reeb
vector @xmath . The SUSY fixed point in eq. ( 4.5.1 ) is part of the
family in eq. ( 4.5.60 ), with @xmath .

For the @xmath we also find an AdS @xmath solution,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Up to this point, we have set the stage for our study, but most of the
solutions discussed above have already been stated in the literature.
Here we just added some new backgrounds and technical elaborations on
the known ones. Below, we will present genuinely new type IIA/B
solutions. The technical tool that we have used is non-Abelian
T-duality. This technique, when applied to an @xmath isometry of the
previously discussed solutions will generate new type IIA
configurations. In our examples these new solutions are nonsingular.
Their lift to eleven dimensions will produce new, smooth, AdS @xmath
configurations in M-theory. Moreover, performing an additional Abelian
T-duality transformation we generate new type IIB backgrounds with all
fluxes turned on and an AdS @xmath fixed point at the IR. We move on to
describe these.

#### 4.5.2 The Donos-Gauntlett(-Kim) background

In this section we revisit a beautiful solution written in [ 66 ] —this
type of solution was first studied in [ 67 ] . Due to the more detailed
study of [ 66 ] , we will refer to it as the Donos-Gauntlett solution in
the rest of this chapter.

The background in [ 66 ] describes a flow in the radial coordinate, from
AdS @xmath T @xmath to AdS @xmath M @xmath . The solution is very
original. While the boundary of AdS @xmath is of the form @xmath T
@xmath , the compactification on the Riemann surface (a torus) does not
use a ’twist’ of the 4d-QFT. This is reflected by the absence of a
fibration of the Riemann surface on the R-symmetry direction @xmath .
Still, the background preserves SUSY ⁸ ⁸ 8 The solutions in
Eqs.(63)-(80) of the paper [ 176 ] , can be thought as an ’ugly’
ancestor of the Donos-Gauntlett background. . The solution contains an
active NS-three form @xmath that together with the RR five form @xmath
implies the presence of a RR-three form @xmath . The authors of [ 66 ]
found this configuration by using a very inspired ansatz. We review this
solution below, adding new information to complement that in [ 66 ] .

The metric ansatz is given by,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are functions of the radial coordinate @xmath only. The
line element @xmath is defined in eq. ( 4.5.45 ) and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are given in eq. ( 4.5.46 ). The natural vielbein is,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.63)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

Note that compared to [ 66 ] we have relabeled @xmath . To complete the
definition of the background, we also need

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the fluxes,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.65)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.66)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath is a constant that encodes the deformation of the space
(and the corresponding operator in the 4d CFT). The BPS equations for
the above system are given by,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.5.67)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

It is possible to recover the AdS @xmath T @xmath solution by setting
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Further we can recover the AdS @xmath solution by setting @xmath (this
is just a conventional value adopted in [ 66 ] ) and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A flow (triggered by the deformation parameterized by @xmath ) between
the asymptotic AdS @xmath and the AdS @xmath fixed point can be found
numerically.

Up to this point, we have set the stage for our study, but most of the
solutions discussed above have already been stated in the literature.
Here we just added some new backgrounds and technical elaborations on
the known ones. Below, we will present genuinely new type IIA/B
solutions. The technical tool that we have used is non-Abelian
T-duality. This technique, when applied to an @xmath isometry of the
previously discussed solutions will generate new type IIA
configurations. In our examples these new solutions are nonsingular.
Their lift to eleven dimensions will produce new, smooth, AdS @xmath
configurations in M-theory. Moreover, performing an additional Abelian
T-duality transformation we generate new type IIB backgrounds with all
fluxes turned on and an AdS @xmath fixed point at the IR. We move on to
describe these.

### 4.6 New backgrounds in type IIA: uses of non-Abelian T-duality

In this section we apply the rules ( 4.1.13 ), ( 4.1.15 ), ( 4.1.17 ) of
NATD on the type IIB backgrounds presented above. We have checked
explicitly that the generated backgrounds are indeed IIA SUGRA
solutions.

#### 4.6.1 The non-Abelian T-dual of the twisted solutions

We will start by applying non-Abelian T-duality (NATD) to the background
obtained via a twisted compactification in section 4.5 . The
configuration we will focus on is a particular case of that in eq. (
4.5.44 ). Specifically, in what follows we consider @xmath . These
values for the functions @xmath and @xmath are compatible with the BPS
system ( 4.5.49 ). In this case the background ( 4.5.44 ) simplifies to,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.6.70)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

As before, all other RR and NS fields are taken to vanish. Also, the
1-form @xmath , the line element of the Riemann surface @xmath and the
corresponding volume form, for each of the three cases that we consider
here, are given in eq. ( 4.5.47 ).

We will now present the details for the background after NATD has been
applied on the @xmath isometry described by the coordinates @xmath . As
is well-known a gauge fixing has to be implemented during the NATD
procedure. This leads to a choice of three ’new coordinates’ among the
Lagrange multipliers @xmath used in the NATD procedure and the ’old
coordinates’ ( @xmath ) ⁹ ⁹ 9 The process of NATD and the needed gauge
fixing was described in detail in [ 126 , 160 ] . . In all of our
examples we consider a gauge fixing of the form,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a result, the Lagrange multipliers @xmath and @xmath play the rôle of
the dual coordinates in the new background. To display the natural
symmetries of the background, we will quote the results using spherical
coordinates (the expressions in cylindrical and cartesian coordinates
are written in appendix C of [ 16 ] ). We define,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.6.72)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

The NSNS sector of the transformed IIA background reads,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (4.6.73)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

while the RR sector is, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 According to the democratic formalism,
the higher rank RR forms are related to those of lower rank through the
relation @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6.74)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The SUSY preserved by this background is discussed in appendix 4.A.3 .
We have checked that the equations of motion are solved by this
background.

#### 4.6.2 The non-Abelian T-dual of the Donos-Gauntlett solution

In this section we will briefly present the result of applying NATD to
the Donos-Gauntlett solution [ 66 ] that we described in section 4.5.2 .

Like above, we will perform the NATD choosing a gauge such that the new
coordinates are @xmath . We will quote the result in spherical
coordinates (the expressions in cylindrical and cartesian coordinates
are written in appendix C of [ 16 ] ). The expressions below are
naturally more involved than those in section 4.6.1 . This is due to the
fact that now there is a non-trivial NS 2-form that enters in the
procedure (explicitly, in the string sigma model) which makes things
more complicated. As above, we start with some definitions,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The NSNS sector is given by,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6.76)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The RR sector reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here again, aspects of the SUSY preserved by this background are
relegated to appendix 4.A.3 . We have checked that the equations of
motion are solved by this background.

### 4.7 T-dualizing back from type IIA to IIB

In this section, we will construct new type IIB Supergravity backgrounds
with an AdS @xmath factor at the IR. The idea is to obtain these new
solutions by performing an (Abelian) T-duality on the configurations
described by eqs. ( 4.6.73 )-( 4.6.1 ) which, in turn, were obtained by
performing NATD on the backgrounds of eq. ( 4.6.70 ). The full chain of
dualities is NATD -T. The new solutions present an AdS @xmath fixed
point and all RR and NS fields are switched on.

It should be interesting to study if the AdS @xmath fixed point of this
geometry falls within known classifications [ 84 ] . If not, to use them
as inspiring ansatz to extend these taxonomic efforts.

In order to perform the T-duality, we will choose a Killing vector that
has no fixed points, in such a way that the dual geometry has no
singularities. An adapted system of coordinates for that Killing vector
is obtained through the change of variables,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

obtaining ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In fact using the coordinate transformation eq. (
4.7.81 ) we obtain @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Killing vector that we choose is the one given by translations along
the @xmath direction. Its modulus is proportional to the quantity,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is defined in eq.( 4.6.72 ). Since @xmath is never
vanishing the isometry has no fixed points.

To describe these new configurations, we define,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will write with a tilde the background produced in this section; its
NSNS sector is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7.85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7.86)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
                       @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

and the RR sector reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.7.87)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have checked that the equations of motion are solved by this
background, either assuming the BPS equations ( 4.5.50 ) or the non-SUSY
solution ( 4.5.60 ). We have also checked that the Kosmann derivative
vanishes without the need to impose further projections. These facts
point to the conclusion that this new and smooth solution is also SUSY
preserving.

We will now present new backgrounds of eleven-dimensional supergravity.

### 4.8 Lift to M-theory

Here, we lift the solutions of sections 4.6.1 and 4.5.2 to eleven
dimensions using the relations ( 4.A.191 ), ( 4.A.192 ) of subsection
4.A.2 . This way, they become new and smooth backgrounds of M-theory
that describe the strong dynamics of a SUSY 2d CFT. It is well known
that given a massless solution of the type IIA supergravity can be
uplifted to eleven dimensions solution, with the following relations:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the dilaton of the 10-dimensional solution of the Type
IIA SUGRA and @xmath is the 1-form potential that corresponds to the RR
2-form of the Type IIA background. Also, by @xmath we denote the @xmath
coordinate which corresponds to a @xmath isometry as neither the metric
tensor or flux explicitly depend on it.

The 11-dimensional geometry is supported by a 3-form potential @xmath
which gives rise to a 4-form @xmath . This 3-form potential can be
written in terms of the 10-dimensional forms and the differential of the
@xmath coordinate as,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The 3-form @xmath corresponds to the closed part of the 10-dimensional
RR form @xmath . Here, @xmath is the NS 2-form of the 10-dimensional
type-IIA theory and @xmath . Hence we see that in order to describe the
11-dimensional solution we need the following ingredients,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now present these quantities for the cases of interest.

#### 4.8.1 Uplift of the NATD of the twisted solutions

As we mentioned above, in order to specify the M-theory background we
need to read the field content of the 10-dimensional solution. For the
case at hand we wrote the metric @xmath , the dilaton @xmath and the NS
2-form @xmath in eq. ( 4.6.73 ). Moreover, from the expression of the RR
2-form in eq. ( 4.6.1 ) we can immediately extract the 1-form potential
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The 3-form potential– @xmath –can be obtained from the RR 4-form of eq.
( 4.6.1 ). After some algebra one finds,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.8.94)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We close this section by observing that, if the coordinate @xmath takes
values in a finite interval, then the radius of the M-theory circle,
@xmath never blows up, because the function @xmath that appears in the
expression of the dilaton is positive definite. We have checked that the
equations of motion of the 11-dimensional Supergravity are solved by
this background.

#### 4.8.2 Uplift of the NATD of the Donos-Gauntlett solution

Here, the NSNS fields of the 10-dimensional theory have been written in
detail in eq. ( 4.6.2 ). In order to complete the description of the
M-theory background we need also to consider the potentials @xmath and
@xmath that are encoded in the RR fields of eq. ( 4.6.78 ). Hence from
the RR 2-form potential we can easily read @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the function @xmath has been defined in eq. ( 4.6.75 ). Also, from
the RR 4-form we can obtain the potential @xmath which in this case is,

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (4.8.96)
                    
                    
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

Here for brevity we have defined the 1-form @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.8.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, we observe that the radius of the M-theory circle is finite,
for reasons similar to those discussed in the previous example. We have
checked that the equations of motion of the 11-dimensional Supergravity
are solved by this background.

This completes our presentation of this set of new and exact solutions.
A summary of all the solutions can be found in Table 4.1 . The
expressions for these backgrounds in cartesian and cylindrical
coordinates are written in appendix C of [ 16 ] .

We will now move on to the second part of this chapter. We will study
aspects of the field theories that our new and smooth backgrounds are
defining.

### 4.9 General comments on the Quantum Field Theory

Let us start our study of the correspondence between our new metrics
with their respective field theory dual. We will state some general
points that these field theories will fulfill.

In the case of the backgrounds corresponding to the compactifications
described in section 4.5.1 , our field theories are obtained by a
twisted KK-compactification on a two dimensional manifold—that can be
@xmath or @xmath . The original field theory is, as we mentioned, the
Klebanov-Witten quiver, that controls the high energy dynamics of our
system. The bosonic part of the global symmetries for this QFT in the UV
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.9.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, as we know the @xmath is enhanced to @xmath . The theory contains
two vector multiplets @xmath , for @xmath , together with four chiral
multiplets @xmath for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

These fields transform as vector, spinors and scalars under @xmath —that
is @xmath are singlets, the fermions transform in the @xmath and the
vectors in the @xmath . The transformation under the ’flavor’ quantum
numbers @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.9.99)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The backgrounds in section 4.5.1 , are describing the strong coupling
regime of the field theory above, in the case in which we compactify the
D3-branes on @xmath twisting the theory. This means, mixing the
R-symmetry @xmath with the @xmath isometry of @xmath . This twisting is
reflected in the metric fibration between the @xmath -direction (the
Reeb vector) and the @xmath . The fibration is implemented by a vector
field @xmath in eq. ( 4.5.44 ). The twisting mixes the R-symmetry of the
QFT, represented by @xmath in the dual description, with (part of) the
Lorentz group. In purely field theoretical terms, we are modifying the
covariant derivative of different fields that under the combined action
of the spin connection and the R-symmetry (on the curved part of the
space) will read @xmath .

In performing this twisting, the fields decompose under @xmath . The
decomposition is straightforward for the bosonic fields. For the
fermions, we have that @xmath decomposes as @xmath and similarly for the
@xmath spinors.

The twisting itself is the ’mixing’ between the @xmath charges of the
spinor and its R-symmetry charge. There is an analog operation for the
vector and scalar fields. Some fields are scalars under the diagonal
group in @xmath . Some are spinors and some are vectors. Only the
scalars under the diagonal group are massless. These determine the SUSY
content of the QFT. This particular example amounts to preserving two
supercharges. There are two massless vector multiplets and two massless
matter multiplets. The rest of the fields get a mass whose set by the
inverse size of the compact manifold. In other words, the field theory
at low energies is a two dimensional CFT (as indicated by the AdS @xmath
factor), preserving @xmath SUSY and obtained by a twisted
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten CFT. The QFT is deformed in the
UV by a relevant operator of dimension two, as we can read from eq. (
4.5.52 ).

An alternative way to think about this QFT is as the one describing the
low energy excitations of a stack of @xmath D3-branes wrapping a
calibrated space @xmath inside a Calabi-Yau 4-fold.

The situation with the metrics in section 4.5.2 is more subtle. In that
case there is also a flow from the Klebanov-Witten quiver to a
two-dimensional CFT preserving (0,2) SUSY. The difference is that this
second QFT is not apparently obtained via a twisting procedure. As
emphasized by the authors of [ 66 ] , the partial breaking of SUSY is
due (from a five-dimensional supergravity perspective) to ’axion’ fields
depending on the torus directions. These axion fields are proportional
to a deformation parameter—that we called @xmath in eq. ( 4.5.66 ). The
deformation in the UV QFT is driven by an operator of dimension four
that was identified to be @xmath and a dimension six operator that
acquires a VEV, as discussed in [ 66 ] .

To understand the dual field theory to the IIA backgrounds obtained
after non-Abelian T-duality and presented in section 4.6.1 involves more
intricacy. Indeed, it is at present unclear what is the analog field
theoretical operation of non-Abelian T-duality. There are, nevertheless,
important hints. Indeed, the foundational paper of Sfetsos and Thompson
[ 191 ] , that sparked the interest of the uses of non-Abelian T-duality
in quantum field theory duals, showed that if one starts with a
background of the form AdS @xmath S @xmath , a particular solution of
the Gaiotto-Maldacena system (after lifting to M-theory) is generated [
81 ] . This is hardly surprising, as the backgrounds of
eleven-dimensional supergravity with an AdS @xmath factor and preserving
@xmath SUSY in four dimensions, have been classified. What is
interesting is that the solution generated by Sfetsos and Thompson
appears as a zoom-in on the particular class of solutions in [ 163 ] .
This was extended in [ 126 ] that computed the action of non-Abelian
T-duality on the end-point of the flow from the @xmath conformal quiver
with adjoints to the Klebanov-Witten CFT. Again, not surprisingly, the
backgrounds obtained correspond to the @xmath version of the Gaiotto
@xmath theories— these were called Sicilian field theories by Benini,
Tachikawa and Wecht in [ 21 ] , see Fig. 4.1 . It is noticeable, that
while the Sicilian theories can be obtained by a twisted
compactification of M5-branes on @xmath , the case obtained using
non-Abelian T-duality corresponds only to M5-branes compactified on
@xmath and preserving minimal SUSY in four dimensions. What we propose
in this chapter is that the twisted compactification on @xmath of a
Sicilian gauge theory can be studied by using the backgrounds we
discussed in section 4.6.1 and their M-theory counterparts. We will
elaborate more about the 2-d CFTs and their flows in the coming
sections.

In the following, we will calculate different observables of these QFT’s
by using the backgrounds as a ’definition’ of the 2d SCFT. The
backgrounds are smooth and thus the observables have trustable results.
Hence, we are defining a QFT by its observables, calculated in a
consistent way by the dual solutions. The hope is that these
calculations together with other efforts can help map the space of these
new families of CFTs. To the study of these observables we turn now.

### 4.10 Quantized charges

In this section, we will study the quantized charges on the string side.
This analysis appears in the field theory part of the chapter because
these charges will, as in the canonical case of AdS @xmath S @xmath ,
translate into the ranks of the gauge theory local symmetry groups.

The NATD produced local solutions to the 10-dim SUGRA equations of
motion. Nevertheless, it is still not known how to obtain the global
properties of these new geometries. Some quantities associated to a
particular solution, like the Page charges below, are only well-defined
when the global properties of the background are known. Since we have
only a local description of our solution, we will propose very
reasonable global results for the Page charges, mostly based on physical
intuition.

Let us start by analyzing a quantity that is proposed to be periodic in
the string theory. We follow the ideas introduced in [ 152 ] and further
elaborated in [ 160 ] . To begin with, we focus on the NATD version of
the twisted solutions; described in section 4.6.1 . Let us define the
quantity,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.100)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the cycle @xmath is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.101)
  -- -------- -- ------------

As the topology of the NATD theory is not known, we propose that this
cycle is present in the geometry. This cycle will have a globally
defined volume form, which in a local description can be written as
@xmath . We then find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.102)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Again, we emphasize that this is a proposal made in [ 152 ] and used in
[ 160 ] . Moving further than @xmath along the variable @xmath can be
’compensated’ by performing a large gauge transformation on the @xmath
-field,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.103)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We will make extensive use of this below.

Let us now focus on the conserved magnetic charges defined for our
backgrounds. We will start the analysis for the case of the solutions in
section 4.5.1 .

#### 4.10.1 Page charges for the twisted solutions

We will perform this study for the solutions before and after the NATD,
and we will obtain how the Page charges transform under the NATD
process. Page charges (in contrast to Maxwell charges) have proven
fundamental in understanding aspects of the dynamics of field
theories—see for example [ 20 ] .

In particular, for D3-branes we have, ( 4.A.189 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The topology of the internal space is @xmath . We consider the following
cycles:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10.104)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------

The background fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are vanishing, and only
@xmath contributes. The specific components of @xmath in eq. ( 4.6.70 )
that have non vanishing pullback on these cycles are,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.105)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We explicitly see that it is a globally defined form, as all the
involved quantities ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) are well
defined globally. The associated Page charges of D3-branes for the
background around eq. ( 4.6.70 ) are,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.106)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the total volume of the two-manifold @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12
Notice that we use Vol for volume elements (differential forms) and
@xmath for the actual volumes of the manifolds (real numbers). As usual,
the first relation quantizes the size of the space,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.107)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We have then defined three D3-charges. The one associated with @xmath is
the usual one appearing also in the AdS @xmath S @xmath case. The other
two can be thought as charges ’induced’ by the wrapping of the D3-branes
on the Riemann surface. The reader may wonder whether these charges are
present in the backgrounds found after NATD. We turn to this now.

We use now the Page charges expressions for IIA SUGRA ( 4.A.189 . We
label the radius of the space of the geometry in eq. ( 4.6.73 ) by
@xmath , to distinguish it from @xmath , the quantized radius before the
NATD. In order to properly define the cycles to be considered, we should
know the topology of this NATD solution. However, we have obtained only
a local expression for this solution, and we do not know the global
properties. As we explained above, we will present a proposal to define
the Page charges that would explain the transmutation of branes through
the NATD. We propose the relevant cycles to be, ¹³ ¹³ 13 Intuitively, we
can think that the branes transform under NATD as 3 consecutive
T-dualities. For example, in the first 5-cycle of eq. ( 4.10.104 ), the
NATD is performed along 3 of the coordinates, ( @xmath ), in such a way
that we end up with a 2-cycle, the first cycle in eq.( 4.10.108 ),
associated with D6-branes. In the second 5-cycle of eq.( 4.10.104 ) the
NATD only affects the @xmath -direction, so it disappears, and two more
directions are added in order to complete the 3 T-dualities, ending up
with a 6-cycle in eq.( 4.10.108 ), associated with D2-branes.

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.108)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The associated charges are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.109)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

In the last expression, we performed the integral over the @xmath
-coordinate in the interval @xmath . These three charges are in
correspondence with the ones before the NATD in eq. ( 4.10.106 ).
Indeed, we can compute the quotients,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.110)
  -- -------- -- ------------

These quotients indicate a nice correspondence between charges before
and after the duality.

Using the first relation in eq. ( 4.10.109 ) we quantize the size @xmath
of the space after NATD to be @xmath .

A small puzzle is presented by the possible existence of charge for
D4-branes, as there would be no quantized number before the NATD to make
them correspond to. To solve this puzzle, we propose that there should
be a globally defined closed non-exact form that allows us to perform a
large gauge transformation for the @xmath , in such a way that all the
D4 Page charges vanish. In local coordinates, we have a gauge
transformation,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.111)
  -- -------- -- ------------

written in such a way that the integrand has at least one leg along a
non-compact coordinate,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.112)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Hence, any Page charge for D4-branes is vanishing. To be precise, the D2
charge @xmath must be computed after choosing this gauge, as it depends
on @xmath , but it turns out to be the same as calculated in eq. (
4.10.109 ).

The motion in the @xmath -coordinate, as we discussed above, can be
related to large gauge transformations of the @xmath -field. The large
transformation that ’compensates’ for motions in @xmath , namely @xmath
has the effect of changing the Page charges associated with D4-branes,
that were initially vanishing. Indeed, if we calculate for the following
four cycles,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.113)
  -- -------- -- ------------

the Page charge of D4-branes varies according to,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.10.114)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------

We can interpret these findings in the following way. Our QFT (after the
NATD) can be thought as living on the world-volume of a superposition of
D2- and D6-branes. Motions in the @xmath -coordinate induce charge of
D4-branes, which can be interpreted as new gauge groups appearing. This
suggest that we are working with a linear quiver, with many gauge
groups. Moving @xmath -units in @xmath generates or ’un-higgses’ new
gauge groups of rank @xmath and @xmath . Computing volumes or other
observables that involve integration on the @xmath -coordinate amounts
to working with a QFT with different gauge group, depending on the range
in @xmath we decide to integrate over. Notice that @xmath is not a
holographic coordinate. Motions in @xmath are not changing the energy in
the dual QFT. For the AdS-fixed points the theory is conformal and
movements in @xmath do not change that.

In the paper [ 160 ] , the motion in the @xmath -coordinate was argued
to be related to a form of ’duality’ (a Seiberg-type of duality was
argued to take place, in analogy with the mechanism of the
Klebanov-Strassler duality cascade, but in a CFT context). That can not
be the whole story as other observables, like for example the number of
degrees of freedom in the QFT, change according to the range of the
@xmath -integration. Hence the motion in @xmath can not be just a
duality. We are proposing here that moving in the @xmath -coordinate
amounts to changing the quiver, adding gauge groups, represented by the
increasing D4 charge.

We will now present the same analysis we have performed above, but for
the case of the background in section 4.5.2 .

#### 4.10.2 Page charges for the Donos-Gauntlett solution

Part of the analysis that follows was carefully done in the original
work of [ 66 ] and here we will extend the study for the solution after
the NATD that we presented in section 4.5.2 . We will give an outline of
the results as the general structure is similar to the one displayed by
the twisted solutions of the previous section.

We focus on the original Donos-Gauntlett background first. We denote by
@xmath , @xmath the two radii of the torus (the cycles of the torus are
then of size @xmath and @xmath respectively) and consider five different
cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -- -------- ------------
                    (4.10.115)
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ------------

The Page charges associated with D3-, D5- and NS5-branes are,

  -- -- -- -------- ------------
                    (4.10.116)
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ------------

After the NATD, we focus on the background around eqs. ( 4.6.2 ) and (
4.6.78 ). We consider the following cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -------- -- ------------
        @xmath      (4.10.117)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- ------------

The correspondent Page charges defined on them (the @xmath -coordinate
is taken in the @xmath interval),

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.118)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

From the first relation we obtain, @xmath . Like in the case of the
twisted solutions, we can choose a gauge for the @xmath field

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.119)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

such that the Page charge of D4-branes, when computed on every possible
compact 4-cycle, is vanishing. Indeed, after the gauge transformation,
we have

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.120)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Any integral over compact manifolds is vanishing. Like in the case of
the twisted solutions, @xmath and @xmath should be recalculated after
choosing this gauge; but their value turns out to be unchanged.

We can apply the same string theory considerations on the quantity
@xmath that now is defined as an integral over the cycle,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.121)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We then calculate,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.122)
  -- -------- -- ------------

If we move further than @xmath along the variable @xmath , we can
compensate this by performing the large gauge transformation @xmath We
now consider the correspondent variation of Page charges for D4-branes,
that can be calculated using the following cycles,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.123)
  -- -------- -- ------------

to be,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.10.124)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------

The variation of the Page charges of D2-branes vanishes under this large
gauge transformation. For the Donos-Gauntlett solution we observe a
structure very similar to the one discussed for the twisted solutions.
Again, here we would propose that the NATD background ’un-higgses’ gauge
groups of rank @xmath as we move in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate.

We move now to the study of another important observable of our dual 2-d
and 4-d CFTs.

### 4.11 Central charges and c-theorem

In the following sections, we will quote the results for central charges
according to eq. ( 4.2.42 ) for the conformal field theories in two and
four dimensions. Following that, we will write the result that it yields
for the flows between theories.

#### 4.11.1 Central charge at conformal points

As anticipated, we will quote here the results for eq. ( 4.2.42 ) for
the different AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath fixed points. We start with the
twisted solutions of section 4.5.1 . We will use that the volume of the
@xmath space is @xmath .

Twisted geometries

For the IR AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.125)
  -- -------- -- ------------

At the UV AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the result for the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.126)
  -- -------- -- ------------

After the NATD, we must consider the new radius of the space @xmath and
the volume of the new 5-dim compact space @xmath . The computations turn
out to be similar as the previous ones, and we obtain that the central
charges before and after NATD, for both the two and four dimensional
CFTs, are related by,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.127)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us comment on the quantity @xmath , that appears in the calculation
of the Page charges in section 4.10 —see for example, eq. ( 4.10.118 )
and also in the computation of the entanglement entropy of section 4.12
. Indeed, if we calculate, ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We identify the integral with the
volume of the manifold spanned by the new coordinates. This becomes more
apparent if we use the expressions in the appendix, in different
coordinate systems.

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.128)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We have performed the @xmath -integral in the interval @xmath . The
logic behind this choice was spelt out in section 4.10 , see below eq. (
4.10.114 ). The proposal is that moving in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate implies ’un-higgsing’ a gauge group, hence we would have a
linear quiver gauge theory. The central charge captures this un-higgsing
procedure, increasing according to how many groups we ’create’. What is
interesting is the @xmath behavior in eq. ( 4.11.128 ). Indeed, if
@xmath were associated with the rank of a gauge group, this scaling
would be precisely the one obtained in Gaiotto-like CFTs (also valid for
the @xmath ’Sicilian’ theories of [ 21 ] ). Indeed, the NATD procedure
when applied to the AdS @xmath T @xmath background creates metric and
fluxes similar to those characterizing the Sicilian CFTs. The
backgrounds in sections 4.5 to 4.8 are dual to a compactification of the
Klebanov Witten CFT and (using the NATD background) the Sicilian CFT on
a two space @xmath . The two-dimensional IR fixed point of these flows
is described by our ’twisted AdS @xmath ’ and its NATD. The central
charge of the Sicilian CFT and its compactified version is presenting a
behavior that goes like a certain rank to a third power @xmath . This
suggest that crossing @xmath amounts to adding D4-branes and
Neveu-Schwarz five branes and @xmath is the number of branes that were
added —see eqs. ( 4.10.114 ) and ( 4.10.124 )--- or crossed ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
Thanks to Daniel Thompson for a discussion about this. . Had we
integrated on the interval @xmath , we would have obtained a scaling
like @xmath at leading order in @xmath .

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We study here the central charge for the Donos-Gauntlett background in
section LABEL:sectionDG . For the AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of
the internal compact manifold is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.129)
  -- -------- -- ------------

For the AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold @xmath , and the central charge results in,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.130)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The quotient of central charges before and after the NATD for the
Donos-Gauntlett QFT, are given by a similar expression to that in eq. (
4.11.127 ).

We move now to study a quantity that gives an idea of the degrees of
freedom along a flow.

#### 4.11.2 Central charge for flows across dimensions

In the previous section, we calculated the central charge for two and
four dimensional CFTs dual to the AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath fixed points
of the flow. In this section, we will use the developments in [ 77 ] and
[ 135 ] , to write a c-function along the flows between these fixed
points. We will find various subtleties,

-   When considered as a low energy two-dimensional CFT, the definition
    of the c-function evaluated on the flows will not detect the
    presence of the four dimensional CFT in the far UV.

-   We attempt to generalize the formula of [ 135 ] for anisotropic
    cases (that is for field theories that undergo a spontaneous
    compactification on @xmath ). This new definition will detect both
    the two dimensional and four dimensional conformal points, but will
    not necessarily be decreasing towards the IR. This is not in
    contradiction with ’c-theorems’ that assume Lorentz invariance.

We move into discussing these different points in our particular
examples. To start, we emphasize that the formulas in ( 4.2.38 )-(
4.2.42 ), contain the same information. Indeed, the authors of [ 135 ] ,
present a ’spontaneous compactification’ of a higher dimensional
Supergravity (or String theory) to @xmath dimensions, see eq. ( 4.2.41
). Moving the reduced system to Einstein frame and observing that the
@xmath of the matter in the lower dimension satisfies certain positivity
conditions imposed in [ 77 ] , use of eq. ( 4.2.39 ) implies eq. (
4.2.42 ). Hence, we will apply eqs. ( 4.2.41 )-( 4.2.42 ) to our
different compactifications in sections 4.5 to 4.8 .

Twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions. For the purpose of the flows both
twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions present a similar qualitative
behavior. We start by considering the family of backgrounds in eq. (
4.5.44 ) as dual to field theories in @xmath dimensions. In this case
the quantities relevant for the calculation of the central charge are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.131)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We calculate the quantity

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.132)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.133)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Using the BPS equations describing these flows in eq. ( 4.5.49 ) we can
get an expression without derivatives. Specializing for the solution
with an @xmath in section 4.5.1 , we find

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.134)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We can calculate this for the background we obtained in section 4.6.1 ,
by application of NATD. The result and procedure will be
straightforward, but we will pick a factor of the volume of the space
parametrized by the new coordinates, @xmath .

For the purposes of the RG-flow, the quotient of the central charges
will be the same as the quotient in eq. ( 4.11.128 ). This was indeed
observed in the past [ 126 ] , [ 160 ] and is just a consequence of the
invariance of the quantity @xmath under NATD.

Coming back to eq. ( 4.11.134 ), we find that in the far IR, represented
by @xmath , the central charge is constant. But in the far UV ( @xmath
), we obtain a result that is not characteristic of a CFT. Hence, this
suggest that the definition is only capturing the behavior of a 2-dim
QFT. In other words, the four dimensional QFT may be thought as a two
dimensional QFT, but with an infinite number of fields.

The absence of the four dimensional fixed point in our eq. ( 4.11.134 )
can be accounted if we generalize the prescription to calculate central
charges for an anisotropic 4-dim QFT. Holographically this implies
working with a background of the form, ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 A natural generalization
of eq. ( 4.11.135 ) is @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.135)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In this case we define,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.136)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We can apply this generalized definition to the flow for the twisted
@xmath background of section 4.5.1 , and Donos-Gauntlett background of
section 4.5.2 (for more examples the reader is referred to appendix D of
[ 16 ] ). In this case, we consider them as dual to a field theory in
@xmath anisotropic dimensions (two of the dimensions are compactified on
a @xmath ). The quantities relevant for the calculation of the central
charge are,

  -- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath            (4.11.137)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- ------------

We calculate

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.138)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.139)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Focusing on the @xmath case, if we use the solution that describe this
flow—see eq. ( 4.5.51 ) we get an analytical expression,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.140)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Notice that, by definition, this quantity gives the correct central
charge in the UV (a constant, characterizing the 4-d fixed point). In
the IR, the quantity turns out to be constant too, so it is capturing
the presence of a 2-d fixed point. Nevertheless, it is probably not an
appropriate candidate for a ’c-function between dimensions’ as it is not
necessarily increasing towards the UV. This is not in contradiction with
the logic of ’a-theorems’ and proofs like the ones in [ 77 ] or [ 140 ]
, as the metric does not respect Lorentz invariance. Hence, it is not
satisfying the assumptions of the theorems. For the Donos-Gauntlett case
analogous things happen. It would be very nice to try to apply the
recent ideas of [ 99 ] to this flow. Notice that this feature of a
’wrong monotonicity’ for the central charge was also observed—for
theories breaking Lorentz invariance in Higher Spin theories—see the
papers [ 102 ] .

Let us move now to study other observables defining the 2-d and 4-d
QFTs.

### 4.12 Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops

In this section, we will complement the work done above, by studying a
couple of fundamental observables in the QFTs defined by the backgrounds
in sections 4.5 to 4.8 .

Whilst at the conformal points the functional dependence of results is
determined by the symmetries, the interest will be in the coefficients
accompanying the dependence. Both observables interpolate smoothly
between the fixed points.

#### 4.12.1 Entanglement entropy

The aim of this section is to compute the entanglement entropy on a
strip, which extends along the direction @xmath , and study how this
observable transforms under NATD. The input backgrounds for our
calculations will be the Donos-Gauntlett and the @xmath flow as well as
their non-Abelian T-duals. Since the procedure is the same in all of the
cases and due to the similarity of the geometries we will present the
results in a uniform way.

This prescription states that the holographic entanglement entropy
between the strip and its complement is given by the minimal-area static
surface that hangs inside the bulk, and whose boundary coincides with
the boundary of the strip. The general form of the entanglement entropy
for the non-conformal case is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.141)
  -- -------- -- ------------

For the strip, we chose the embedding functions to be @xmath and @xmath
and then using the conservation of the Hamiltonian we arrive at an
expression for @xmath that makes the area minimal under that embedding.
With that we compute,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.142)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the form of the function @xmath depends on the geometry of the
background that we consider,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.143)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Above, @xmath is the radial position of the hanging surface tip and we
define @xmath . Also, with @xmath we denote the volume of the Riemann
surface @xmath . Notice that the form of the function @xmath is the same
before and after NATD. Moreover we consider,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.144)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The quantity @xmath is defined as,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.145)
  -- -- -- ------------

Before the NATD transformation @xmath comes from the 3-dimensional
submanifold that is spanned by the coordinates @xmath , while after the
NATD it comes from the submanifold that is spanned by the dual
coordinates @xmath . This implies that the entropies before and after
NATD are proportional all along the flow, for any strip length. A
discussion on possible values of the quantity @xmath can be found in the
quantized charges section 4.10 and in the discussion on central charges
in section 4.11 .

When computed by the Ryu-Takayanagi formula eq. ( 4.12.142 ) the
entanglement entropy is UV divergent. In order to solve this we compute
the regularized entanglement entropy ( @xmath ) by subtracting the
divergent part of the integrand of eq. ( 4.12.142 ). The regularized
entanglement entropy is given by,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.146)
  -- -- -- ------------

where the last integral is an indefinite integral with the result being
evaluated at @xmath and

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.147)
  -- -- -- ------------

From the formulas ( 4.12.144 ), ( 4.12.145 ) and ( 4.12.146 ) it is
obvious that the regularized entanglement entropies before and after the
NATD transformation differ by the factor

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.148)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In the formula above we denoted by @xmath the value of the entanglement
entropy after the NATD transformation. As discussed below eq. ( 4.11.134
), the quantity @xmath is invariant under NATD, and this explains why
the ratio ( 4.12.148 ) is constant along the flow.

At this point let us normalize the regularized entanglement entropy by
defining the quantity,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.149)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In what follows we present the behavior of @xmath in the UV and the IR
for the geometries of interest. We express the results in terms of the
width of the strip @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.150)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The UV/IR behavior written in eqs ( 4.12.152 ), ( 4.12.155 ), ( 4.12.158
) and ( 4.12.160 ) below, are just consequences of the fact that in far
UV and far IR the dual QFT is conformal. The functional forms are
universal, so our main interest is the constant appearing in them, and
also as a cross-check of numerical results.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted geometries

In the case of the twisted @xmath geometry we find that the width of the
strip is,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.151)
  -- -- -- ------------

Here in the integration we changed the variable @xmath by @xmath . From
the calculation of the normalized entropy @xmath we observe that in the
UV this behaves like @xmath , namely

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.152)
  -- -- -- ------------

where we also included subleading and next-to subleading terms.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Similarly in the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we find that the
width of the strip in terms of @xmath (considering also a subheading
term) is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.153)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.154)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Here as well we end up with a @xmath behavior, a logarithmic subleading
contribution and a constant @xmath for the regularized entropy,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.155)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.156)
  -- -------- -- ------------

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometries

The calculation for the IR limit is more tricky. The origin of the
subtlety is that the integrals we have to evaluate now run all along the
flow and we do not know the analytical properties of the integrands. In
order to address this issue we split the integration into the intervals
@xmath and @xmath choosing @xmath to be in the deep IR but always
greater than @xmath .

Following this prescription in the calculation, for the width of the
strip we find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.157)
  -- -------- -- ------------

If we do the same analysis when we calculate the normalized entropy we
find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.158)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The logarithmic dependence of the leading term on @xmath is the expected
for a @xmath theory.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We close this section presenting the corresponding results for the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry. As in the case of the twisted geometries we
split the integrations in the same way. Then for the width of the strip
we find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.159)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The normalized entropy displays again a logarithmic behavior in terms of
the width of the strip,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.160)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the constant @xmath has the value,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.161)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The results for the entanglement entropy are shown in Fig. 4.2 . We will
now perform a similar analysis for Wilson loops.

#### 4.12.2 Wilson loop

In our calculations we consider an embedding of the form @xmath for the
string. Such an embedding gives rise to the following induced metric on
the string,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.162)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is defined in ( 4.12.144 ). It is obvious that the above
induced metric is the same for all of the geometries that we have
discussed in this chapter so far (even for the duals). For this reason
we believe that it is not necessary to make any distinction with respect
to these geometries for the moment. Moreover, this means that the
observable is ’uncharged’ under NATD and thus it has the same functional
form when computed in the initial and dualized geometries. The interest
will be in the numerical coefficients our calculation will give.

The Nambu-Goto lagrangian density for the string takes the form,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.163)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath stands for the induced metric ( 4.12.162 ).

An important observable that can be computed holographically is the
potential energy of two non-dynamical sources added to the QFT. As
explained in the subsection 4.2.1 ,the conservation of the Hamiltonian
implies that,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.164)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the value of the function @xmath at the tip of the
hanging string @xmath . We can solve the last equation for @xmath and
use the result to calculate the distance between the endpoints of the
string. If we do this we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.165)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The Nambu-Goto action now reads

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.166)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath . The integral in eq. ( 4.12.166 ) is divergent since we
are considering quarks of infinite mass sitting at the endpoints of the
string. We can regularize this integral by subtracting the mass of the
two quarks and dividing by @xmath as it is shown below

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.167)
  -- -------- -- ------------

This formula gives us the quark-antiquark energy. In order to calculate
the same observable starting with the NATD geometries one must take into
account that the AdS radius @xmath is different from that of the
original geometries. In fact both results are related in the following
way

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.168)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In the last expression the hats refer to the dual quantities.

At this point we will explore the UV and IR limits of the
quark-antiquark energy both for the twisted and the Donos-Gauntlett
geometries.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted and Donos Gauntlett geometry

First we focus on the twisted solution where the Riemann surface is the
hyperbolic space, i.e. @xmath . In section 4.5.1 we saw that in this
case the function @xmath behaves like @xmath . Taking this into account
we can compute the distance between the quarks from the formula (
4.12.165 ). The result of this is

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.169)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Solving this equation for @xmath we can substitute into the result
coming from the formula ( 4.12.167 ). This will give the quark-antiquark
energy in terms of @xmath which in our case is

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.170)
  -- -------- -- ------------

as expected for a CFT. The main point of interest in the previous
formula is in the numerical coefficient.

Similar considerations for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry give
the same results as in the twisted case above. This is because the
asymptotic behavior of the function @xmath in the UV is the same in both
cases.

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometry

Again in the IR region we address again the same difficulty that we
found in the computation of the entanglement entropy. We use the same
trick to overcome it, that is we split the integrations into the
intervals @xmath and @xmath where @xmath has value in the deep IR but
always greater than @xmath .

In section 4.5.1 we saw that in the case where @xmath , the IR behavior
of the function @xmath is @xmath . Applying this into the formula (
4.12.165 ) we obtain the following result,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.171)
  -- -------- -- ------------

As before we solve the previous result for @xmath and we substitute it
into the expression that we find from the calculation of the
quark-antiquark potential. This way we express the energy as a function
of the distance between the quarks,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.172)
  -- -- -- ------------

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Repeating the same steps for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we
find that the distance between the quarks is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.173)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, expressing the energy in terms of the distance @xmath we find
again a dependence proportional to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.174)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us point out that the behavior in eqs ( 4.12.170 ), ( 4.12.172 ) and
( 4.12.174 ) are just consequences of the fact that far in the UV and
far in the IR the QFT is conformal.

The results for the quark-antiquark potential are shown in Fig. 4.3 .

### 4.13 Discussion

We started by studying backgrounds dual to two-dimensional SUSY CFTs.
The 2-d CFTs were obtained by compactification of the four-dimensional
Klebanov-Witten CFT on a torus or on a compact hyperbolic plane. The 2-d
CFT preserves (0,2) SUSY.

On those type IIB backgrounds we performed a NATD transformation, using
an @xmath -isometry of the ’internal space’ (or, equivalently, a global
symmetry of the dual CFT). As a result, we constructed new, smooth and
SUSY preserving backgrounds in type IIA and 11-dimensional supergravity
with an AdS @xmath fixed point. A further T-duality was used to
construct new, smooth and SUSY type IIB background whose IR is of the
form AdS @xmath M @xmath and all fluxes are active.

We analyzed the dual QFT by computing its observables, using the smooth
backgrounds mentioned above. By studying the Page charges, we observed
that there is a correspondence between the branes of the starting type
IIB solution and those of the type IIA solution after NATD.

The behavior of the central charge in the original CFT (the
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten theory to 2-d) is @xmath , while
after the NATD goes like @xmath . This new (cubic) dependence suggest a
relation with long linear quivers, which would imply that @xmath is
measuring the number of D4- and NS5-branes. The picture that emerges is
that of a 2-d CFT living on the intersection of D2- , D6- and
NS5-branes, with induced D4 charge every time an NS-brane is crossed.
Quantized charges support this interpretation.

Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops had the expected universal
dependence on @xmath (the quark-antiquark separation or the length of
strip separating the two regions) at the fixed points. The interest of
the expressions is on the coefficients, not determined by conformal
invariance. Interestingly, along the flow the observables smoothly
interpolate between the IR and the UV behaviors, which are fixed points
of different dimensionality. Both for the entanglement entropy and the
Wilson loops we found that the quotient of their values before and after
NATD is constant along the flow, as it is expected. It would be
interesting to connect these studies with previous calculations done for
AdS @xmath , either at the sigma model or the supergravity level. We are
presenting new backgrounds, hence new 2-d CFTs on which studies done in
the past could be interesting to revisit. It would be also interesting
to make more precise the QFT dual to these backgrounds. The key point
needed for this purpose is to understand the global properties of the
supergravity background after the NATD. Besides, it could be interesting
to check whether our solutions fall within the existent classifications
of, for example [ 84 , 17 ] . Probably, for this purpose the global
properties of the solution are needed. Another interesting point would
be to further study new observables that select (or explore) the values
of @xmath argued in this work to be special values of the @xmath
-coordinate, in the line of [ 156 ] .

## Appendix 4.A Appendix

#### 4.a.1 Supergravity

In the previous chapter we introduced in some detail the Lovelock and
LGB gravity theories; now we discuss another family of gravitational
actions that play a very distinguished role in AdS/CFT : Supergravities,
that are low energy limit of string theories.

Supersymmetry (SUSY) is a proposed symmetry that relates bosonic and
fermionic fields. It has been very explored since the early 1970’s, with
many remarkable properties both formal and phenomenological ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 So
far no clear experimental evidence of it is available, though. . As
mentioned in the motivation, it was applied to string theories where it
reduced the necessary number of spacetime dimensions and eliminated a
tachyon among other implications.

The SUSY applications to string theories and holography are many and
very important: microstate counting for BH entropy, strong-weak
dualities, AdS/CFT discovery, identification of the dual CFT in cases of
high SUSY, exploration of highly coupled regimes of field theories,
classifications of possible fields theories, exact solvability …; the
list goes on and on. It also generically allows to find stable analytic
solutions by solving first order equations (frequently called BPS
solutions); this has become a mainstream technique that we also have
used.

The SUSY of superstring theories is also inherited by their low energy
limits. The extension of gravitational theories with SUSY was also
studied for its own sake, and it is called Supergravity (SUGRA). The
SUSY in these cases is a gauge symmetry, namely the transformations
parameters are position dependent and new fields appear, very much like
in electromagnetism.

These SUGRA theories are particularly useful in the context of AdS/CFT.
In the top-down approach, the duality is normally used in the low energy
limit of the string theory side that is described by classical SUGRA. At
the beginning of AdS/CFT, only solutions of string theory effective
actions were used and they are often found relying on SUSY.
Surprisingly, purely bosonic solutions are almost always considered,
although they normally preserve some of the supersymmetries of the
theory they belong to.

In general, SUGRA theories can be constructed in different dimensions,
gauge symmetries and different amounts of SUSY ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Meaning that
several linearly independent symmetry transformations exist. . For our
purposes we will introduce type IIA/B and 11D SUGRAs, which are the
bosonic low energy limits of type IIA/B superstrings and of M-theory
respectively. The 11D case is fairly special, because for @xmath
nontrivial consistent field theories cannot have massless particles with
spins greater than two.

#### 4.a.2 11D and type IIA, IIB SUGRAs

In this subsection the main concepts of the bosonic sectors of SUGRAs
(11d, type IIA and type IIB) used in this thesis are briefly reviewed.
Let’s start with the type eleven dimensional case.

##### 11d Sugra

The bosonic sector of 11D SUGRA is given by the vierbein @xmath and a
4-form @xmath with dynamics given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.175)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a three form verifying @xmath (at least locally).

The bosonic equations of motion of eleven-dimensional supergravity are a
generalization of the Einstein:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.176)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and Maxwell equations is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.177)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We will call @xmath and @xmath called a background in 11D. When it
verifies equations ( 4.A.176 ) and ( 4.A.177 ) the background is a
classical bosonic solution to 11D SUGRA.

The supersymmetric character of the theory is given by a list of rules
that transform bosons and fermions and leave invariant the equations of
motion, the so called SUSY transformations. For bosonic solutions, where
the fermionic fields are set to zero, the supersymmetric variation of
bosonic fields is automatically zero, and the supersymmetric variation
of the fermionic field called gravitino is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.178)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath given by the geometrical covariant derivative of the
spinor:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.179)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We say that a classical bosonic solution of eleven-dimensional
supergravity is supersymmetric if there is a nonzero spinor @xmath such
that @xmath . That spinor is called a Killing spinor. As equation ( ) is
linear, the solutions form a vector space of fields ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In very
much the same way Killing vectors do. . For 11D SUGRA, the dimension of
this vector space can range from 0 to 32, and it is common to use the
parameter @xmath to refer to the supersymmetry of a given background. It
is very common to refer as SUSY solutions as @xmath BPS solutions. In
this manner 1/2 BPS solution of 11D SUGRA will have @xmath , 1/4 BPS
means @xmath , etcetera.

The BPS solutions have two key properties that make them extremely
useful. ( 4.A.178 ) is a first order equation that surprisingly implies
that the background is solution of the much more difficult to solve (
4.A.176 ),( 4.A.177 ). But, additionally, the solutions found in this
way are automatically stable. This explains why the technique has become
so popular.

These are the key notions of 11D SUGRA that appear often in the AdS/CFT
literature. Now we will review similar ones for type IIA and IIB SUGRAs,
and the relation to the former.

##### Type IIA supergravity

It is a non-chiral maximally supersymmetric supergravity in ten
dimensions. The bosonic fields are @xmath : @xmath is the metric, @xmath
is the dilaton, a real scalar, @xmath is the Kalb-Ramond 2-form, @xmath
are 1,3-forms respectively and called the potentials. Let us define
their field strengths:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.180)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.181)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.182)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

satisfying the following Bianchi identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.183)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.184)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.185)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The equations of motion are obtained from the action (in string frame ²⁰
²⁰ 20 This is the form one obtains directly from the low energy limit of
string theory, hence the name. Yet, the field redefinition @xmath
eliminates the prefactor @xmath from ( 4.A.186 ). That field choice is
called the Einstein frame because of the minimal coupling of @xmath that
it produces. ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.186)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the string coupling constant (often taken
equal to 1). The truncation @xmath is frequently considered and referred
as massless IIA SUGRA.

The equations of motions for @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.A.187)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The fluxes (a.k.a. Maxwell) equations read:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.188)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -----------

There are some key quantities @xmath and @xmath associated to the forms
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -- -- -----------
           (4.A.189)
  -- -- -- -----------

where every @xmath is a d-cycle in the geometry. These quantities are
called Page charges and they measure the amount of D @xmath or @xmath
branes associated with the geometry, therefore providing vital
information about the field theory dual [ 20 ] . ( 4.A.189 ) are also
valid for the IIB SUGRA fields.

As explained in the 11D case, we are only interested in bosonic
solutions, and most of them will be supersymmetric. To find the latter
we introduce the IIA SUSY transformations for the fermions: dilatino
@xmath and gravitino @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.190)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the product of all gamma matrices, and @xmath .
Finally, it is possible to get massless IIA SUGRA as a consistent
truncation of the 11D SUGRA; equivalently any massless IIA solution can
be uplifted to eleven dimensions. The uplifted metric is given by: ²¹ ²¹
21 We said before that M-theory contains IIA superstring. The present
embedding of IIA supergravity into 11d is the corresponding fact for
their low energy limits.

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.191)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where by @xmath we denote the @xmath coordinate which corresponds to a
@xmath isometry in the 11D theory upon which we compactify.

The 11-dimensional geometry is supported by a 3-form potential @xmath
which gives rise to the 4-form @xmath . This 3-form potential can be
written in terms of the 10-dimensional forms and the differential of the
@xmath coordinate as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.192)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The 3-form @xmath corresponds to the closed part of the 10-dimensional
RR form @xmath .

##### Type IIB supergravity

There exists also a chiral maximal supergravity in ten dimensions, type
IIB supergravity. It can be related with IIA using T-duality, that will
be also explained in section 4.1 .

The bosonic fields are similar to those of IIA: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath is a ten-dimensional metric, @xmath is the Kalb
Ramond 2-form, @xmath is the dilaton (again a real scalar), @xmath are
0,2,4-differential forms serving as potentials of the following field
strengths:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.193)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.194)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.195)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.196)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The Bianchi identities for the RR forms are given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.197)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The EoM can be derived from the following action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.198)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . The equations of motion obtained from this action are
supplemented by a further condition, which states that the @xmath form
is self-dual:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.199)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Like in type IIA, the Page charges are given by eq. ( 4.A.189 ). The
difference in this case is that the @xmath will have odd @xmath .

The SUSY transformations for the dilatino @xmath and the gravitino
@xmath for type IIB supergravity in string frame are [ 126 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.200)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , are the Pauli matrices.

#### 4.a.3 SUSY analysis

##### SUSY preserved by the twisted solutions

In this part of the appendix we write explicitly the variations of the
dilatino and gravitino for the ansatz (2.1-2.4), for the 3 cases @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . The SUSY transformations for the dilatino @xmath
and the gravitino @xmath for type IIB supergravity in string frame are
given by ( 4.A.2 ).

Let us consider the @xmath case in detail (the @xmath case is obtained
analogously). Recall that the vielbein is written in ( 4.5.48 ).

The dilatino variation vanishes identically, as the fields involved are
vanishing. The @xmath component of the gravitino reads,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.201)
  -- -------- -- -----------

First, we use the chiral projection of type IIB,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.202)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we define @xmath . We also impose the following projections
(Kähler projections),

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.203)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, expression ( 4.A.201 ) simplifies to,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.204)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We now impose the usual projection for the D3-brane,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.205)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and also a further projection related to the presence of the twisting,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.206)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, imposing that expression ( 4.A.204 ) vanishes we obtain,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.207)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For the component @xmath of the gravitino equation, we obtain that it is
zero when we impose the projections and equation ( 4.A.207 ). For the
component @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.208)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Combining projections ( 4.A.203 ) and ( 4.A.206 ) we get @xmath . Then,
( 4.A.208 ) gives the condition,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.209)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For @xmath , after imposing the projections and equation ( 4.A.209 ) we
arrive at,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.210)
  -- -------- -- -----------

There are two contributions to this term, one coming from the curvature
of the @xmath (through the spin connection) and another coming from the
twisting @xmath . That is, here we explicitly see that the twisting is
introduced to compensate the presence of the curvature, in such a way
that some SUSY can be still preserved. Then, we impose,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.211)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For @xmath , the variation is,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.212)
  -- -------- -- -----------

From the condition @xmath , we obtain a differential equation for @xmath
. Solving for it we arrive at the following form for the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.213)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is spinor which is independent of the coordinate @xmath .
For @xmath the variations vanish as long as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.214)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Finally, for @xmath the graviton variation vanishes if,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.215)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Summarizing, the variations of the dilatino and gravitino vanish if we
impose the following projections on the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.216)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the BPS equations ( 4.5.49 ), together with the condition @xmath .
For the case of the 2-torus, if we focus on the @xmath component,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.217)
  -- -------- -- -----------

we see that there is one term depending on @xmath , due to the twisting.
Contrary to the @xmath and @xmath cases, here there is no curvature term
that could cancel it. This will force @xmath , obtaining @xmath , which
does not permit an AdS @xmath solution.

Finally, after all this analysis we deduce that the Killing spinor does
not depend explicitly on the coordinates @xmath on which we perform the
NATD transformation. In fact it only has a dependence on the coordinate
@xmath .

##### SUSY preserved by the NATD solutions

In the above subsection we calculated the amount of SUSY that is
preserved by the type IIB supergravity solutions of the section 4.5.1 by
examining the dilatino and the gravitino variations. Here we compute the
portion of SUSY that is preserved by a supergravity solution after a
NATD transformation following the argument of [ 191 ] , which has been
proven in [ 133 ] . According to this, one just has to check the
vanishing of the Lie-Lorentz (or Kosmann) derivative [ 141 ] of the
Killing spinor along the Killing vector that generates the isometry of
the NATD transformation. More concretely, suppose that we want to
transform a supergravity solution by performing a NATD transformation
with respect to some isometry of the background that is generated by the
Killing vector @xmath . Then there is a simple criterion which states
that if the Lie-Lorentz derivative of the Killing spinor along @xmath
vanishes, then the transformed solution preserves the same amount of
SUSY as the original solution. In the opposite scenario one has to
impose more projection conditions on the Killing spinor in order to make
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanish. Thus in that case the dual background
preserves less supersymmetry than the original one.

We recall that given a Killing vector @xmath the Lie-Lorentz derivative
on a spinor @xmath along @xmath maps the spinor @xmath to another spinor
and is defined as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.218)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . For further details about the Lie-Lorentz derivative we
urge the interested reader to consult [ 177 ] .

In this chapter we constructed type IIA supergravity solutions by
applying a NATD transformation with respect to the @xmath isometry of
the original backgrounds that corresponds to the directions @xmath . The
non-vanishing components of the associated Killing vectors are,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.219)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In what follows we will compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the
three Killing vectors @xmath using the geometries of the sections 4.5.1
and 4.5.2 . It turns out that in all cases the Lie-Lorentz derivative
vanishes without the requirement of imposing further projections on the
Killing spinor. This means that the new solutions that we found using
the technique of NATD preserve the same SUSY as the original solutions.

Let us now compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vector (
4.A.219 ) for the twisted geometries that are described by the formulas
( 4.5.44 )-( 4.5.48 ). In the previous section, which deals with the
supersymmetry of the starting solutions, we mentioned that the Killing
spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath . This means
that the first term in ( 4.A.218 ) reduces to,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.220)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Hence for each of the three Killing vectors we find,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For convenience we have defined the rotated @xmath -matrices,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.224)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now compute the 1-forms that are dual to the Killing vectors.
What one has to do is to lower the index of the Killing vectors (
4.A.219 ) using the metric ( 4.5.44 ) which gives the following result,

  -- -- -- -------- -----------
                    (4.A.225)
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -----------

The second term of ( 4.A.218 ) can be computed by acting with the
exterior derivative on the above 1-forms and contracting the result with
@xmath -matrices. Notice that in order to compare with ( 4.A.3 ) one has
to express the components of @xmath using the flat frame ( 4.5.48 ).
Finally for the second term of ( 4.A.218 ) we find,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.226)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which means that the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vectors
@xmath vanishes.

In the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry ( 4.5.62 ) we notice that
all the necessary expressions are quite similar to those computed in the
previous subsection. This is because the only significant difference
between the line element of the twisted geometries and that of the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry is just a fiber term. As in the previous case,
the Killing spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath .
This implies that the derivative term @xmath in eq. ( 4.A.218 ) has no
contribution to the result. Then the first term of eq. ( 4.A.218 ), for
each of the three Killing vectors, can be easily obtained from eq. (
4.A.3 ) by setting @xmath . Similarly, if we set @xmath into eq. (
4.A.225 ) we find the 1-forms @xmath for the Donos-Gauntlett case. Once
we know these 1-forms we can follow the same prescription as in the
previous subsection and compute the second term of ( 4.A.218 ) for each
Killing vector. It happens again that this term, when computed for every
Killing vector, is related to the first term by a minus sign and thus
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanishes without imposing further projections
on the Killing spinor.

## Chapter 5 Holographic Ward identities in 1+1 QFT

The goal of the present chapter is the holographic description of Ward
Identities in 1+1 QFTs. We start with a review of the concepts of
symmetry breaking, Ward identities and Goldstone bosons in the field
theory side 5.1 . The peculiarities of 1+1 dimensional case are covered
in section 5.1.1 . In 5.2.1 , we will introduce the basics of
holographic renormalization for a scalar, while the AdS/CFT description
of symmetry breaking will be given in section 5.2.2 . Finally, we start
the presentation of the original results of the chapter, reaching the
desired holographically Ward identities in section 5.4 and discussing
them in 5.6 .

### 5.1 Symmetry breaking and Ward identities in QFT. Goldstone theorem

Symmetries play an absolutely fundamental role in High Energy Physics.
Nevertheless, this symmetries might be broken below a certain energy
scale, and therefore be absent in the experimental data. In this
situations, we say that the symmetry is broken. Concerning our
mathematical descriptions, the symmetry breaking can be explicit (in the
action, Hamiltonian or EoM), spontaneous (violated by the vacuum) or
both at the same time (concomitant). There are very important
phenomenological consequences. In High Energy Physics, a prominent
example is the Higgs mechanism ¹ ¹ 1 Indeed discovered nearly
simultaneously by Higgs, Brout and Englert, and Guralnik, Hagen and
Kibble. [ 72 , 101 , 113 , 114 , 115 ] (actually inspired by a condensed
matter related proposal [ 7 ] ). The discovery [ 1 , 52 ] of the Higgs
boson at CERN was recently awarded the Nobel Prize. The Higgs field
gives mass to the gauge bosons @xmath and @xmath without explicitly
breaking gauge symmetry. Another very important example the is chiral
symmetry breaking of QCD, which endows nucleons with mass [ 172 , 171 ]
. This work was also worthy of the Nobel prize. Another very
investigated but still unobserved case is SUSY breaking. In condensed
matter systems, the list of symmetry breaking instances is very large,
and some examples include every crystal (spatial translation is broken),
(anti)ferromagnets, superconductors and superfluids, to name a few.
Indeed, the BCS theory of superconditivity, that relies on symmetry
breaking, has also been worthy of Nobel Prize [ 13 ] . The relevance and
applicability of the concept is therefore clear. In the following we
give an introduction of the very elementary concepts from the field
theory side.

Consider an action invariant under some gauge group @xmath . In
classical Physics the Noether theorem asserts that every continuous
symmetry will be associated with a conserved current. In the quantum
setting, the analog result is given by the Ward identities, that will
play also a central role when the symmetry is broken. We begin by
briefly discussing the different kinds of symmetry breaking. The
simplest possibility is the explicit breaking, in which we add a term to
the action that is not invariant under @xmath . For concreteness and
also because is our case of interest, let us take @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is invariant under @xmath and for simplicity we consider
@xmath to have unity charge, therefore it breaks the symmetry. @xmath is
the explicit breaking parameter.

The second possibility is called spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). It
happens when the vacuum state @xmath is not invariant under all elements
of @xmath , or alternatively, it is not annihilated by all generators
@xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath this generically implies that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is called the vacuum expectation value of @xmath , VEV for
short. Despite @xmath being charged, we are going to take always real
@xmath . ² ² 2 This can always be achieved with a gauge transformation
These two quantities @xmath will appear extremely often: what we mean by
explicit breaking is @xmath and by spontaneous @xmath . Holographically,
they will be related to source and VEV of the scalar field dual to
@xmath . ³ ³ 3 This is so for standard quantization of the scaar. In
alternative quantization of the scalar, their roles are exchanged. The
third possibility is when both @xmath and receives the name of
concomitant symmetry breaking.

Now that we have introduced the first definitions of symmetry breaking,
let us explain its effect on the particle spectrum. This is indeed the
content of the Goldstone theorem from the 1960’s. [ 92 ] . It states
that when there is spontaneous symmetry breaking, massless scalar
particles will appear; they are called Goldstone bosons (GB). There are
as many GB as symmetry generators are broken. It must be emphasized that
this result holds in @xmath -dimensional QFT for @xmath . The
peculiarities of @xmath dimensional symmetry breaking are reviewed in
section 5.1.1 , as we want to describe them holographically. When the
breaking is concomitant with dominant spontaneous component, Goldstone
scalars become slightly massive and then they are referred as
pseudo-Goldstone bosons.

Let us relate the symmetry breaking and GB with the Ward identities as
promised above. The Ward identity is, by definition:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the current operator. The relations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

follow from the Ward identity, and we will refer to them informally as
the Ward identities. @xmath is an unknown function, but the same for
both correlators. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Functions of @xmath can be understood as
operatorial relations between functions, for example in one dimension:
@xmath corresponds to @xmath , and from it we infer that @xmath .
However, these notation becomes more understandable in Fourier space,
where @xmath . The Fourier space is usually preferred for explicit
computations of correlators. We will sometimes keep the delta function
@xmath implicit. Furthermore, in two point functions the operator on the
left is evaluated in @xmath and the one on the right in @xmath , unless
stated otherwise, and often we will not write them. The main objective
of the present chapter is to holographically obtain ( 5.1.5 ) for 1+1
dimensions; the result can be found in section 5.4 , eqs. 5.4.98 .

The so called GMOR relations establish the mass of pseudo-GB in the
presence of small ESB. Although we will not use them, its (quantitative)
reproduction by a bottom-up model is a remarkable achievement of
holography presented in [ 11 ] . We will heavily rely on their methods,
and they will be reviewed in section 5.2 .

#### 5.1.1 Symmetry breaking in 1+1 QFT. Absence of SSB at finite N

The Goldstone theorem is valid only for spacetime dimension @xmath . In
@xmath (1+1 CFT), it is crucial to distinguish finite @xmath and
(strictly infinite) large @xmath behaviour. At finite @xmath , there are
no Goldstone bosons [ 55 ] . A similar situation happens in @xmath
dimensions with non-vanishing temperature [ 166 , 117 ] . These two
facts are collectively known as the Coleman-Mermin-Wagner theorem.

A simple physical intuition of the absence of SSB can be found in [ 158
] , and we quickly review it here. Consider a complex scalar field
@xmath , with cartesian components @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The action will be given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last terms is introduced by hand to break the gauge symmetry and
@xmath is taken to be small. This parameter @xmath will make more clear
the limit of purely SSB, and we will take it to zero at the end.
Furthermore, the spatial length of the system is restricted with an IR
cutoff @xmath , that will also be taken to infinity at the end of the
computation. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Otherwise the results present IR divergences.

Taking into account these limits, we say that the @xmath symmetry is
spontaneously broken iff:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The order of limits is important, and if taken in the opposite order the
VEV will always vanish.

It is convenient to introduce the polar coordinates of the field @xmath
to focus on the phase. With that purpose we fix the value of the modulus
@xmath : ⁶ ⁶ 6 The validity of such approximation is also discussed in [
158 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We are therefore left with a free field @xmath . The corresponding mode
expansion is well known:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

As the field is free, we can explicitly compute the 2pt. correlator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

that diverges in the IR as @xmath , the limit of vanishing explicit
breaking. We have implicitly taken the @xmath limit. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The integral
is also UV divergent, but the Coleman theorem is essentially related to
IR behaviour ( cf. [ 158 ] ) . Therefore the fluctuations become
infinitely large in 2d for the free field. With it, we arrive at our
desired result for the VEV:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 5.1.12 ), @xmath in the limit of @xmath , i.e. no explicit
breaking. As a consequence, both @xmath vanish, so do @xmath and
therefore the VEV of @xmath , @xmath , vanishes too. This is essentially
worded saying that quantum fluctuations erase the VEV in 2d. Notice that
it only happens in @xmath as in higher dimensions higher powers of
@xmath will appear in the numerator of ( 5.1.12 ) and the IR
contribution is finite. A similar phenomenon happens in 2+1 thermal
field theories. [ 166 , 117 ] .

Nevertheless, symmetry can be spontaneously broken ( [ 57 , 96 , 207 ] )
in the large @xmath limit , because of the fluctuation suppression it
produces. Actually, with non-zero temperature the situation is the same
in @xmath , as implied by the Mermin-Wagner theorem. The breaking of
symmetry is possible only for strict large @xmath . This result was
actually re-obtained holographically in [ 9 ] , using non-classical
calculations on the gravity side to include @xmath effects. We shall not
tackle such difficult computation, and instead we will find
holographically the presence of GB in eq. ( 5.5.111 ), as expected for
large @xmath .

### 5.2 Introduction to AdS/CFT of symmetry breaking

In this section we will introduce a few notions of holographic
renormalization and the AdS/CFT description symmetry breaking. Our
original work is totally based on them.

#### 5.2.1 Holographic renormalization of a scalar field (standard
quantization)

In this subsection we quickly review the formalism of holographic
renormalization using the example of a complex scalar field to compute 2
points functions of an operator in the boundary theory. After that, we
use the scalar to show an example of alternative quantization. This
simple case contains most of the key concepts that will appear in our
original work: correspondence between scalar and operator, gauge
transformations, counterterms, near boundary expansion and source choice
through alternative quantization. The general goal of holographic
renormalization is to compute n-point functions in the gauge theory
side. It is based on the precise formulation of AdS/CFT relating the
partition functions of the boundary and bulk theories. This is the
so-called Witten prescription, that we will use in the saddle point
approximation for gravity [ 208 , 97 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the QFT generating functional. @xmath are the sources
(to be more clearly defined later), and @xmath is the boundary of the
asymptotically AdS space in the gravity side. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The on-shell action
can be computed using Euclidean or Lorentzian signature; we proceed with
the second. Notice that both sides of the correspondence have the same
sources @xmath . If one computes @xmath with the appropriate
renormalization, the @xmath correlators can be computed taking
functional derivatives on it:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In similar fashion one computes correlators involving only @xmath and
the ones involving both @xmath and @xmath .

The main issue is how to compute the on-shell action to use ( 5.2.14 ).
We are going to ignore the backreaction of @xmath on the geometry ⁹ ⁹ 9
This can be done in certain situations, check [ 192 ] for more details.
. The dimension will be fixed to @xmath field theory, therefore
4-dimensional bulk. The action then is just the free scalar in AdS.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath can be negative, but not arbitrarily. There is a minimal
physically acceptable value known as the BF bound [ 32 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The mass will determine the dimension of the operator @xmath dual to
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Besides, there is an upper bound given by unitarity of the dual field
theory (unitarity bound), that also further restricts the possible
values of @xmath . Taking into account both bounds, we obtain a neat
restriction on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are going to fix @xmath such that @xmath . This value is well inside
the BF and the unitarity bounds, and corresponds to the explicit
calculations in [ 11 ] . It is easy to solve the EoM of @xmath in pure
AdS, as it turns out to be Bessel equation. For values of @xmath close
to 0, the result is the well-known near boundary expansion of an scalar:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the radial coordinate we are going to use, and @xmath is
the near boundary region. Notice that linear and quadratic powers of
@xmath appear only because we chose @xmath . In general they will be
@xmath where @xmath is the mass of the scalar. @xmath are called the
modes of @xmath respectively. The next step is to evaluate the on-shell
action using the near-boundary expansion ( 5.2.22 ). As mentioned
before, it is UV divergent and needs a UV cutoff. In order to make it
finite, we need to add some counterterms @xmath that are boundary terms
in the bulk theory and gauge invariant. With it the renormalized action
is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the pullback of the metric on the boundary. Using the
renormalized action, we can compute the variations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We see that it demands @xmath on the boundary to have vanishing
variation. When quantities fixed by the variational principle are
constant, all the sources should be constant too. When this happens we
will say that the sources are consistent with the variational principle.
Furthermore, it is the only requirement we will impose on the sources.
As @xmath constant in the boundary is consistent with the variational
principle, we can use them as a legitimate sources. The higher order
modes @xmath have to be written as functions of the sources @xmath . The
EoMs and normalizability in the bulk impose relations between the modes,
that we write generically as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We can now rewrite the action @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We finally compute the desired holographic correlators with functional
derivatives ( 5.2.16 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The first follows as no linear term in @xmath appears, and the same
happens in the last one.

The only matter that remains is the precise form of @xmath . The EoM
have already been used; only remains to fix the integrations constant in
such a way they solution is normalizable in the bulk. The result is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we are using the Fourier space representation of the correlators,
and @xmath . This is precisely the conformal result.

#### Alternative quantization of the scalar

Eq. ( 5.2.26 ) imposes to choose @xmath as a source. But we can make
@xmath sources if we add an appropriate boundary terms @xmath to the
action. Indeed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we now must impose @xmath instead of @xmath as we did in the case
of ( 5.2.26 ). Therefore @xmath will be our new sources. @xmath is
sometimes called a Legendre term ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In analogy with the Legendre
transform applied for example in Mechanics or Thermodynamics. The
necessity of a well defined variational principle and the addition of
the necessary terms is totally similar to the discussion of section 3.1
. . Choosing subleading expansion modes as sources is called alternative
quantization , in opposition to the standard quantization of the
previous section, that uses the leading modes as sources.

Different boundary terms can drastically change the holographic meaning
of a given gravity solution. For example, in 5.5 it changes from
representing purely explicit symmetry breaking to purely spontaneous.
Furthermore, let’s mention a relevant application introduced in [ 137 ]
. When one uses standard quantization, the lowest dual operator
dimension described by holography is @xmath . Nevertheless, the
unitarity bound of CFT is lower than @xmath and given by @xmath . It
turns out that the range of dimensions @xmath can be covered using
alternative quantization.

A similar kind of boundary terms will change the source for the vector
field in section 5.3.3 , and this will be needed to describe conserved
current holographically in 2d.

These examples contain key elements that will appear in the original
results of the chapter and that are also common to many holographic
renormalizations:

1.  Scalar-operator correspondence,

2.  Relation of scalar mass and operator dimension, allowed dimensions
    and bounds,

3.  Necessity of gauge invariant combinations of modes,

4.  Counterterms,

5.  Determination of sources.

Of course there are several aspects left out. Among the most important
are the role of backreaction (which is necessary for holographic
stress-energy tensor [ 62 ] and correlators involving @xmath ) and the
systematic determination of counterterms [ 178 ] .

#### 5.2.2 Holographic U(1) symmetry breaking and analytic Goldstone
bosons in AdS@xmath

The purpose of this section is to review how to obtain the Ward
identities ( 5.1.5 ) in @xmath via AdS/CFT. We will use the methods
presented in [ 11 ] . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Some early AdS/CFT work on description of
symmetries and their breaking can be found in [ 137 , 26 , 27 ] . The
first step is to introduce the holographic bottom-up action ¹² ¹² 12
Although it has been proven that it can be embedded in SUGRA for some
values of the parameters. :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath . We are not going to consider the backreaction of
@xmath on the geometry. ¹³ ¹³ 13 This is justified in [ 11 ] , page 9.
This model is well known in the literature by the name of holographic
superconductor [ 103 , 104 ] . We have chosen mass @xmath , that
corresponds to @xmath . It contains the simplest necessary fields to
describe SSB: A @xmath vector field @xmath minimally coupled to a
charged scalar @xmath .

The explicit and spontaneous symmetry breaking are introduced through a
finite background @xmath [ 104 ] in the scalar, around which the field
fluctuates. We also decompose the vector in transversal and longitudinal
part:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We make the standard gauge fixing @xmath (radial gauge). The parameters
@xmath in this background will be the same as the @xmath introduced in (
5.1.4 ) and ( 5.1.3 ). Using the EoMs for @xmath , we find the near UV
expansions: ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 As stressed in ( 5.2.22 ), the powers appearing in
@xmath expansion are determined by dimension and scalar mass choice
@xmath . In particular, other choices can lead to non-entire powers or
even logarithms.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We do not consider explicitly the transverse part @xmath as its EoM are
completely decoupled and it is not the source of the desired Ward
identities. The counterterms and in general all the boundary terms that
are added to the action are required to:

1.  Cancel all divergences.

2.  Respect the symmetries of the action (for example gauge symmetry.)
    ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 If the renormalization can only be done with non-invariant
    terms, then the quantum theory will not preserve the symmetry. This
    is called an anomaly.

3.  Have a well defined variational principle, consistent with the
    desired sources.

In this case, we can meet those criteria with the same counterterm (
5.2.24 ) as the free scalar. To be able to compute correlators we have
to write expansion modes in terms of the sources. Notice that gauge
transformations mix @xmath at first order in fluctuations through @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal gauge transformation. It is therefore
necessary to mix @xmath and @xmath to write gauge-invariant relations,
namely:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

instead of @xmath in terms only of @xmath like we did in ( 5.2.27 ).

To reproduce the Ward identities ( 5.1.5 ) in terms of one unknown
function it is not necessary to solve the EoM of the fluctuations. We
only need to solve them if we want to know the form of that unknown
function. The only remaining ingredient is the guess of the coupling
between sources and operators:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using it, we holographically derive exactly the VEV and the desired Ward
identities ( 5.1.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Once the function @xmath is known analytically, which is possible in
this model with the @xmath choice, one can study @xmath and search for
the Goldstone boson as the IR poles of it. For example, taking the
results for @xmath [ 11 ] (purely spontaneous breaking):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

signals the GB. The case of interest in 1+1 will follow the procedure of
this section, except for one crucial difference: the constant term
@xmath will no longer be the dominant term in the expansion of @xmath ,
eq. ( 5.2.42 ). For @xmath to become source, we need especial boundary
terms as explained in section 5.3.3 .

### 5.3 Holographic renormalization of scalar and U(1) gauge field in
AdS@xmath

From now on until the end of the chapter we present our original
results. We will consider a fixed AdS @xmath background with a vector
field and a complex scalar. This is the minimal bulk field content to
describe a symmetry current and an operator charged under it. Later,
holographic renormalization is performed in order to find the correct
Ward identities describing symmetry breaking. This has a subtlety
related to the fact that a vector in a three-dimensional bulk can have
different boundary conditions [ 164 ] . We will see that coupling it to
a charged scalar with a non-trivial profile singles out one boundary
condition, the one that correctly corresponds to a conserved current in
the boundary theory. Besides reproducing the Ward identities, including
the situation where also explicit breaking is present, an analytically
Goldstone boson is found in a specific toy example. Finally the
implications and context of the result are discussed.

#### 5.3.1 Preamble: a free vector alone in AdS@xmath

The procedure of holographic renormalization exhibits many subtleties
for a vector in 2+1 bulk dimensions. Most of them are related to the
fact that a vector in AdS @xmath has properties analogous to a scalar at
the Breitenlohner-Freedman (BF) bound [ 32 ] . We then start the study
of the peculiarities of holographic renormalization in two dimensions
with a preliminary discussion of a free gauge field in AdS @xmath ,
before coupling it to matter and analyzing the physics of symmetry
breaking.

As a precedent, the case of a vector in AdS @xmath was discussed briefly
in [ 164 ] along with higher dimensions. It was stated that only a
particular boundary condition led to normalizable fluctuations. It was
also noted there that it can be useful to dualize the bulk vector into a
bulk massless scalar. This approach was also followed in [ 74 ] , where
different boundary conditions were selected, in the dual frame.

Here, we will stick to a vector in bulk AdS @xmath and discuss how one
has to perform renormalization when imposing the boundary condition of [
164 ] . In the next sections we will show that a different boundary
condition is needed for consistency with the derivation of the Ward
identities.

We take the following bulk action for a free Abelian gauge field: ¹⁶ ¹⁶
16 Being in three dimensions, one could include a Chern-Simons term for
the vector (see for instance [ 8 ] for a careful discussion in a similar
perspective). Since our aim is to stay as close as possible to the
higher dimensional cases, where such a term is not present, we will take
here the minimalistic approach and set it to zero. This choice is of
course protected by parity.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the usual electromagnetic field strength, and @xmath is
the AdS @xmath metric in the Poincaré patch,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We choose the radial gauge @xmath , and we divide the remainder into
transversal and longitudinal components,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the action becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The action ( 5.3.53 ) leads to the following equations of motion:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.56)
     @xmath      (5.3.57)
     @xmath      (5.3.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the last two equations we derive the asymptotic behaviors of the
fields,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while from the first one we can drop the term in the action ( 5.3.55 )
involving the longitudinal component. Note that the presence of the
logarithmic terms entails that the constant terms can suffer from an
ambiguity. We will deal later on with this issue.

Then we can integrate by parts and use the equation of motion for @xmath
to express the action as a boundary term:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which needs to be renormalized because of the logarithmic divergence.

If we want to write a counterterm that removes this divergence and is
gauge invariant, we may build it out of the field strength, but we soon
realize that we then have to make it non local. This turns out to be
equivalent to a mass term, which is absolutely local, but gauge
invariant only on-shell, by equation ( 5.3.56 ). Indeed, ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 A
counterterm with a @xmath prefactor is typically needed for scalars at
the BF bound, see e.g. [ 27 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               (5.3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the induced metric on the two-dimensional boundary, and
the identity in the second line holds indeed thanks to the constraint (
5.3.56 ).

With such counterterm the renormalized action, @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The variational principle gives

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.63)
  -- -- -- ----------

so that, taking into account the last line of ( 5.3.1 ), we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The source for the operator dual to @xmath would thus be @xmath , in
agreement with [ 164 ] . Note that as the source is transverse, the dual
operator enjoys a gauge symmetry and thus cannot be a conserved current,
it would be a pure gauge field.

We stress that the counterterm we have to introduce in two boundary
dimensions, which has the form of a mass term, does not have an
equivalent in any higher dimensions. This might be reminiscent of the
Schwinger model (see e.g. [ 95 ] for a modern exposition), where the
photon mass is also generated by exactly the same non-local term. Note
however that here we are dealing with a non-local counterterm, due to a
non-local UV divergent term, while in two-dimensional QED the
loop-generated mass of the photon is finite.

In [ 164 ] it is noted that the above boundary conditions for the vector
are equivalent to the usual boundary conditions one would impose on the
massless scalar that is equivalent to (the transverse part of) the
vector by bulk duality:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to see that the usual, local counterterm that one
writes for @xmath corresponds to the non-local one found above.

Profiting from this dual formulation, the authors of [ 74 ] have argued
that in order to describe a conserved current in the boundary theory,
one should impose mixed boundary conditions on @xmath , which are
interpolating between the ordinary and the alternative quantizations [
137 ] (see also [ 168 ] ). ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 We should note that when considering
the holographic correspondence between string theory on AdS @xmath and
boundary CFT @xmath as in [ 90 ] , there is a natural prescription to
describe CFT currents, which are actually enhanced to Kac-Moody
generators. The techniques are however different from the ones employed
here, in particular there is no renormalization. Below, we are going to
see that coupling the vector to a scalar leaves us with the only choice
of the alternative quantization for the vector. We consider now a
holographic model for spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1 dimensional
boundary field theory. We thus consider the following action, of an
Abelian gauge field coupled to a complex scalar in AdS @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

From the equations of motion of a free scalar in AdS @xmath , one can
infer the following scaling dimensions for the dual boundary
operator/source:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then fluctuate the complex scalar around a fixed background,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We take @xmath and @xmath to be real for definiteness. When the scalar
is in the ordinary quantization, the sub-leading piece (proportional to
@xmath ) triggers a VEV for the real part of the dual boundary operator,
and so leads to spontaneous symmetry breaking of the global @xmath . The
leading piece (proportional to @xmath ) corresponds to explicit breaking
of the symmetry, and we keep it different from zero for the moment, in
order to use it as a sort of regulator. It will indeed turn out that we
will need it in some intermediary steps.

Moreover, we fix the radial gauge @xmath and we conveniently split the
gauge field into transverse and longitudinal components as in ( 5.3.54
). We then derive from the variation of the action the following
linearized equations of motion for the fluctuated fields:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.69)
     @xmath      (5.3.70)
     @xmath      (5.3.71)
     @xmath      (5.3.72)
     @xmath      (5.3.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we have seen in the previous section, in three dimensions the vector
field is at the BF bound, and indeed we have the following asymptotic
expansions near the boundary:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The asymptotic expansion of the two scalar components depends on the
value of the bulk mass. Let us set ourselves in the window between the
BF bound ( @xmath ) and the “massless bound” ( @xmath ), and exclude the
two extremal values, which would need to be treated separately since
they entail logarithms. For all other values in this window, the scalar
asymptotic expansions are logarithm-free. We thus have the following
expansions,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now, integrating by parts and using the equations of motion,
reduce the action to a boundary term, which reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

By using the asymptotic expansions we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We see that the divergent pieces of the scalar sector can be removed by
the usual counterterm (in which we subtract the background value)

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.78)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

leaving only the logarithmic divergences of the vector sector:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We would like to remove also these divergences and then express the
renormalized action in terms of the sources only. To do so, we need to
identify which are the sources. Normally the source is associated with
the leading term in the small @xmath expansion of the field, unless one
performs alternative quantization. For the gauge vector field, in any
higher dimension the leading piece corresponds to a constant term. In
our case instead, due to the fact that the vector is at the BF bound and
to the consequent presence of the logarithmic term, the leading term is
no longer the constant one. Then we would be naively led to choose the
logarithmic term as the source, as we indeed did in the previous
section. For the transverse part this does not pose any particular
problem, but for the longitudinal part, which in the present case does
not disappear from the boundary action, it is more problematic.

Note that the longitudinal part of the vector shifts under gauge
transformations, which in the radial gauge @xmath are constant in @xmath
. It is then the constant term in @xmath that shifts, in any boundary
dimensions, including two. Thus in our case it is @xmath defined by (
5.3.74 ) that shifts under gauge transformations. In other words, it is
the constant part of @xmath that has gauge transformations, and so
should be the source of a boundary conserved current. Then it seems
reasonable to try to alternatively quantize the vector, and move the
source from the coefficient of the logarithm to the @xmath -constant,
gauge-dependent term.

#### 5.3.2 Ordinary quantization for the vector

In first place, however, let us renormalize the vector in ordinary
quantization, i.e. keeping the source to be @xmath . The point of this
subsection is to show that this approach does however lead to a flawed
physical picture, and that a different choice has to be made.

We then compute first the variation of the regularized action ( 5.3.66
), namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

It is crucial here not to use the constraint ( 5.3.69 ), which in
components yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation is relating the coefficient of the logarithm to the source
and VEV of the fluctuating scalar @xmath . The equations of motion can
be used to express VEV’s in term of sources, but since we do not know
yet whether @xmath will be a source or not, we have to remain off-shell
to check the variational principle.

We then vary the counterterm for the scalar divergences,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.3.82)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

so that we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.83)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Thus the scalar sources appear to be well-defined in the ordinary
quantization, but of course we still have to renormalize the vector
sector. A mass-like counterterm as the one of the previous section (
5.3.1 ) will not help in renormalizing the longitudinal component. We
propose the following gauge invariant, local counterterm:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

whose variation is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.85)
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We notice that such counterterm (and its variation as well) is singular
in the limit @xmath , and so in the purely spontaneous case it would not
do the job. Keeping instead @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that in this way the variational principle is well defined (even
if still singular in @xmath ), and in particular @xmath should be
considered as the source. Then we had better interpret the constraint (
5.3.81 ) as an expression for @xmath in terms of the sources. In this
point of view the renormalized action is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.87)
  -- -- -- ----------

Again we see that all the terms involving the source of the imaginary
part of the dual scalar operator explode for @xmath . No theory of
spontaneous breaking can be extracted out of this, which is consistent
with the fact that the VEV of the longitudinal component of the vector
is gauge-dependent in this quantization. Moreover, in the purely
spontaneous case the constraint coming from eq. ( 5.3.69 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which strengthens the idea that @xmath cannot be the source of the
conserved current. Indeed, @xmath is the source for the imaginary part
of the scalar, and so @xmath cannot be another source, ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 A
similar situation happens in cascading solutions, as for instance in [
25 ] . and therefore we confirm that we are forced to do the alternative
quantization on the vector.

Let us then show how to alternatively quantize the vector field and put
the source back to the gauge-dependent, @xmath -constant term @xmath ,
as in any higher dimensions.

#### 5.3.3 Alternative quantization for the vector

We should then try to renormalize in a different way, such that we move
the source to the constant term. This is achieved by considering an
additional counterterm, of the Legendre transform kind, such as the
following one:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Indeed its variation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, taking the expression ( 5.3.83 ), and the variation of the ordinary
counterterm ( 5.3.2 ), the combination

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 (5.3.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

yields the desired switch of the sources. Furthermore, the corresponding
renormalized action reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the constraint ( 5.3.81 ) to remove @xmath , which is
not a source anymore. Notice that both ( 5.3.3 ) and ( 5.3.92 ) are
finite in the @xmath limit.

This renormalized action is completely identical to those of higher
space-time dimensions and gives the suitable Ward identities for a
pseudo-Goldstone boson (see for instance [ 11 ] for the
three-dimensional case). However, both counterterms we have used ( 5.3.2
) and ( 5.3.89 ) are singular for @xmath (even if the final result is
not), so our action cannot be renormalized in this way if we set @xmath
from the beginning.

We realize however that there is another gauge invariant and local
counterterm that yields the same action as @xmath in one step, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.3.93)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

This counterterm, subtracted to ( 5.3.79 ), trivially gives the
renormalized action ( 5.3.92 ). The counterterm is then equivalent to
the combination @xmath , and is not singular when @xmath .

Note that this could be interpreted to mean that the limits @xmath (high
UV) and @xmath (purely spontaneous breaking) do not commute at large
@xmath . In order to make explicit this non-commutativity of the two
limits, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see immediately that if we take first the limit @xmath we get the
desired counterterm @xmath , which is independent of @xmath and so the
subsequent @xmath limit is ineffective; whereas if we take first the
limit @xmath , we have no singularities thanks to @xmath , but we have
surviving divergences in @xmath when we take the @xmath limit
afterwards, namely:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.94)
  -- -- -- ----------

One could be tempted to interpret this as a signal of the impossibility
of taking @xmath and @xmath at the same time, i.e. no spontaneous
symmetry breaking. However the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) is perfectly
well-behaved on its own, and it can actually be written also for the
vector alone, whereas this is not the case for the two intermediate
steps (( 5.3.2 ), ( 5.3.89 )), which are actually even more singular
when all the scalar background is taken to zero. We cannot thus exclude
the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ), and with it we have to allow for spontaneous
symmetry breaking in two dimensions, confirming the expected holographic
evasion of the Coleman theorem.

The counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) has an explicit @xmath factor, leading to the
possibility to add also a finite counterterm with a similar structure
and an arbitrary prefactor. This is indeed what was analyzed in [ 74 ]
in the dual frame, with the interpretation of the introduction of a
double-trace current-current deformation and the consequence of a
non-trivial RG flow. Here we note that such a finite counterterm would
spoil the identification of @xmath and @xmath as sources, shifting them
by an arbitrary amount linear in @xmath and @xmath respectively. In the
following, we take the point of view that the ambiguity in the @xmath
has been fixed, and we have taken @xmath and @xmath to be our sources.
It is indeed this prescription that allows us to find the expected Ward
identities.

One last comment about alternative quantization for the vector field is
that, if one holds @xmath fixed and lets @xmath loose, then according to
[ 164 ] the fluctuations are not normalizable. This seems the price to
pay to describe in the boundary theory a proper conserved current, whose
existence we have no reason to exclude for a two-dimensional CFT. In
addition, let us say that while for scalars bulk non-normalizability is
usually connected to boundary operators with dimension below the
unitarity bound, in the present case we do not see what problematic
scenario this non-normalizability would correspond to in the dual
theory; on the contrary, we have shown that everything works as smoothly
as in higher dimensions precisely when we choose the alternative
quantization for the vector field.

### 5.4 Ward identities of symmetry breaking in AdS@xmath/Cft@xmath

Once we have obtained the renormalized action ( 5.3.92 ), then showing
that the Ward identities are realized is systematic. It actually follows
from the same arguments as in [ 11 ] . First we rewrite the action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then we remark that the equations of motions and gauge invariance
dictate the relations between VEVs and sources to take the following
form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath ’s are typically non-local functions, obtained by
solving the EOM with appropriate IR boundary conditions (i.e. in the
deep bulk).

Replacing in the action yields the generating functional for one- and
two-point functions, depending explicitly on sources only:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.96)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using the usual dictionary, for instance

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get for the correlators most relevant to the Ward identities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function enforced by fluctuations EoM and IR decaying
boundary conditions, as defined in eq. ( 5.4.95 ); @xmath is a constant
given by @xmath . This is our main result, and we can summarize the
whole chapter as:

1.  @xmath must be used as source of a boundary conserved current.

2.  One needs a boundary term like ( 5.3.93 ) such that: 1) divergences
    of the action are countered, 2) @xmath appears as a source in the
    variational principle (( 5.3.3 )) of the renormalized action.

3.  After the previous two steps, the expected Ward identities are
    recovered in ( 5.4.98 ).

As in [ 11 ] , we can obtain directly the Goldstone boson pole in the
purely spontaneous case from ( 5.4.96 ) and ( 5.4.97 ). In momentum
space, relativistic invariance and the Ward identity force the mixed
correlator to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

displaying the expected massless pole. Furthermore when turning on
@xmath , one can argue that @xmath has to have a pole with a mass square
proportional to @xmath . Hence also @xmath has a massless pole in the
@xmath limit. We will not repeat these steps here because they are
clearly independent of the dimension of space-time. The Coleman theorem
kicks in only after one considers (perturbative) quantum corrections due
to the massless particle. Clearly holography does not capture such
quantum corrections, which we then assume to be suppressed by the large
@xmath limit.

In the following section, in order to cover all possibilities (namely,
all scalar operator dimensions between @xmath and @xmath ), we will
briefly perform alternative quantization also in the scalar sector.
Moreover, this will allow us to work out an analytic expression for
@xmath for a specific value of the dimension of the dual boundary
operator.

### 5.5 Alternative quantization of the scalar. Analytic Goldstone boson

Here, as we did for the vector field, the goal is to move the sources to
the subleading terms for the scalar as well. That is, we are interested
in considering @xmath as the sources.

In order to change the boundary conditions we should consider a Legendre
transformation of the scalar counterterm ( 5.3.78 ), that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.100)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

Then the following combination is free from scalar divergences,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.5.101)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

and @xmath and @xmath have opposite meanings with respect to ( 5.3.79 ).
We can verify by the variational principle that indeed the sources and
VEV’s are switched. If we take the expression ( 5.3.80 ) and subtract
the variation of the present counterterm, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.5.102)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

as desired.

Then we use the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) to remove the vector divergences
as well, and we get the renormalized action where both the vector and
the scalar are in the alternative quantization:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We remark that, since now the purely spontaneous breaking occurs for
@xmath , the two counterterms ( 5.3.2 ), ( 5.3.89 ) are now well behaved
for the purely spontaneous case, whereas they are singular for the
purely explicit one. Since we do not expect any obstruction for explicit
symmetry breaking specific to two dimensions, this confirms that the
counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) is the correct one, while it is the ordinary
quantization for the vector which is problematic.

If we now express the VEV’s in terms of the gauge-invariant sources in
the following way:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

(where the @xmath ’s are just the reciprocals of the @xmath ’s), we can
rewrite the renormalized action uniquely in terms of the sources,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.105)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

From this renormalized action we can retrieve Ward identities that are
completely equivalent to those in ( 5.4.98 ), with inverted roles for
@xmath and @xmath (and @xmath going into @xmath ).

To conclude the discussion, we would like to provide an explicit
expression for the two-point correlator of @xmath , where the massless
Goldstone pole should be found. For @xmath , that in alternative
quantization corresponds to purely spontaneous breaking, and @xmath ,
corresponding to the dimension of the boundary operator equal to @xmath
, the equation of motion ( 5.3.71 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . This equation can be analytically solved, and, if we
impose boundary conditions such that the solution is not exploding in
the deep bulk, we obtain the following well-behaved function

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the Tricomi’s hypergeometric function.

From the constraint ( 5.3.69 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the constant term in the small @xmath expansion.
Similarly, from the equation of motion ( 5.3.71 ) we can express the
gauge invariant combination involving @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then we can derive the final expression for the correlator:

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.110)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, and @xmath is the
di-gamma function. Using the expansion @xmath for large @xmath , one
verifies that both the linear term @xmath and the logarithmic term
@xmath in the numerator of the equation above cancel in the @xmath
limit. In this way, the low energy behavior of this correlator exhibits
the expected Goldstone massless pole, namely

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We have thus confirmed the presence of the Goldstone boson, in addition
to the constraints imposed by the Ward identities.

### 5.6 Discussion

We have verified from the holographic point of view that in the strict
large @xmath limit spontaneous symmetry breaking can occur in two
dimensions [ 207 ] . Indeed, considering the minimal AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath setup in which symmetry breaking can be produced, we have
retrieved the canonical Ward identities ( 5.4.98 ) as they appear in
higher dimensions [ 11 ] . Nevertheless, the way to get this result
involves subtleties and peculiarities which are specific to two
dimensions. The most crucial one is that we have to renormalize the
gauge field in the alternative quantization, if we want it to properly
source a conserved current and then recover the correct Ward identities
for the breaking of a global symmetry on the boundary.

We can consider quantum corrections to the result that we have obtained,
taking inspiration from [ 9 ] , and compute a bulk tadpole correction to
the scalar profile. It would presumably reproduce the infrared
divergence which is responsible for preventing the vacuum expectation
value, mirroring a similar field theory computation. Such a quantum
effect, by the holographic correspondence, is equivalent to a @xmath
correction in the boundary theory.

On the other hand, we can think of the question directly in field
theory, considering the canonical example of a complex scalar field with
a Mexican-hat potential, as in [ 158 ] . In @xmath dimensions, the large
quantum fluctuations of the phase would prevent the selection of a
specific ground state around the circle at the minimum of the potential.
However, if we add an arbitrarily small (but finite) explicit breaking,
this would select a particular ground state, and act as a regulator for
the infra-red divergence, making such vacuum stable under quantum
fluctuations. Hence, for explicit breaking parametrically smaller than
the spontaneous one, we expect (even at finite @xmath ) a mode that is
hierarchically lighter than the rest of the spectrum, and whose mass is
linear in the explicit breaking parameter, in accordance with the
renowned Gell-Mann–Oakes–Renner relation [ 87 ] . So, if there are no
Goldstone bosons in two dimensions, there definitely should be
pseudo-Goldstone bosons in two dimensions, and we have just provided a
holographic description of the latter.

## Chapter 6 Summary and conclusions

In the present thesis we have the long term motivation of testing and
extending the domain of applicability of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
This goal has been made concrete in three different problems, which we
summarize alongside with the main results in the following pages.

Quantum Theory describes our most essential principles of the very small
scales, roughly ranging from molecular and condensed matter to
elementary particles. Its success in explaining and predicting physical
phenomena is simply extraordinary. The other great revolution of early
XX century was the General theory of Relativity, that explains gravity
but has profound conceptual implications for the rest of Physics. One
can naively apply on it the principles of Quantum Mechanics seeking a
Quantum description of Gravity but the resulting theory is not
renormalizable. Indeed, finding a consistent Quantum Theory of gravity,
and experimentally testing it, is one of the most relevant problems of
current Fundamental Physics.

The most developed candidate to reach that goal is string theory. After
more than 20 years of extensive work on it, the AdS/CFT correspondence
(a.k.a. holography, holographic duality and gauge/gravity
correspondence) was discovered by Maldacena in 1997. In its most
frequent use, it states the equivalence of QFT at large @xmath and
strong coupling with classical gravity theories in AdS. This means that
it is possible to compute strongly coupled QFT quantities (typically
very hard) using weakly coupled classical gravity. It is in the context
of the correspondence where this thesis’ research was done.

### 6.1 AdS to dS phase transition in higher curvature gravity

We have examined the role of higher curvature gravity corrections on
thermal phase transitions between AdS and dS geometries. Apart from the
natural gravitational interest, this research may be eventually helpful
to clarify the holographic correspondence in the case of asymptotically
dS geometries.

Higher curvature corrections to gravity are studied for a variety of
reasons: as string theory (or any other high energy gravity theory) low
energy effective actions, to test their cosmological effects, from a
purely classical gravitation point of view, to explore their holographic
meaning, etcetera. Among those theories, Lovelock family have some
special properties. We have focused on the simplest non-GR case of the
Lovelock family, known as Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity. The potential
holographic relevance of the problem is that we have a dynamical process
in which the initial state is asymptotically AdS while after some time a
dS cosmological horizon is formed.

Despite our emphasis in higher curvature theories, gravitational phase
transitions can also happen in GR; for example, the well known
Hawking-Page transition [ 106 ] . Furthermore, it is certainly possible
for a phase transition in GR to change spacetime asymptotics. A simple
way is the transition between the different non-degenerated minima of a
scalar potential. [ 56 ] . Normally, these transitions end in AdS
vacuum, while in our case it ends in a dS one.

What is specific of higher curvature corrections is that the transitions
can happen between asymptotics of different curvature radius even in the
absence of matter [ 43 ] . This process is mediated by bubble
nucleation. The interior of such bubbles contains a solution with the
geometry of the final vacuum (dS in our case) and it is matched to an
exterior solution with the initial asymptotics (AdS in our example) with
appropriate junction conditions. When the thermalon -euclidean section
of the static bubble- has lower free energy than the initial solution,
bubble nucleation is triggered. The new configuration is dynamically
unstable, thereby it will either collapse or expand. The last
possibility will give rise to the desired change in the asymptotics. Let
us remark that the metric is continuous at the junction but the
derivatives are not; despite it such solution must be considered as a
legitimate competing saddle in the euclidean path integral approximation
to free energy [ 43 ] .

Our main result is a phase transition from thermal AdS to the formation
of dS cosmological horizon in Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity. The
transition happens through the proliferation of bubbles hosting dS black
holes in their interior. No matter fields are required to match both
sides of the bubble due to the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet term. For other
higher curvature corrections we generically expect a similar phenomenon.
The transition becomes disfavored from a maximum value of the higher
curvature coupling @xmath , although thermal fluctuations could trigger
them given enough time. In previous studies of AdS to AdS transitions
was favored beyond a critical temperature for all @xmath .

It is important to remind the limitations of our analysis. The main one
is the Boulware-Deser instability of the initial AdS vacuum, meaning
that the graviton field presents ghosts around that vacuum. Nevertheless
it is easy to find higher order Lovelock theories having two different
stable Boulware-Deser vacua, although there are many additional
technical complications to compute the bubble free energy. Such analysis
was carried out in fourth order Lovelock by the authors of [ 43 ] , and
the transition between two AdS healthy vacua was shown to take place. We
also conjecture that the same kind of thermalon mediated phase
transitions are generic in higher curvature theories, not exclusively in
Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet or Lovelock.

There are other limitations deserving some comments. In [ 44 ] , the
quadratic theories of gravity have been found to display causality
violation, rendering them inconsistent at least in this respect.
Notably, it was found in [ 59 ] that for certain string-brane scattering
the massless modes approximation is inconsistent. However, if the full
stringy structure (in particular the Regge behaviour) is taken into
account the causality violating effects found in [ 44 ] are avoided.
Nevertheless, the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet theories still remain acceptable
models for many purposes, for example the study of hydrodynamics.
Another point of concern, related to the previous one and that is
actually present in part of our work, is that for small @xmath the
curvature of one of the vacua goes as @xmath , and from a stringy point
of view, curvature corrections of order higher than quadratic should be
necessary.

The main open question concerning the transitions is clearly their
potential holographic meaning, which remains unknown to us. A first step
may be to analyze the observables of the static bubble configuration,
for example the Wilson loop at large enough distances so that the string
penetrates the bubble or even the horizon. A second stage would be the
computation of similar observables during the expansion of the bubble,
along the lines of, for example, [ 146 ] . Finally, one may try to study
the dS geometry in which the transition ends, following the research
line of dS/CFT correspondence started by Strominger in 2001 [ 193 ] .

### 6.2 Deformation of KW CFT and new AdS@xmath backgrounds via
non-Abelian T-duality

We found new solutions of Supergravity using non-Abelian T-duality, a
generating technique based on string theory. Such new solutions
represent supersymmetric RG flows from four to two dimensions, and we
investigate the effects of the Non-Abelian T-duality on the holographic
observables. The problem also presents a (super)gravitational
motivation, as the generated solutions can fall outside known
classifications, as it happens in [ 154 ] . Apart from being interesting
in themselves, the new field theories may help to understand the effect
of non-Abelian duality on the string theory sigma model, its
supergravity approximation and the interplay with holographic
correspondence.

There are deformations of Klebanov-Witten (KW) background AdS @xmath T
@xmath flowing to an AdS @xmath factor in the IR. We generated new
examples applying non-Abelian T-duality on them. After it, we compared
the holographic observables of the generated solutions with those of the
previously known deformations. The new dual field theories seem to be
related to long linear quiver gauge theories. This paragraph summarizes
the whole research.

To be more detailed, we have considered two kinds of geometries on which
NATD is applied. The first is given by the duals of some 4d QFT placed
on a manifold @xmath ; in particular an @xmath SUSY flow with @xmath and
non-SUSY fixed points with @xmath ; we called them ’twisted solutions’.
The second kind is the deformation of KW found by Donos and Gauntlett in
[ 66 ] , that we refer to as the Donos-Gauntlett (DG) solution. This
last background was chosen as seed of the generating technique
essentially for three reasons: it is a deformation of KW flowing to AdS
@xmath , it is supersymmetric and can be related by two Abelian
T-dualities to AdS @xmath S @xmath S @xmath S @xmath . This last
background is the near horizon limit of D1-D5 brane intersection and
some discussion of its possible field theory dual can be found in [ 198
] .

The solutions generated that are T-dual to a flow are also RG flows from
AdS @xmath to an AdS @xmath factor. They are new type IIA SUGRA
backgrounds and preserve SUSY and regularity. By construction very
non-trivial fields and coordinate dependence appear. On one of the new
geometries, we have also performed Abelian T-duality after the
non-Abelian one. Furthermore we have lifted the IIA solutions to 11D
SUGRA. The main limitation of the NATD procedure is that the generating
technique does not give a prescription on the coordinate ranges for the
new background, and therefore its global properties are not determined a
priori. Nevertheless, recent progress on the subject has given a
non-trivial interpretation of the unknown ranges based on the
holographic field theory [ 156 ] .

Concerning the observables dual to the new geometries, we have analyzed
Page charges, c-function, entanglement entropy (EE) on a strip and a
rectangular Wilson loop (WL) energy before and after applying NATD. The
main results have been:

1.  The new background’s dual field theories seems closely related to an
    infinitely long linear quiver gauge theory. The relation between
    central charge and Page charges is @xmath , instead of the standard
    quadratic in @xmath . Such dependence suggests a relation with long
    linear quivers, which would imply that @xmath is measuring the
    number of D4- and NS5-branes. The picture that emerges is that of a
    2-d CFT living on the intersection of D2- , D6- and NS5-branes, with
    induced D4 charge every time an NS-brane is crossed.

2.  Quark-antiquark Wilson loop energy as a function of distance is
    trivially invariant. c-function and EE in terms of the energy scale
    and strip width, respectively, are non-trivially invariant all along
    the RG flow up to a constant factor which depends on the range of
    dual coordinates.

The relation to long linear quiver gauge theories was quickly sharpened
in [ 159 ] and the effect of NATD on the dual field theory significantly
clarified in [ 156 , 153 , 155 ] . The change of the dual field theory
caused by the duality at the level of SUGRA does not mean automatically
that NATD is not a duality of the full (perturbative) string theory,
although it points to it, as explained in [ 128 ] . Its authors proposed
as a motivation of their work to elucidate whether NATD is a string
duality or not by the examination of its effects on the meson spectrum.
They conjecture that the difference before and after NATD they found may
be caused either by the presence of a boundary in the sigma-model field
theory or due to finite @xmath or finite ’t Hooft coupling effects.
Finally, they propose to directly study the string theory on the
non-Abelian T-dual, specifically taking the pp-wave limit and using the
formalism initiated in [ 22 ] .

### 6.3 Holographic Ward identities in 1+1 QFT

We have studied the extension of the holographic renormalization
procedure to reproduce the field theoretic Ward identities of
spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1 holographic superconductor. The
result could be of interest for applications to one-dimensional
condensed matter systems. Another motivation is to know if the bottom up
model we use behaves in physically sensible manner for this low
dimension. A final goal is to explore what is specific of three
dimensional bulk theory and what are its implications for the QFT side.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) is important in High Energy Physics
as well as in Condensed Matter. A key result about it is the Goldstone
theorem: there is a massless boson (called Goldstone boson) for every
given generator whose symmetry is spontaneously broken. The properties
of symmetry breaking are reflected on the Ward identities: the one point
function signals SSB and the two point spectrum encodes the Goldstone
bosons. The powerful result of Goldstone does not apply to 1+1 QFT: at
finite @xmath SSB and Goldstone bosons are not possible (Coleman
theorem), although the restriction disappears at large @xmath .

Holographically, symmetry breaking has been studied in several previous
works to explore the holographic dictionary and apply it to the less
understood case of symmetry breaking at strong coupling. Our purpose is
to holographically derive the Ward identities corresponding to symmetry
breaking in a 1+1 QFT. The action in the gravity side is that of the
holographic superconductor; we will break its @xmath gauge symmetry. In
2+1 bulk the holographic description of conserved current requires
alternative quantization for the @xmath vector field @xmath . This
happens because a massless vector field saturates the BF bound in 2+1
dimensions; this is the particular way in which the peculiarities of
three dimensional bulk are reflected on the Ward identities holographic
computation. Once we applied alternative quantization, the higher
dimensional field-theoretic Ward identities are correctly recovered.
Furthermore, we found an analytic Goldstone boson pole for the
spontaneous breaking case; this is not in contradiction with Coleman
theorem since our use of holography corresponds to large @xmath .

The result above is an extension of previous ones on Ward Identities and
analytic Goldstone bosons to 1+1 CFT [ 11 ] . Concerning the goal of
learning about the applicability of the correspondence, we can draw two
lessons. The first is that we can interpret the quantitative holographic
reproduction of standard field-theoretic Ward identities in @xmath as
further evidence of the broad applicability of AdS/CFT beyond the
standard dimension @xmath . Our result is far from being the first
concerning @xmath , but we have given additional evidence.

The second lesson coming from our study is on whether gravitational
bottom-up models do have sensible field theories duals. It must be noted
that the holographic superconductor model can be embedded into string
theory for some values of the parameters in @xmath [ 86 ] and @xmath [
98 ] . For a particular bottom-up case presented in [ 11 ] , it was
possible to quantitatively reproduce GMOR relations and Goldstone boson
poles. In our case, it is difficult to assure with total certainty that
our action cannot be embedded in SUGRA, although it seems unlikely.
Despite it, the quantitative predictions for the Goldstone boson pole
were quantitatively correct.

We have investigated gravitational phase transitions, non-Abelian
T-duality and symmetry breaking in the context of AdS/CFT to test and
extend its applicability. All of the previous topics remain worthy of
further investigation on the open questions explained above. We also
want to mention some additional lines of research. For example the
generation of new solutions, in particular time dependent ones, via
combination of Abelian and non-Abelian dualities, and possibly other
generating techniques. A particularly interesting project is to apply
the Abelian transformation to the theories found in [ 165 ] . This work
is in progress, and the result about invariance of BH entropy will be
published soon [ 70 ] . Another possibility for dualities in the SUGRA
limit is the study of more field theory observables like baryon vertex,
giant gravitons and couplings defined by probe branes, as suggested in [
128 ] .

Another interesting test of the conjecture would be to extend our result
about symmetry breaking to the finite @xmath holography. In [ 9 ] the
thermal field theory analog of Coleman theorem was also tested
successfully for a holographic superconductor both for the large @xmath
limit and leading @xmath corrections. It should be possible to repeat
their quantum gravity analysis in our setup to confirm or disproof the
vanishing VEV expected for finite @xmath .

Clearly, many question remain open about what can be described via
AdS/CFT and the precise form of the correspondence. Although we have
learned many non-trivial lessons in the last 20 years, a more precise
map between bulk and boundary theories is only starting to to be
developed, for example in the recent efforts about bulk reconstruction.
This is expected to clarify in more detail how geometry emerges from
field theory. The literature about quantum gravity corrections to the
gravity side of the duality is still limited in comparison to the
classical limit. The extensions to asymptotically dS and flat spaces are
much less common than the AdS case. The same can be said about the
correspondence at weak coupling with respect to the standard infinitely
strong limit. There are many other relevant questions out of this short
list. Clearly, AdS/CFT will remain a very active field of research in
the next few years.
