This thesis is about the study of Diophantine equations involving binary
recurrent sequences with arithmetic functions. Various Diophantine problems are
investigated and new results are found out of this study. Firstly, we study
several questions concerning the intersection between two classes of
non-degenerate binary recurrence sequences and provide, whenever possible,
effective bounds on the largest member of this intersection. Our main study
concerns Diophantine equations of the form $\varphi(|au_n |)=|bv_m|,$ where
$\varphi$ is the Euler totient function, $\{u_n\}_{n\geq 0}$ and
$\{v_m\}_{m\geq 0}$ are two non-degenerate binary recurrence sequences and
$a,b$ some positive integers. More precisely, we study problems involving
members of the recurrent sequences being rep-digits, Lehmer numbers, whose
Euler's function remain in the same sequence. We particularly study the case
when $\{u_n\}_{n\geq 0}$ is the Fibonacci sequence $\{F_n\}_{n\geq 0}$, the
Lucas sequences $\{L_n\}_{n\geq 0}$ or the Pell sequence $\{P_n\}_{n\geq 0}$
and its companion $\{Q_n\}_{n\geq 0}$. Secondly, we look of Lehmer's conjecture
on some recurrence sequences. Recall that a composite number $N$ is said to be
Lehmer if $\varphi(N)\mid N-1$. We prove that there is no Lehmer number neither
in the Lucas sequence $\{L_n\}_{n\geq 0}$ nor in the Pell sequence
$\{P_n\}_{n\geq 0}$. The main tools used in this thesis are lower bounds for
linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers, the so-called Baker-Davenport
reduction method, continued fractions, elementary estimates from the theory of
prime numbers and sieve methods.