## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Introduction

In many practical situations involving a propagating flame,
inhomogeneities are present in the mixture through which the flame
propagates. These inhomogeneities can be caused by fluctuations or
stratifications in the temperature, the composition or the flow field .
Understanding the effects of such inhomogeneities on the propagation and
stability of laminar flames in simple configurations is crucial to
provide a platform for further investigations that take into account
more complex aspects such as turbulence. Similarly, since in most
applications combustion generates large amounts of heat and occurs in a
gravitational field, it is vital to understand the combined effects of
thermal expansion and buoyancy on flame propagation and stability in
such simple situations.

The aim of this thesis is to investigate the combined effect of thermal
expansion and buoyancy on the propagation and stability of flames
propagating through inhomogeneous mixtures. The inhomogeneity is
prescribed in the unburned gas, into which the flame propagates, in one
of two ways: either a) as a non-uniform flow field against which a
premixed flame propagates, or b) as a stratification in the
concentrations of the fuel and oxidiser, which leads to the propagation
of a triple flame. The simple configuration considered throughout the
thesis is a channel with rigid walls that are impermeable to the fluid.
We begin with a brief literature review that summarises the work done in
the areas relevant to each chapter of the thesis. More thorough reviews
and descriptions of further areas of relevance to each chapter are
contained within the chapters themselves and the papers by Pearce and
Daou [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] , on which much of this thesis is based.

The coupling between the flame and the flow is modelled with the
Navier–Stokes equations, coupled to equations for the temperature and
the mass fractions of fuel and oxidiser, with a one-step Arrenhius
reaction. A short derivation of the governing equations is given in §
1.2 of this chapter. Before discussing work that has been undertaken
using these governing equations, it is instructive to first note a
simplification that has been used in many studies, known as the constant
density approximation . This approximation neglects the effect of the
flame on the flow by assuming that the density of the fluid is constant.
The effect of the flow on the flame is taken into account through the
advection term in the temperature and mass fraction equations, where the
flow can be prescribed. The approximation has been justified
asymptotically from the governing equations of combustion theory in the
limit of weak heat release in [ 4 ] . Decoupling the temperature and
mass fraction equations from the Navier–Stokes equations considerably
simplifies combustion problems and has been useful for investigating,
for example, the so-called thermo-diffusive [ 5 ] instabilities in
combustion, which arise due to differences in the rate of transport of
fuel and oxidiser. Although we are not concerned with such instabilities
in this thesis, we occasionally utilise the constant density
approximation, either for comparison of results to help understand the
effects of thermal expansion, or in order to investigate an effect that
arises from combustion without having to account for the complex
interactions brought about by the effect of the flame on the fluid
through which it propagates.

Another significant simplification of the governing equations of
combustion was utilised by Darrieus and Landau in their early studies on
the stability of a planar premixed flame [ 6 , 7 ] . These studies took
the effect of the flame on the flow into account through thermal
expansion but ignored the transport of temperature and mass fractions.
Darrieus and Landau found using this approximation that a planar flame
should always be unstable due to the difference in density across the
flame. Planar flames can, however, be observed in the laboratory; the
analysis of Darrieus and Landau fails at short wavelengths, where
transport processes inside the flame influence the flame structure and
velocity [ 8 ] . The hydrodynamic or Darrieus–Landau instability of
premixed flames has been the focus of several studies, as reviewed in [
9 ] .

Later studies investigated the effects of a full coupling between the
Navier–Stokes and the transport equations on the propagation speed and
stability of premixed flames in the limit of infinite activation energy
and an infinitely thin flame front [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ] . These
studies provided the necessary correction terms to the dispersion
relation derived by Darrieus and Landau, finding that planar premixed
flames can indeed be stable. Since the aforementioned studies, there has
been a significant amount of work investigating the effects of thermal
expansion on the propagation and stability of thin flames in both
laminar and turbulent regimes (see e.g. the reviews given in [ 8 , 9 ,
15 ] ).

There has been significantly less work, however, on thick flames, which
correspond to flames in relatively narrow channels. These are the focus
of Chapter 2 of this thesis. Since the development of a suitable
analytical methodology based on a thick flame asymptotic limit by Daou
et al. [ 16 ] , studies on thick flames in the constant density
approximation have addressed the effect of heat loss [ 16 , 17 ] , the
effect of nonunity Lewis numbers [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] and the influence of
oscillatory flow [ 21 ] . More recently, the influence of thermal
expansion on thick flames has been investigated [ 22 , 23 ] under
different distinguished limits of the governing parameters. In Chapter 2
, which is based on work by Pearce and Daou [ 3 ] , we extend the
knowledge of premixed flame propagation by investigating thick premixed
flames subject to the effects of thermal expansion in cases where the
prescribed flow against which the flame propagates has infinitely large
amplitude. The results of the analysis in this distinguished limit are
relevant to several important topics of research, as will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 2 .

One such topic of interest is the so-called bending effect of turbulent
combustion. The bending effect is observed experimentally when the
effective flame speed @xmath of a premixed flame is plotted versus the
turbulence intensity [ 24 ] . In Chapter 3 we provide a discussion of
the bending effect in laminar premixed flames and explain how this
relates to turbulent combustion. The main motivation in this chapter is
to describe the relevance of asymptotic results in the thick flame
asymptotic limit to the bending effect.

As well as investigating the effect of inhomogeneities in the flow on
premixed flames, in this thesis we also investigate combustion in
inhomogeneous mixtures of fuel and oxidiser, in the same channel
configuration as the one utilised in Chapters 2 and 3 . Premixed flames
can still propagate through mixtures with small fluctuations in the
temperature or the concentrations of fuel and oxidiser. There have been
several studies investigating how such fluctuations affect the
propagation and stability of premixed flames (see [ 25 ] and the
references therein). However, if the fuel and oxidiser are stratified, a
different structure known as a triple flame propagates through the
mixture. Triple flames consist of a fuel-rich premixed branch, a
fuel-lean premixed branch and a trailing diffusion flame.

Triple flames were first identified experimentally by Phillips [ 26 ] .
Initial theoretical investigations were carried out by Ohki and Tsuge [
27 ] , followed by Dold and collaborators [ 28 , 29 ] . Much research
has focused on triple flames and their properties since, mostly
concerning triple flames in the constant density approximation (see the
review papers [ 30 ] and [ 31 ] ). The first work to investigate the
effects of thermal expansion on triple flames was a mainly numerical
study by Ruetsch et al. [ 32 ] . There have been several studies since
that have investigated the effects of thermal expansion on triple flames
[ 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 ] , with a key result being the increase in triple
flame speed due to thermal expansion above that of the planar premixed
flame, when the flame-front is thin (corresponding to a wide channel).

One aspect of triple flames that is not very well understood is the
effect of buoyancy on their propagation and stability. Triple flames
propagating in a direction parallel to the direction of gravity have
been investigated numerically and experimentally in [ 37 , 38 , 39 , 40
] . It was found that the propagation speed of a triple flame
propagating downwards is decreased in comparison to that of a triple
flame in the absence of gravity. The change in the propagation speed was
explained in [ 39 ] as being due to an increase in the acceleration of
the gas ahead of the triple flame leading edge, caused by buoyancy.
Conversely, upward propagation leads to an increase in the propagation
speed. It seems, however, that no prior dedicated studies have been
undertaken on triple flames propagating in a direction perpendicular to
gravity. In this thesis we provide such a study.

In order to investigate the effect of buoyancy on a triple flame, it is
imperative to first understand this effect on the “strongly burning”
diffusion flame, which forms one of the triple flame’s branches;
steadily propagating triple flames are only expected for parameter
values where a planar diffusion flame exists and is stable. For this
reason Chapter 4 of this thesis contains a stability analysis of a
horizontal planar diffusion flame, subject to the combined effect of
thermal expansion and gravity. The chapter is based on work by Pearce
and Daou [ 2 ] , which seems to be the first study in the literature to
investigate the instability of a planar diffusion flame due to
buoyancy-driven convection.

In Chapter 5 we move on to investigate the combined effect of thermal
expansion and gravity on triple flames steadily propagating
perpendicular to the direction of gravity, using the results of Chapter
4 to concentrate on areas in parameter space where the planar diffusion
flame is stable. The original published work by Pearce and Daou [ 1 ]
seems to be the first dedicated study of this aspect of triple flame
behaviour.

To complete our investigation of the combined effect of thermal
expansion and gravity on triple flames, in Chapter 6 we study the
transient behaviour of triple flames from their initiation in contexts
where the underlying planar diffusion flame is either stable or
unstable. Included in this study is an investigation of the energy
required for initiation of triple flames from a two-dimensional ignition
kernel. Steady, non-propagating, two-dimensional solutions representing
“flame tubes” are determined; their thermal energy is used to define a
minimum ignition energy for the two-dimensional triple flame in the
mixing layer. Similar axisymmetric structures representing inhomogeneous
flame balls [ 41 , 42 ] , flame disks [ 43 ] and flame isolas [ 44 ]
have previously been identified and linked to the ignition of
axisymmetric flames in the mixing layer, but to our understanding, no
such study has yet been performed for two-dimensional triple flames in
the mixing layer.

The thesis is structured as follows. The remainder of the current
chapter is given to a theoretical background of mathematical combustion,
including the derivation of the governing equations and some quantities
used for scaling throughout the thesis. Chapter 2 contains a study of
the effects of thermal expansion on premixed flames propagating through
a narrow channel against a parallel flow of large intensity. Chapter 3
focuses on the bending effect of laminar premixed flames. Chapter 4
consists of an investigation of the instability of a planar diffusion
flame, caused by buoyancy-driven convection. Chapter 5 discusses the
behaviour of steadily propagating triple flames under the combined
effect of buoyancy and thermal expansion. Chapter 6 presents a study of
two-dimensional triple flame initiation in mixing layers. Finally, we
end the thesis with conclusions and recommendations for further study in
Chapter 7 .

### 1.2 Theoretical background

#### 1.2.1 Governing equations

In this section we provide the governing equations of combustion theory,
with an overview of their derivation from a continuum mechanics
perspective. Expanded versions of the derivation (including the
derivation of the transport equations using the kinetic theory of gases)
can be found in [ 45 ] and [ 46 ] . The derivation of the general
governing equations of continuum mechanics can be found in [ 47 ] . A
general introduction to fluid dynamics, including a derivation of the
Navier–Stokes equations, is given in [ 48 ] .

Consider a fixed control volume @xmath , depicted in figure 1.1 . The
volume is bounded by a control surface @xmath with outer unit normal
@xmath . A bulk velocity @xmath passes through the volume. Note that the
mass-weighted @xmath is the resultant of the individual velocities
@xmath of the @xmath individual species, so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the density of each species. Then the molecular
diffusion velocity @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equations ( 1.1 ) and ( 1.2 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, consider some extensive property @xmath , whose magnitude depends
on the size of the control volume @xmath . Then a quantity @xmath ,
whose magnitude does not depend on the size of @xmath , can be
considered to be the “density” of @xmath per unit volume of the fluid.
The two quantities can be related by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Suppose the amount of @xmath changes due to external influences at a
rate given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an effective density of source strength. The rate of
change of @xmath is given by the amount of @xmath lost through the
surface @xmath plus the increase of @xmath associated with external
influences [ 48 ] . This statement may be written mathematically as

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.6)
  -- -- -- -------

Rearranging and applying the divergence theorem and Leibniz’s rule to (
1.6 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the fact that @xmath is fixed. The left hand side of
( 1.7 ) is referred to as the material time derivative of @xmath [ 47 ]
. Equation ( 1.7 ) will now be used to derive the conservation equations
for mass, momentum, energy and the concentration of species.

##### Conservation of mass

Let @xmath be the total mass @xmath of the fluid. Then @xmath is the
mass density @xmath of the fluid. Since matter can neither be created
nor destroyed, the quantity ( 1.5 ) can be set to zero in this case.
Then equation ( 1.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, since the control volume @xmath is arbitrary,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 1.8 ) is the continuity equation .

##### Conservation of momentum

Let @xmath be the momentum of the flow, @xmath . Then @xmath is the
momentum flux @xmath . In this case the material time derivative ( 1.7 )
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the resultant force acting on the fluid. This follows
from Newton’s second law, which states that the force acting on the
fluid is equal to the rate of change of the fluid’s momentum. We can
split the resultant force @xmath into two parts: the force acting on the
surface of @xmath , represented by the stress tensor @xmath , and the
resultant of the body forces @xmath per unit mass, acting on the @xmath
th species [ 45 , 47 , 46 , 48 ] . The surface force is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the divergence theorem. Thus, equation ( 1.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dyadic tensor. Using equation ( 1.8 ) and the fact
that @xmath is arbitrary, we can rewrite equation ( 1.10 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a viscous Newtonian fluid the stress tensor @xmath can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.12)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the pressure, @xmath is the dynamic viscosity and @xmath
is the unit tensor. This form of the stress tensor for fluids, along
with physical descriptions of the meaning of each term, is discussed in
[ 47 ] and [ 48 ] .

We assume the only external body force acting on the fluid is gravity.
Since gravitational acceleration is the same for all species this leads
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, if the viscosity @xmath does not depend on the temperature of
the fluid, which we assume for simplicity throughout this thesis, we
have, using ( 1.11 ), ( 1.12 ) and ( 1.13 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 1.14 ) is referred to as the Navier–Stokes equation .

##### Conservation of species

Let @xmath be the mass @xmath of the @xmath th species. Then @xmath is
the density @xmath of the @xmath th species. The mass of the @xmath th
species inside @xmath can be changed either as a result of a chemical
reaction, with rate of production @xmath of the @xmath th species per
unit volume, or due to diffusion across @xmath . The magnitude of this
diffusive transport is proportional to the mass flux @xmath of the
molecular random motion [ 46 ] and can be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the divergence theorem. In this case the quantity ( 1.5 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that, using the fact that @xmath is arbitrary, equation ( 1.7 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, defining the mass fraction of the @xmath th species as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using equation ( 1.8 ), we can write equation ( 1.16 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, assuming Fick’s law (see [ 45 ] or [ 46 ] for a derivation in
this context), which states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the diffusion coefficient of the @xmath th species, we
can write equation ( 1.18 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have assumed @xmath is constant. We will discuss the form of the
reaction term @xmath later.

##### Conservation of energy

Let @xmath be the total energy of the material inside @xmath . The total
energy can be written as @xmath , where @xmath is the kinetic energy and
@xmath is the internal energy [ 47 ] . In this case @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the internal energy density and the term on the right
hand side defines the kinetic energy of the fluid. The energy of the
fluid inside @xmath can be changed by work done by the surface or body
forces, or by energy entering @xmath through the boundary @xmath ; we
ignore radiative heat transfer. Thus equation ( 1.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

is due to the energy flux @xmath across @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the work done by the surface forces acting on @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the work done by the body forces acting on each species in @xmath ,
which are moving at @xmath . Note that the divergence theorem was used
in rewriting the above equations. Using equations ( 1.21 )–( 1.24 ) and
the fact that @xmath is arbitrary leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, taking the scalar product of equation ( 1.11 ) with @xmath and
subtracting from ( 1.25 ), we obtain a simpler form of the energy
conservation equation, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath indicates that the two tensors are to be
contracted twice to form a scalar [ 45 ] . We now make several
assumptions to simplify the energy conservation equation ( 1.26 ).
Firstly, we define the enthalpy @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Secondly, from ( 1.12 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assume the viscous dissipation [ 48 ] term @xmath , with @xmath
defined in ( 1.12 ), takes the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is justifiable for low speed, subsonic flows [ 46 ] . Thirdly, we
assume the energy flux @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term on the right hand side results from Fourier’s law
of heat conduction, and the second term is due to partial enthalpy
transport by diffusion [ 46 ] ; for simplicity, we assume the thermal
conductivity @xmath is constant. In equation ( 1.30 ) the quantities
@xmath relate to the enthalpy @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, if the body force is gravity, using ( 1.3 ) and ( 1.13 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equations ( 1.8 ) and ( 1.26 ), the assumptions ( 1.27 )–( 1.32 ),
together with the assumption that the process is isobaric, lead to the
enthalpy equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we assume the caloric equation of state [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature and @xmath and @xmath are the reference
temperature and enthalpies, respectively. Here we have assumed that each
species has the same constant specific heat capacity @xmath . Using (
1.20 ), ( 1.31 ) and ( 1.34 ), equation ( 1.33 ) can be written in terms
of the temperature as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the temperature change due to chemical reactions given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath can also be written in terms of the thermal diffusivity
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have assumed @xmath is constant.

##### Chemical reactions

In this section we prescribe the form of the chemical reaction terms
@xmath in equations ( 1.20 ) and ( 1.36 ). Reactions in combustion
applications can be extremely complicated, consisting of multi-step
reactions of many different species. A summary of common reaction
mechanisms used in mathematical modelling of combustion is given in [ 46
] . Here we assume a simple, one-step reaction between fuel F and
oxidiser O

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the amount of fuel and oxidiser in the
reaction, respectively, and @xmath denotes the heat released in the
reaction. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the Arrenhius law [ 50 ] assumed for the global reaction rate
@xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the fuel
mass fraction, the oxidiser mass fraction, the universal gas constant,
the temperature, the pre-exponential factor and the activation energy of
the reaction, respectively. Then the temperature change due to chemical
reactions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, substituting the relations ( 1.39 )–( 1.42 ) into the equations (
1.20 ) and ( 1.35 ) and rescaling the mass fractions by @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
     @xmath      (1.44)
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the heat released per unit mass of fuel and @xmath is
the amount of oxidiser consumed per unit mass of fuel, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Equation of state

We complete the set of governing equations by specifying the ideal gas
law equation of state [ 48 , 45 , 46 ] , which gives the pressure in
terms of the density, the temperature and the universal gas constant
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Low Mach number approximation

To finish the formulation of the governing equations we adopt the low
Mach number approximation, common in flame theory and more rigorously
justified using asymptotic analyses in several studies, such as those by
Rehm and Baum [ 51 ] and Majda and Sethian [ 52 ] . If we assume low
Mach number, the spatial variations in pressure are small. The total
pressure can therefore be split into a background term consisting of
thermodynamic pressure and a perturbational term consisting of
hydrostatic pressure and hydrodynamic pressure (see [ 51 ] ). We define
the hydrodynamic pressure as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the thermodynamic pressure, which we assume to be
constant (see [ 50 , p. 14] ) and given by the equation of state ( 1.46
) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the density in the absence of combustion. @xmath is the
hydrostatic pressure which satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is found by considering ( 1.14 ) in the frozen limit with no flow
(i.e. in hydrostatic equilibrium) and noting that, following from
equation ( 1.47 ), the ambient atmosphere in the absence of heating must
be taken to have constant density @xmath . Subtracting ( 1.48 ) from (
1.14 ) then gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.49)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Mach number (see [ 53 ] ), the perturbational
pressure term can be neglected in the ideal gas equation ( 4.6 ), which
can then be written @xmath or, after considering ( 1.47 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Summary of governing equations

The governing equations ( 1.8 ), ( 1.43 )–( 1.45 ), ( 1.49 ) and ( 1.50
) can now be written together in full:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
     @xmath      (1.52)
     @xmath      (1.53)
     @xmath      (1.54)
     @xmath      (1.55)
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the reaction term @xmath is given by ( 1.40 ). These equations
must be supplemented by suitable initial conditions and boundary
conditions, which depend on the configuration and will be specified in
future chapters.

#### 1.2.2 Planar premixed flame

A fundamental problem in combustion is the propagation of the planar
premixed flame through an unbounded premixed gas. The asymptotic
structure of the planar premixed flame for large activation energies
@xmath is shown in figure 1.2 . Throughout this thesis we will use
several properties of the planar premixed flame as reference quantities,
namely the adiabatic flame temperature @xmath , the flame thickness
@xmath and the propagation velocity @xmath . In this section we derive
expressions for these quantities.

In order to derive such expressions we utilise the well-known technique
of activation energy asymptotics . This technique has been used
effectively in many combustion studies, including generalisations of the
following analysis to more complex situations (see e.g. [ 10 , 11 , 12 ,
13 , 14 ] ). The method relies on the fact that the activation energy of
the reaction is large, which is true in most combustion applications.

The governing equations of a planar premixed flame are given by the
steady, one-dimensional form of equations ( 1.51 )–( 1.56 ). In a frame
of reference attached to the flame-front, these equations become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.57)
     @xmath      (1.58)
     @xmath      (1.59)
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions far upstream as @xmath correspond to a fresh mixture with
unburnt temperature @xmath and mass fractions @xmath and @xmath . Far
downstream as @xmath the conditions correspond to burnt gas where if we
assume a stoichiometric mixture the temperature is adiabatic and the
fuel and oxidiser have been fully consumed. The planar flame speed
@xmath is defined as the speed of the incoming flow at @xmath in the
current frame of reference. The boundary conditions can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density in the fresh mixture and @xmath is the
density under adiabatic conditions. Note that ( 1.57 ) can be integrated
to give @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Planar flame temperature

Multipling equation ( 1.59 ) by @xmath , then integrating from @xmath to
@xmath and adding to the integral of equation ( 1.58 ) from @xmath to
@xmath , gives the adiabatic flame temperature as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

having used the boundary conditions ( 1.61 )–( 1.62 ).

##### Planar flame speed

Using equations ( 1.58 )–( 1.60 ) and ( 1.63 ) with the fact that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are assumed constant, the governing equations for a
planar premixed flame can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.65)
     @xmath      (1.66)
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript @xmath denotes diffusivities in the unburnt gas at
@xmath . These equations can be non-dimensionalised by writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

which after substitution into equations ( 1.65 )-( 1.67 ) and dropping
the superscript gives the non-dimensional governing equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
     @xmath      (1.70)
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have noted that @xmath , based on our assumption that the
mixture is stoichiometric. Substituting ( 1.68 ) into the boundary
conditions ( 1.61 )–( 1.62 ) leads to the non-dimensional boundary
conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we consider the commonly utilised limit of infinite activation
energy, @xmath . In this limit the reaction term is negligible to all
orders in @xmath , except in a thin layer corresponding to @xmath . Thus
we can split the domain into three zones: two outer zones consisting of
the preheat zone and the burnt gas and a thin inner zone consisting of
the reaction layer (see figure 1.2 ). In the outer zones the reaction
rate is zero so that the equations ( 1.69 )–( 1.71 ) become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations can be solved to give the outer solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the burnt gas we have @xmath to prevent unboundedness as @xmath ;
thus from the boundary conditions ( 1.75 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the preheat zone we have @xmath and @xmath from boundary conditions (
1.74 ), which gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The outer fuel mass fraction profiles intersect at the point @xmath
where @xmath . Since the problem is translationally invariant, we can
choose @xmath to be the origin so that @xmath . Thus the outer profiles
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.77)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.78)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The constants @xmath and @xmath in ( 1.77 ) can be determined by
matching with the inner solution. We begin by expanding both in terms of
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where superscripts are used to denote successive terms in inner
expansions in terms of @xmath . Now, since the reaction zone thickness
is @xmath , we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have anticipated that to leading order @xmath and @xmath inside
the reaction zone. Now, for a balance between the reaction and diffusion
terms inside the reaction zone in equation ( 1.69 ), it is clear that
@xmath . Also, since @xmath to leading order, we have @xmath to leading
order. Thus we let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the governing equations for the inner solution are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
     @xmath      (1.81)
     @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The boundary conditions on equations ( 1.80 )–( 1.82 ) are now found by
matching with the outer solutions using the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each dependent variable @xmath . Matching with the solution for the
burnt gas, given in ( 1.78 ), gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the solution for the temperature in the unburnt gas, given by
( 1.77 ), as @xmath leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Matching with the inner solution as @xmath gives @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, it can be shown that @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, adding equations ( 1.80 ) and ( 1.81 ), we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be integrated twice, using boundary condition ( 1.84 ), to
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this is also valid as @xmath , we have @xmath from boundary
conditions ( 1.85 ) and ( 1.86 ). Similarly, adding equations ( 1.80 )
and ( 1.82 ) and integrating with the use of ( 1.84 ) shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus @xmath from ( 1.85 ) and ( 1.86 ). Using ( 1.87 ) and ( 1.88 )
we can now write the inner problem as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The problem ( 1.89 )–( 1.91 ) can be solved by multiplying equation (
1.89 ) by @xmath and integrating from @xmath to @xmath , using
conditions ( 1.90 )-( 1.91 ), to find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that, using ( 1.79 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

and finally, inserting ( 1.92 ) into the definition of @xmath on the
left hand side of ( 1.73 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

to leading order in @xmath . This is the required result, giving the
planar premixed flame speed, with thermal expansion taken into account.

##### Planar flame thickness

The planar flame thickness is defined by the diffusive length scale [ 10
, 12 , 14 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 2 Taylor dispersion and thermal expansion effects on flame
propagation in a narrow channel

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter, which is based on a paper by Pearce and Daou [ 3 ] , we
provide a theoretical study of a variable density premixed flame
propagating through a narrow channel against a Poiseuille flow of large
amplitude. Under these conditions, the dependence of the propagation
speed of the premixed flame on the Peclet number is investigated. The
essential governing parameters are the flame-front thickness @xmath and
the amplitude of the flow @xmath (which together define the Peclet
number @xmath ), as well as the activation energy of the reaction @xmath
. The problem studied has relevance to several important areas of
research.

The first area concerns premixed flames propagating through narrow
channels, which have been the subject of considerable renewed interest
in recent years. In addition to traditional applications such as fire
safety in mine shafts [ 55 , p. 271] , recent applications are concerned
with emerging technologies that utilise microscale combustion [ 56 ] .
Related investigations have addressed the development of a suitable
analytical methodology, based on a thick flame asymptotic limit [ 16 ] ,
the effect of heat loss [ 16 , 17 ] , the effect of non-unity Lewis
numbers [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] , the influence of oscillatory flow [ 21 ] and
the influence of thermal expansion [ 22 , 23 ] under different
distinguished limits of the governing parameters. The asymptotic results
in the current chapter can be considered to be an extension of the
results of Daou et al. [ 16 ] and Short and Kessler [ 22 ] , who studied
the same configuration but in the limit of small Peclet number in the
constant density and variable density cases, respectively. A low value
of @xmath is not the case, however, in many practical applications (see,
for example, the experimental results given in the review article [ 57 ]
, which were obtained for a fixed value of @xmath ). For this reason the
asymptotic analysis in the current study is performed in the limit
@xmath with @xmath and numerical results are obtained for moderately
large Peclet numbers.

The second area of research is related, albeit indirectly, to turbulent
combustion. At high values of @xmath the flame could become turbulent,
an aspect of the problem not addressed here. Nevertheless, the results
are still useful as a first step towards an understanding of the effects
of the small scales in the flow on a turbulent premixed flame; at
present there seems to be no analytical description of even laminar
premixed flames for arbitrary values of @xmath in situations where the
flame is thick compared to the length scale of the flow. This latter
situation is fundamental to a proper evaluation of Damköhler’s second
hypothesis [ 58 ] concerning the effect of small scale flow on turbulent
premixed flames, which has received little attention in the literature.
Conversely, there have been many studies on turbulent premixed flames in
the flamelet regime of large flow scales compared to the flame thickness
[ 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 ] , which was the subject of Damköhler’s first
hypothesis. A detailed discussion of the relevance of Damköhler’s second
hypothesis to turbulent premixed flames can be found in the paper by
Daou et al. [ 16 ] . A thorough review of turbulent combustion in
general can be found in the monograph by Peters [ 15 ] .

The third area of relevant research is Taylor dispersion, a well-studied
topic that began with Taylor’s seminal paper discussing the enhanced
dispersion of a solute due to a parallel flow in a channel [ 64 ] .
Taylor investigated a distinguished limit characterised by a small
diffusion time in comparison to the advective time; in this limit the
depth-averaged concentration of the solute was shown to be governed by a
one-dimensional equation with an effective diffusion coefficient @xmath
, which was found to be larger than the diffusion coefficient @xmath and
dependent upon the profile of the parallel flow. Specifically, in the
case of a cylindrical channel of radius @xmath and an imposed Poiseuille
flow of cross-sectional average @xmath , Taylor found the effective
diffusion coefficient to be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a solute with diffusion coefficient @xmath .

A comprehensive review of the subject of Taylor dispersion can be found
in the book by Brenner and Edwards [ 65 ] . Here we simply note that
there seem to be relatively few analytical studies in the literature
that investigate Taylor dispersion with a variable density flow (see [
66 , 67 , 68 ] ). In these studies the effective diffusion coefficient
has been found to be a function of the density. Although there has been
a small number of studies on Taylor dispersion in reaction-diffusion
equations (e.g. [ 69 ] ), this study is the first to discuss Taylor
dispersion in the context of combustion. One of the limits taken in the
current chapter can be considered to characterise the Taylor regime of a
premixed flame, whereby the flame is described by the one-dimensional
planar premixed flame equation with an effective diffusion coefficient.
The determination of the propagation speed (an eigenvalue representing
the speed of the travelling premixed flame) is intimately linked to the
effective diffusion coefficient in the limit of infinite activation
energy. It is surprising that despite this direct link, Taylor
dispersion does not yet seem to have been investigated in the context of
premixed (laminar or turbulent) combustion.

The main aims of the investigation are: 1) to quantify the effect of a
small-scale parallel (Poiseuille) flow on the propagation speed of a
premixed flame for fixed values of the Peclet number, taking gas
expansion into account (see formula ( 2.53 ) later); 2) to demonstrate
that the enhancement of the propagation speed coincides exactly with the
Taylor dispersion formula ( 2.1 ); 3) to provide an analytical
confirmation of Damköhler’s second hypothesis in our particular case
corresponding to a laminar flow with a single scale which is small
compared to the flame thickness (see the discussion in § 2.6 ). We
believe that achieving these aims, albeit in a simplified adiabatic
context (such as in [ 70 ] ), as is carried out in this study, is a
contribution of a fundamental nature that will provide a solid basis for
future studies accounting for additional realistic effects. These
include more complex multi-scale flows and the influence of heat losses,
which are not accounted for here to concentrate on the pure interaction
between the flow and the flame and to ensure that the analysis is
tractable. The practical aspects of heat losses are known to be
important in real micro-combustion applications; indeed, to minimise the
influence of such heat losses, it is well known that thermal management
is required experimentally, such as external wall heating [ 71 ] or heat
recirculation [ 72 , 73 ] ; see also the review by Fernandez-Pello [ 56
] .

The chapter is structured as follows. In § 2.2 we formulate the problem.
§ 2.3 consists of an asymptotic analysis in the limit @xmath , with
@xmath . In § 2.4 we consider the limit of infinite activation energy,
@xmath , in order to provide an analytical description of the
propagation speed in terms of @xmath . In § 2.5 we expand and discuss
the results of the preceding asymptotic analyses and compare with
numerical solutions of the governing equations, with particular emphasis
on describing the relationship between the effective propagation speed
@xmath and Peclet number @xmath for several values of the flame front
thickness @xmath and activation energy @xmath . Finally, a summary of
the main findings is given in § 2.6 .

### 2.2 Formulation

Consider a premixed flame propagating through a channel of height @xmath
. Far upstream of the flame a fully developed Poiseuille flow, defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is prescribed (see figure 2.1 ). The governing equations at low Mach
number are given by the Navier–Stokes equations coupled to equations for
temperature and mass fractions, along with the ideal gas equation of
state. The fluid velocity is given by @xmath . The combustion is
modelled as a single irreversible one-step reaction of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where F (assumed to be the deficient reactant) denotes the fuel and
@xmath the heat released per unit mass of fuel.
The overall reaction rate @xmath is taken to follow an Arrhenius law of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the
density, the fuel mass fraction, the universal gas constant, the
temperature, the pre-exponential factor and the activation energy of the
reaction, respectively. The flame propagates through the channel in the
@xmath -direction with velocity @xmath , where @xmath is an eigenvalue
to be determined as part of the solution to the problem.
With tilda denoting dimensional quantities, scaled non-dimensional
variables are introduced using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The unit speed is taken to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the laminar burning speed of the planar flame for @xmath . Here
@xmath is the adiabatic flame temperature, @xmath is the Zeldovich
number or non-dimensional activation energy and @xmath is the thermal
expansion coefficient. The quantities @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
denote the values of the temperature, fuel mass fraction and density in
the unburnt gas as @xmath , respectively.
In non-dimensional form the governing equations in a coordinate system
attached to the flame front, which is travelling in the negative @xmath
-direction at speed @xmath , are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath      (2.3)
     @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

assuming that the thermal diffusivity @xmath and the fuel mass diffusion
coefficient @xmath satisfy @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath is the
hydrodynamic pressure.
The walls located at @xmath and @xmath are considered to be rigid and
adiabatic. Symmetry conditions are applied at @xmath . The boundary
conditions are therefore given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

along with suitable initial conditions. The non-dimensional parameters
are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are the non-dimensional flame-front thickness, the Peclet number,
the fuel Lewis number and the Prandtl number, respectively. Here @xmath
is the kinematic viscosity @xmath . Note that @xmath is the dimensional
flame-front thickness given by @xmath and @xmath is the non-dimensional
amplitude of the imposed Poiseuille flow, @xmath . Finally, the
non-dimensional reaction rate @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The problem is now fully formulated and is given by equations ( 2.2 )-(
2.6 ), with boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 ). The non-dimensional
parameters in this problem are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

Note that by integrating the steady form of equation ( 2.4 ) over the
whole domain, using the continuity equation ( 2.2 ) with the boundary
conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 ) and assuming total fuel consumption
downstream, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mean speed of the parallel inflow at @xmath .
Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

appears as an effective propagation speed, as commonly defined in
turbulent combustion. In the current study of a Poiseuille flow in a
rectangular channel, using the boundary condition ( 2.9 ), the effective
propagation speed is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.3 Asymptotic analysis in the limit @xmath

To simplify the problem we consider the steady form of equations ( 2.2
)-( 2.6 ) with unity Lewis number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case only the equation for temperature needs to be considered,
since @xmath . This follows from adding equations ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.5 )
and using boundary conditions ( 2.9 ).

We now consider the limit @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
flow amplitude @xmath for @xmath . We introduce a rescaled coordinate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the governing equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.6 ) become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
     @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath      (2.18)
     @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations are subject to the boundary conditions ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.8
), with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now introduce expansions for @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that here @xmath is the leading order approximation to the
effective flame speed @xmath , defined in ( 2.13 ). Note also that the
horizontal velocity component @xmath is @xmath , due to the imposed
Poiseuille flow at @xmath given by ( 2.21 ), while the vertical
component of the velocity @xmath is taken to be @xmath to balance the
two terms in the continuity equation ( 2.16 ).

Substituting ( 2.23 ) into equations ( 2.16 )-( 2.19 ), we obtain to
leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 2.26 ) and ( 2.27 ) can be integrated with respect to @xmath
to give @xmath and @xmath , after using the boundary condition ( 2.7 )
on @xmath , so that @xmath from ( 2.20 ).
Now, using a similar method to Short and Kessler [ 22 ] , we look for a
separable solution for @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitution of ( 2.28 ) into equation ( 2.25 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. Equation ( 2.29 ) can be integrated twice
with respect to @xmath , using the boundary conditions ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.8
), to yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath has been absorbed into @xmath .
Integrating equation ( 2.24 ) with respect to @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

after using boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.8 ) on @xmath . Equation (
2.30 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the fact that @xmath from equation ( 2.20 ) and boundary condition
( 2.21 ). Thus @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The continuity equation ( 2.24 ) can then be integrated with respect to
@xmath , using ( 2.31 ) and condition ( 2.7 ), to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, at @xmath in equation ( 2.19 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, after using ( 2.31 ) and condition ( 2.7 ), can be integrated
twice with respect to @xmath to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we look to @xmath in equation ( 2.16 ) to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 2.35 ) can be integrated first with respect to @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath , utilising the boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.8 ) on
@xmath , and then with respect to @xmath to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

To evaluate @xmath , we use boundary conditions ( 2.21 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, at @xmath of equation ( 2.19 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Integrating ( 2.38 ) with respect to @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath , taking into account the boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.8 )
on @xmath and substituting ( 2.31 ), ( 2.32 ), ( 2.34 ), ( 2.36 ) and (
2.37 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that in the limit @xmath , with @xmath , the problem of a
variable density premixed flame in a two dimensional channel can be
reduced to a one dimensional boundary value problem. Equation ( 2.39 )
is the equation that would describe a premixed flame propagating through
a one-dimensional channel with an effective diffusion coefficient

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an important result because it corresponds to a generalised form
(accounting for variable density effects) of the effective diffusion
coefficient found when studying the effect of a Poiseuille flow on
mixing in the non-reactive Taylor dispersion problem, originally
investigated by Taylor [ 64 ] . A premixed flame in the limit @xmath ,
with @xmath can be therefore considered to be in the Taylor dispersion
regime.

The boundary value problem ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ) will be solved numerically
in § 2.5 to provide a description of the relationship between @xmath and
@xmath . These results will also be compared to those of numerical
solutions of the full problem. Firstly, however, we will proceed to
study the limit @xmath in order to find a leading order asymptotic
solution for @xmath .

### 2.4 Explicit solution for large activation energy @xmath

Here we consider the solution to the problem ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ) in the
limit of infinite activation energy @xmath . Following a well known
approach in this limit, the reaction is confined to a thin layer of
thickness @xmath . The domain can therefore be split into two outer
zones (which we refer to as the preheat zone and the burnt gas) and an
inner zone (the reaction zone). We use the condition @xmath , which
follows from the total completion of the reaction far downstream.

In the outer zones the reaction rate is set to zero so that, from ( 2.39
),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The solution to this equation in the burnt gas is found
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

while in the preheat zone we have, denoting @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

on using the condition ( 2.21 ). The constant @xmath can be determined
by choosing the origin where the outer profiles intersect, since the
problem is translationally invariant in the @xmath -direction. This
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The propagation speed @xmath can now be determined by matching with the
inner solution. Since the reaction layer is of thickness @xmath , in the
inner region we let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then to leading order we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The boundary conditions to equation ( 2.47 ) are found by matching with
the outer solutions using the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Matching with the solution in the burnt gas, given by ( 2.44 ), yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, noting from ( 2.46 ) and ( 2.48 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we expand equation ( 2.45 ) for the temperature in the unburnt gas as
@xmath to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath can be found by integrating equation ( 2.47 ) subject to the
boundary conditions ( 2.49 ) and ( 2.50 ). Multiplying ( 2.47 ) by
@xmath and integrating with respect to @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, using ( 2.49 ) and ( 2.50 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation gives the leading order approximation @xmath to the
effective flame speed @xmath for a given value of @xmath in the limit
@xmath , @xmath , with @xmath .

#### 2.4.1 Constant density results

The asymptotic results found for a variable density premixed flame can
be similarly derived in the simpler case of a constant density premixed
flame. The constant density form of the boundary value problem ( 2.39
)-( 2.41 ), derived in the limit @xmath with @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , this problem has the solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.4.2 Cylindrical channel results

A similar asymptotic analysis to the one above can be performed (see
Appendix A ) for a premixed flame propagating through a cylindrical
channel of diameter @xmath with an imposed Poiseuille flow. As in the
case of a rectangular channel it is found that the flame is governed by
the equation for a planar premixed flame with an effective diffusion
coefficient, in this case given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the variable density case and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the constant density case. Using the definition of the Peclet number
the constant density result can be written in dimensional form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cross-sectional average of the imposed Poiseuille
flow. The result ( 2.58 ) is exactly the result ( 2.1 ) found by Taylor
[ 64 ] in his original paper.

### 2.5 Further results and discussion

In this section we compare the results of the asymptotic analyses
undertaken in previous sections with the results of numerical
computations. The main aim is to examine the relationship between the
effective propagation speed @xmath , defined in ( 2.13 ), and the Peclet
number @xmath for several values of the flame-front thickness @xmath and
activation energy @xmath , in both the variable density and constant
density cases.

#### 2.5.1 Numerical procedure

The numerical results are obtained by solving the steady form of
equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.6 ) with boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 )
using the software package Comsol Multiphysics. This software has been
extensively tested in combustion applications including our previous
publications [ 1 , 2 ] . The problem is entered into the partial
differential equation (PDE) interface in Comsol, which uses a finite
element discretisation to transform the set of non-linear PDEs into a
set of non-linear algebraic equations in which the propagation speed
@xmath appears as an additional unknown (eigenvalue). These equations,
augmented by the requirement that the temperature is prescribed at the
origin (an additional equation needed to determine the eigenvalue @xmath
), are then solved using an affine invariant form of the damped Newton
method, as described by Deuflhard [ 74 ] . In the constant density case
we solve ( 2.4 ) with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the reaction term
replaced by @xmath . The domain is covered by a non-uniform grid of
approximately 200,000 triangular elements, with local refinement around
the reaction zone. Various tests are performed to ensure the results are
independent of the mesh. A channel of length @xmath is taken to
approximate an infinitely long channel. Throughout this section we let
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath unless otherwise stated. The numerical
calculations are performed for a fixed value of the activation energy,
@xmath , unless otherwise stated. For each @xmath the value of @xmath is
scaled by the value of @xmath calculated numerically for @xmath and
@xmath . Finally the boundary value problems ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ) and (
2.54 )-( 2.56 ), derived in the limit @xmath , are solved using the
BVP4C solver in Matlab, which uses a Lobatto IIIa method [ 75 ] .

#### 2.5.2 Comparison of the asymptotic and numerical results

Figures 2.2(a) and 2.2(b) summarise both the asymptotic and numerical
results in the constant density case and variable density case,
respectively. Plotted are 1) the solutions to the boundary value
problems ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ) and ( 2.54 )-( 2.56 ), derived in the limit
@xmath , @xmath , for several values of @xmath ; 2) the asymptotic
results ( 2.53 ) and ( 2.57 ), derived in the limit @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ; 3) the results of numerical solutions of the full problem,
given by equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.6 ) and boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-(
2.10 ), for large values of both @xmath and @xmath .

It can be seen that in both the constant and variable density cases
there is strong agreement between the numerical results calculated for
high values of @xmath with @xmath and the asymptotic results derived in
the limit @xmath for @xmath . It can also be seen that in both cases the
asymptotic results derived in the limit @xmath (for a chosen value of
@xmath ) approach the results derived in the limit @xmath , @xmath when
@xmath is increased, as expected. Comparing the figures shows that a
finite value of the activation energy @xmath has a larger effect on the
propagation speed in the variable density case than in the constant
density case.

A further comparison of figures 2.2(a) and 2.2(b) shows that @xmath has
a significantly larger effect on the propagation speed in the constant
density case than when thermal expansion is taken into account. This can
be explained by considering the perturbation to the flame shape using
the method of Daou and Matalon [ 17 ] and Short and Kessler [ 22 ] .
Using the fact that @xmath and equation ( 2.34 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, let @xmath be the location at which the leading order temperature
takes the constant value @xmath . Defining the perturbation @xmath , and
letting @xmath denote the value of a variable at @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain the value of @xmath for which @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the relative distance between the temperature reaching @xmath
at @xmath and reaching the same value at @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives a measure of the deformation to the flame due to the flow.
The equivalent of ( 2.59 ) in the constant density case is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus since @xmath , we have @xmath from ( 2.59 )-( 2.60 ) and therefore
the deformation to the flame shape is smaller in the variable density
case. This means that the effective propagation speed @xmath , which
gives a measure of the burning rate of the flame, is expected to be less
in the variable density case. Note that in the @xmath analysis of Short
and Kessler [ 22 ] , the flame deformation was found to be larger in the
variable density case than the constant density case for values of
@xmath giving a propagation speed @xmath , and smaller in the variable
density case when @xmath . Since @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , the
propagation speed @xmath is always expected to be negative in our study
and so the results ( 2.59 )-( 2.60 ) agree with those of Short and
Kessler [ 22 ] .

An illustration of the numerically calculated flame shape for selected
values of the Peclet number in both the constant density and variable
density cases is given in figure 2.3 , which shows that the deformation
to the flame shape is indeed larger in the variable density case, as
found in ( 2.59 )-( 2.60 ).

The flame behaviour and its interaction with the flow is further
illustrated in figures 2.4 and 2.5 , corresponding to numerical
simulations. Figure 2.4 shows a contour plot of the temperature @xmath ;
also shown is the velocity field induced by thermal expansion, namely
@xmath . This is plotted rather than the full velocity field @xmath for
clarity since the imposed Poiseuille flow is large compared to the
induced flow, which is consistent with the asymptotic findings (see
equation ( 2.31 )). Figures 2.4 and 2.4 provide contour plots of the
horizontal and vertical components of the induced flow, respectively. It
is seen that for a fixed value of @xmath , the maximum of the horizontal
component of the induced flow is located at the centreline @xmath , and
the maximum of the vertical component is located around @xmath . Figures
2.5 and 2.5 plot these horizontal and vertical components at @xmath and
@xmath , respectively for selected values of @xmath . Corresponding
plots of the temperature @xmath and the reaction rate @xmath along the
centreline @xmath are shown in figures 2.5 and 2.5 . Figure 2.5
illustrates the gas expansion through the flame. Furthermore the figure
demonstrates that the effective flame thickness increases with
increasing @xmath ; this is in line with the asymptotic results (see the
asymptotic formula ( 2.42 ) and also the discussion in § 2.6 related to
equation ( 2.61 )).

Returning now to the effect of the Peclet number on the propagation
speed, comparing the asymptotic result ( 2.57 ), derived in the constant
density approximation, with ( 2.53 ), derived in the variable density
case, provides a further reason for the larger effect of @xmath on
@xmath in the constant density case. The constant density results are
the same as the variable density results, but with the term @xmath
replaced by @xmath in the leading order term for the effective
propagation speed ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the constant density asymptotic
results ( 2.54 )-( 2.56 ) are not recovered by simply setting @xmath in
equations ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ) due to the presence of @xmath in the
reaction term, which throughout this study is set to @xmath in both
cases. . This suggests that replacing the Peclet number in the variable
density case by a scaled Peclet number, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

would lead to strong agreement between the variable density and constant
density numerical results.

A plot of the numerically calculated value of @xmath versus @xmath in
the constant density and variable density cases is given in figure 2.6 .
As expected, the relationship between @xmath and @xmath in the two cases
is much more similar than in figures 2.2(a) and 2.2(b) , but there is
still a quantitative difference. This can be attributed to the fact that
the finite activation energy has a more significant effect in the
variable density case than in the constant density case, as described
above. It is therefore expected that for larger values of @xmath the
agreement between the numerically calculated value of @xmath and @xmath
would be closer between the two cases. To illustrate this, included in
figure 2.6 is a comparison of @xmath versus @xmath from the numerical
solution to ( 2.54 )-( 2.56 ) and ( 2.39 )-( 2.41 ), valid as @xmath ,
with @xmath . The figure shows that in this case the values of @xmath in
the constant and variable density cases are indeed closer together.
However, performing numerical calculations of the full system with a
larger value of @xmath involves a significant amount of extra
computation and is beyond the scope of this study.

Finally, it should be noted that the asymptotic results found in this
study agree with results obtained previously in the limit @xmath .
Expanding the constant density result ( 2.57 ) as @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which agrees with Daou et al. [ 16 ] . Expanding the variable density
result ( 2.53 ) as @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This agrees with the results found by Short and Kessler [ 22 ] , which
found @xmath to leading order.

### 2.6 Conclusion

In this study we have investigated the propagation of a premixed flame
through a narrow channel against a flow of large amplitude, taking the
effect of the flame on the flow into account through the action of
thermal expansion. This is the first study to consider a variable
density premixed flame in a narrow channel with Peclet number @xmath ,
which characterises the large amplitude flow. It is also the first to
investigate Taylor dispersion in the context of combustion. The problem
has been studied analytically to determine the effective propagation
speed @xmath for @xmath , in the limit @xmath with both finite and
infinite values of the activation energy @xmath . The asymptotic studies
are complemented by a numerical study whose results have been compared
to the analytical results to test their effectiveness.

It has been found that, in the limit @xmath , a two-dimensional premixed
flame propagating through a rectangular channel against a Poiseuille
flow can be described by a boundary value problem that corresponds to a
one-dimensional premixed flame with an effective diffusion coefficient,
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the constant density case and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the variable density case. These values correspond to those found in
studies of enhanced dispersion due to a Poiseuille flow in non-reactive
fluids, known as Taylor dispersion. A premixed flame propagating through
a channel in the limit @xmath , with @xmath can therefore be considered
to be in the Taylor regime.

Further, analytical solutions to the derived one-dimensional boundary
value problems have been obtained in the limit @xmath in both the
constant density and variable density cases. The asymptotic results have
been found to show strong agreement with the numerical results in both
cases, as well as with results derived in previous studies in the limit
@xmath . Physical reasons for the differences between the constant and
variable density cases in the relationship of the propagation speed
versus the Peclet number have been discussed.

The analytical results ( 2.53 ) and ( 2.57 ) can provide some insight
towards understanding the effect of small-scale eddies on the
propagation of a turbulent premixed flame, when the flow amplitude
@xmath in our study is identified with the turbulence intensity and the
channel height @xmath is identified with the turbulent flow (integral)
scale. The situation where the flame is thick compared to the scale of
the flow is described by Damköhler’s second hypothesis, which may be
stated in the form of a relationship between the dimensional effective
propagation speed and the effective thermal diffusivity, given by @xmath
. Here @xmath is the chemical time related to the planar premixed flame
speed @xmath (used in this study as unit speed to non-dimensionalise
velocities) by @xmath . Therefore on dividing these two equations,
Damköhler’s second hypothesis is recovered, to leading order, in
equation ( 2.57 ), as can be seen by noting that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The results ( 2.53 ) and ( 2.57 ) may also be used to provide a possible
explanation of the so-called bending effect of the turbulent premixed
flame speed when plotted in terms of the turbulence intensity for fixed
values of the Reynolds number (see e.g. [ 57 , 24 ] ). Therefore our
distinguished limit, namely @xmath with @xmath fixed (note that the
Reynolds number and Peclet number are equal if @xmath ), mimics the
experimental conditions of Bradley [ 57 ] and can be used to shed some
light on the experimental findings. An initial discussion of the
relevance of the asymptotic results in this chapter to the bending
effect, along with further asymptotic results, is provided in Chapter 3
of this thesis.

Finally, it has been shown that, in the limit @xmath , @xmath , the
graphs of @xmath in the constant and variable density cases are
identical when plotted against a scaled Peclet number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and graphs of the numerically calculated propagation speed against this
scaled Peclet number have also been provided.

## Chapter 3 The thick flame asymptotic limit and the bending effect of
premixed flames

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter, which provides a continuation of the work undertaken in
Chapter 2 , we are again mainly concerned with premixed flame
propagation against a steady parallel flow of large amplitude, for fixed
values of the Peclet number. The main motivation in this chapter is to
describe the relevance of the asymptotic results in the thick flame
asymptotic limit to the so-called bending effect of turbulent
combustion, as mentioned in the conclusion of Chapter 2 . The bending
effect is reported to be observed experimentally when the effective
flame speed @xmath is plotted in terms of the flow intensity @xmath , as
seen in figure 3.1 , adapted from [ 24 ] . As discussed in [ 76 ] , this
is a fundamental problem in turbulent combustion which has received
considerable attention in the literature. Previous theoretical studies
have predicted linear, sub-linear, or exponential dependence of @xmath
on @xmath [ 24 ] . Experiments, on the other hand, have shown that the
effective flame speed increases with the flow intensity @xmath at lower
values of @xmath , but levels off at higher values of @xmath [ 77 ] ,
which is widely known as the bending effect. The constant value to which
@xmath seems to converge is found to depend on the Reynolds number [ 77
] , which in our case is equivalent to the Peclet number since we assume
unity Prandtl number. Taking into account the complexity associated with
the multi-scale nature of turbulence, it is of great interest to examine
this relationship for cases such as parallel or vortical flows, because
of their relative simplicity.

In this chapter, we investigate the relationship between the effective
propagation speed of a laminar premixed flame and the amplitude of a
prescribed Poiseuille flow. The amplitude of the flow can be thought of
as analagous to the turbulence intensity, as plotted in figure 3.1 . We
are motivated by the asymptotic result ( 2.53 ), derived in Chapter 2 ,
which shows a constant dependence of the effective propagation speed on
the Peclet number in the thick flame asymptotic limit. Furthermore, to
complement the investigation other distinguished limits are considered
to help understand the discrepencies between theory and experiments.
Finally, we will provide numerical results to aid in this discussion.

The chapter is structured as follows. In § 3.2 we perform an asymptotic
analysis in the infinite activation energy limit, to provide a
complementary asymptotic result to equation ( 2.53 ), derived in Chapter
2 . In § 3.3 , we provide some further asymptotic results in the
constant density case, as well as numerical results for a full range of
values of the flow amplitude @xmath and the Peclet number @xmath . This
section also contains a discussion of the relevance of the results to
the bending effect of turbulent combustion. We end the chapter with
conclusions in § 3.4 .

### 3.2 Infinite activation energy asymptotic analysis

The result ( 2.53 ) in Chapter 2 provided an asymptotic result for the
effect of a Poiseuille flow on the propagation speed of a variable
density premixed flame. The limits taken were @xmath , followed by
@xmath , with @xmath . In this chapter we provide a complementary
asymptotic analysis to the one performed in Chapter 2 , this time in the
limit @xmath , followed by @xmath , with @xmath , in order to assess the
effect of taking the limits in this order. Note that, since the three
main non-dimensional parameters in the problem can be related to each
other by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

taking @xmath with @xmath is equivalent to taking @xmath with @xmath .
All parameters have the same definitions as in Chapter 2 . In this
chapter, attention will be restricted to steady flame propagation with
unity Lewis number

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit of infinite activation energy, @xmath , the reaction zone
is confined to a thin sheet, @xmath , say. On either side of the thin
sheet, the reaction rate can be set to zero. We introduce the change of
variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the steady form of the governing equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.6 ) can be
written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations are subject to boundary conditions, which using ( 3.3 )
in ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 3.4 )-( 3.8 ) are also subject to jump conditions across the
flame sheet, which is located at @xmath . The derivation of these jump
conditions is not given here, but can be found in e.g. [ 14 ] , where
the full set of conditions are listed; here we simply give the
conditions used in the following asymptotic analysis:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.2.1 Solution in the limit @xmath, with @xmath

In this section we provide the leading order asymptotic solution to (
3.4 )-( 3.13 ) in the limit @xmath , with @xmath . Note that this limit
is equivalent to @xmath , with @xmath , due to ( 3.1 ). A similar
asymptotic analysis was performed in [ 76 ] in the constant density
approximation. Using a similar method to the one used in § 2.3 in
Chapter 2 , we introduce a scaled coordinate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and expand each variable in powers of @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the leading order term for the effective propagation
speed @xmath , defined in ( 2.13 ).

Inserting the scaling ( 3.14 ) into ( 3.4 )-( 3.13 ) and dropping the
prime notation, we find that the leading order solutions are the same as
those found in §2.3 of Chapter 2 , and are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then to @xmath in equation ( 3.7 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be integrated twice with respect to @xmath , using the
boundary conditions ( 3.9 )-( 3.10 ) on @xmath and @xmath , and
substituting in ( 3.16 ), to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of integration. Now, using the
conditions ( 3.11 ) and ( 3.13 ) on @xmath and setting @xmath , a
condition which can be prescribed due to the translational invariance of
the problem, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total burning rate is proportional to the flame surface area [ 70 ]
by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

a relationship which can be derived by integrating the steady form of
equation ( 2.4 ) up to the reaction sheet and utilising the continuity
equation ( 2.2 ) with the boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 ). Thus we
can find the first approximation @xmath to the effective flame speed
@xmath , which using ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.21 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result provides a complementary asymptotic expression to equation (
2.53 ) in Chapter 2 . Note that equation ( 2.53 ) in Chapter 2 is
expected to be valid for @xmath , while equation ( 3.22 ) is expected to
be valid for @xmath . It can be seen that both expressions predict a
constant dependence of the effective propagation speed @xmath on the
Peclet number in the thick flame asymptotic limit. A comparison of the
two expressions is given in figure 3.2 , where it can be seen that there
is good agreement between the two results for low and moderate values of
the Peclet number (approximately @xmath in the constant density case and
@xmath in the variable density case). For high values of @xmath , the
results start to diverge, although this divergence is more marked in the
constant density case than the variable density case. The relevance of
the results to the bending effect will be discussed in the following
section.

### 3.3 Further results and discussion

In this section we present the results of the asymptotic analysis of §
3.2 and compare with the results of numerical simulations of the full
system of governing equations, given by the steady form of ( 2.2 )-(
2.10 ), with @xmath . We also compare with some further asymptotic
results that are available in the constant density case. All asymptotic
results in this section have been obtained by first taking the infinite
activation energy limit @xmath . The aim in this section is to provide a
discussion of the relevance of these asymptotic and numerical results to
the bending effect of premixed flames.

Note that throughout this section the numerical method used is the same
as the one described in Chapter 2 . Numerical results in the constant
density case are obtained by solving ( 2.4 ) with @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and the reaction term replaced by @xmath , as described in
Chapter 2 . Finally, note that the effect of thermal expansion is
investigated by varying the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath , while
taking the reaction term @xmath to be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given the fixed value @xmath , as is done in [ 1 ] .

#### 3.3.1 Constant density results

In this section we provide asymptotic and numerical results in the
constant density case. The asymptotic result ( 3.22 ) obtained in §
3.2.1 in the limit @xmath , with @xmath , can be written in the constant
density case simply by setting @xmath , so that the leading order term
for the effective propagation speed is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further asymptotic results are available in the constant density case,
in the separate limits a) @xmath , with @xmath and b) @xmath , with
@xmath . Note that these limits both correspond to the thin flame limit
@xmath . In both of these limits, the propagation speed @xmath can be
written asymptotically as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where with @xmath . A derivation of ( 3.25 ) in the limit @xmath , with
@xmath can be found in [ 70 ] . The derivation of ( 3.25 ) in the limit
@xmath , with @xmath is slightly different and can be found in Appendix
B . Equation ( 3.25 ) predicts a linear dependence of @xmath on @xmath
when @xmath is small, which is in agreement with several of the
theoretical studies shown in figure 3.1 .

We now have a fairly complete asymptotic picture of the problem. The
asymptotic results ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.25 ) are shown in figure 3.3 , where
they are compared with and complemented by numerical results in the
constant density case, obtained for a full range of values of @xmath and
@xmath . It is clear that in all cases the numerically calculated
propagation speed approaches a constant value, which depends on the
Peclet number, as the flow amplitude @xmath increases to large values;
this is in line with the the asymptotic results ( 3.24 ) and shows a
similar behaviour to the available experimental results summarised in
figure 3.1 . It can also be seen in figure 3.3 that there is a maximum
in the curve of @xmath versus @xmath , which occurs at a higher value of
@xmath as @xmath increases, as predicted by the asymptotic results (
3.25 ). Finally, it can be seen that the numerical results for small
values of @xmath agree very well with the formula ( 3.25 ), as is to
expected.

#### 3.3.2 Variable density results

In this section we investigate the effect of thermal expansion on
premixed flames propagating against a prescribed parallel inflow. We
begin with a discussion of the behaviour of a premixed flame in a
channel subject to thermal expansion when no flow is prescribed (i.e.
the case @xmath ).

If no flow is prescribed in the constant density case, the flame is
planar and propagates at the laminar flame speed, so that @xmath .
However, this is not the case when thermal expansion is present. As can
be seen in figure 3.4 , the propagation speed of variable density flames
is larger than the laminar flame speed if @xmath is small enough, even
though no flow is prescribed at @xmath in these calculations. For larger
values of @xmath , the propagation speed is increased by a larger
amount.

The increase in the propagation speed as @xmath is due to the flame
being necessarily curved. This is attributable to the effect of the
no-slip sidewalls. Thermal expansion across the flame causes a shear
(Poiseuille) flow to be induced downstream, and the flame becomes curved
(or “tulip” shaped), as can be seen in figure 3.5 . Figures 3.4 and 3.5
also show results for a flame with @xmath , but @xmath =0 at the
sidewalls (instead of the no-slip condition). As can be seen, in this
case the flame is planar and propagates at the laminar flame speed,
which shows that the no-slip sidewalls are the cause of the increase in
propagation speed due to thermal expansion as @xmath . A similar effect
was found in [ 82 ] and is numerically studied in detail in [ 83 ] .

At this point it should be noted that various transient behaviours of
premixed flames in closed channels that arise as a result of the
frictional effects of sidewalls, combined with other effects of thermal
expansion such as the Darrieus–Landau instability, have been
investigated in the literature (for a review, see e.g. [ 9 ] ). However,
in the infinitely long channel configuration studied here, it is
sufficient to note that steady solutions exist and that the steady
solutions calculated here are all found to be stable to small
perturbations.

Now, we plot in figure 3.6 the effective propagation speed @xmath versus
the prescribed inflow amplitude @xmath for selected values of the Peclet
number @xmath in both the constant and variable density cases. As
expected, it can be seen that as @xmath , the propagation speed in the
constant density case approaches @xmath and the propagation speed in the
variable density case approaches a value @xmath . It can also be seen
that the prescribed inflow has a larger effect on the propagation speed
in the constant density case than in the variable density case. Thus for
the same value of the Peclet number, the propagation speed in the
constant density case is larger than the propagation speed in the
variable density case, if @xmath is large enough. This is to be expected
as the asymptotic results ( 3.22 ), valid in the limit @xmath , show
this behaviour. The results ( 3.22 ) are included in figure 3.6 .

To summarise, despite the effect of wall friction and the lessened
effect of a prescribed parallel flow on a variable density premixed
flame, the qualitative shape of the curve of @xmath versus @xmath
remains the same in the constant and variable density cases. This shows
that in a laminar flame at least, the bending effect cannot be
attributed to the effects of thermal expansion.

### 3.4 Conclusion

In this chapter we have discussed the relevance of asymptotic results
obtained in the thick flame asymptotic limit to the bending effect of
turbulent combustion. The asymptotic result ( 2.53 ), obtained in
Chapter 2 in the limit @xmath followed by @xmath , with @xmath , has
been compared to the further asymptotic result ( 3.22 ), which has been
derived in the limit @xmath followed by @xmath , with @xmath . It has
been found that the results agree for moderately small values of the
Peclet number, with closer agreement in the variable density case than
in the constant density case. Numerical results have been provided,
showing that as the prescribed inflow amplitude @xmath increases to
large values, the effective propagation speed @xmath approaches a
constant value, which depends on the Peclet number. This result is in
line with both the asymptotic results ( 2.53 ) and ( 3.22 ) and with the
available experimental results on turbulent combustion, summarised in
figure 3.1 . We have therefore shown that for laminar flames in the
context of a parallel flow, premixed flames in the thick flame
asymptotic limit mimic the behaviour of turbulent premixed flames in the
relationship between the effective propagation speed and the flow
intensity @xmath , which is analagous to the turbulence intensity.

We have also provided some asymptotic results for small values of @xmath
in the constant density case, given by equation ( 3.25 ), in order to
provide a full asymptotic picture of the relationship between the
effective propagation speed and @xmath . These results show that for
small values of @xmath , the relationship between @xmath and @xmath is
linear. Finally, we have investigated the effect of thermal expansion on
the problem; it has been found that in the limit @xmath , variable
density premixed flames in channels propagate at a speed larger than the
laminar flame speed, due to the fact that the flame curves as a result
of the effect of wall friction. Despite this difference between constant
and variable density premixed flames, it has been found that for
variable density premixed flames the effective propagation speed still
approaches a constant value which depends on the Peclet number for large
values of @xmath , which again mimics the behaviour of the turbulent
premixed flames shown in figure 3.1 .

## Chapter 4 Rayleigh–Bénard Instability Generated by a Diffusion Flame

### 4.1 Introduction

The presence of flames in chemically reacting systems, whether premixed
or non-premixed, naturally generates temperature gradients. Such systems
are therefore prone to buoyancy-driven instabilities which have a
paradigm in Rayleigh–Bénard convection. In this chapter, which is based
on a paper by Pearce and Daou [ 2 ] , we revisit the Rayleigh–Bénard
problem in the specific context of a diffusion or non-premixed flame, a
fundamental problem which seems to have received no attention in the
literature. The aim of the work is to complement the available knowledge
on flame stability by determining the critical conditions which define
the threshold of instability of a planar diffusion flame under
gravitational effects.

The Rayleigh–Bénard problem itself has been important in work on the
stability of physical systems since the early studies at the beginning
of the 20th century by Bénard [ 84 ] and Rayleigh [ 85 ] on the natural
convection of a fluid layer heated from below. The temperature gradient
in the system causes the fluid at the bottom of the layer to be lighter
than the fluid at the top, an arrangement which becomes unstable if the
temperature gradient is strong enough. The instability is opposed by the
viscous forces of the fluid. It was in Lord Rayleigh’s seminal paper
that it was first demonstrated that a non-dimensional parameter which
later became known as the Rayleigh number must exceed a critical value
in order for the aforementioned instability to manifest itself. This
parameter was defined in terms of the gravitational acceleration @xmath
, the height of the fluid layer @xmath , the temperature gradient @xmath
and the coefficients of thermal expansion @xmath , thermal diffusivity
@xmath and kinematic viscosity @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the Rayleigh number exceeds its critical value, which may be denoted
@xmath , the resulting instability resolves itself into a steady state
of ’convection rolls’, observed by Bénard in his original experiments as
a regular structure of hexagonal cells. The problem of determining the
critical Rayleigh number and characterising the resulting instabilities
has been studied experimentally, numerically and analytically in a huge
amount of research, which we do not review here. For a complete overview
of the canonical problem see Chandrasekhar [ 86 , pp. 1–75] and
literature reviews by Getling [ 87 , pp.1–26] and Bodenschatz et al. [
88 ] ; more recent reviews concerning turbulence in Rayleigh–Bénard
convection have been performed by Ahlers et al. [ 89 ] and Lohse and Xia
[ 90 ] .

The stability of steady states has also formed a crucial aspect of the
study of both premixed and non-premixed flames. A thorough review of
recent literature concerning flame instabilities has been performed by
Matalon [ 91 ] . A further review concentrating on instabilities in
premixed flames can be found in [ 92 ] ; here we concentrate on
instabilities in non-premixed combustion.

There have been a large number of studies on the diffusive-thermal
instability of planar diffusion flames. Early studies focused on
oscillatory instabilities of diffusion flames for fuel and oxidiser
Lewis numbers greater than 1 [ 93 , 94 , 95 ] before further studies
including cellular instabilities for values of the Lewis number below 1
[ 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 , 102 ] . The common factor in these
studies is the use of the constant density approximation which
simplifies the study of combustion phenomena by separating the
hydrodynamics from the equations for temperature and mass fractions.
Recently this approximation was dispensed with by Matalon and Metzener [
103 ] to investigate the effect of thermal expansion on the stability of
diffusion flames, again using the planar diffusion flame as the
unperturbed state. It was found that, although thermal expansion does
not play as crucial a role as it does for premixed flames, it influences
the regions of parameter space for which the diffusive-thermal
instability occurs.

A key point in the stability analyses previously performed on the planar
diffusion flame in the absence of gravity is that of the unconditional
stability of the Burke–Schumann diffusion flame, which arises in the
limit of infinite reaction rate. Our study is motivated by the idea that
the mechanism for the Rayleigh–Bénard instability described above could
be expected to have a similar effect on a layer of fluid heated from
below by a horizontal diffusion flame if buoyancy is taken into account,
leading to instabilities of a system previously considered
unconditionally stable. There seems to our knowledge to be very little
work addressing the effect of gravity on planar diffusion flames in the
literature. Stability studies that have taken gravity into account have
been focused on the flickering motion of diffusion flames [ 104 , 105 ,
106 ] , diffusion flames over a solid fuel [ 107 ] or triple flames
aligned with the gravity vector [ 40 ] .

In the present study we consider the stability of a horizontal planar
diffusion flame in an infinitely long channel of given height under the
effects of gravity. The main aim is to find the critical conditions for
instability in the form of the critical value of a suitably defined
Rayleigh number which defines the threshold of instability. An
investigation into the instabilities in this problem will provide a
crucial step towards a full understanding of the interaction between
diffusion flames and hydrodynamics. This will also provide a basis for
investigating the combined effect of thermal expansion and gravity on
the propagation of triple flames, which leave a trailing diffusion flame
behind them.

We formulate the problem in the low Mach number approximation, as
derived in Chapter 1 . Further, in order to treat the problem
analytically as far as possible we employ the Boussinesq approximation
commonly used to study non-reactive Rayleigh–Bénard convection, which
was derived by Boussinesq [ 108 ] . A rigorous derivation of this model
from the general equations of combustion theory has been performed by
Matkowsky and Sivashinsky [ 4 ] . The results of a linear stability
analysis in this formulation will be compared to a numerical treatment
of the non-Boussinesq equations in order to test the effect of
compressibility on the system.

The chapter is structured as follows. We begin in § 4.2 by providing the
governing equations, which we then non-dimensionalise and simplify in
the Boussinesq approximation. We proceed in § 4.3 with an asymptotic
analysis in the Burke–Schumann limit of infinite Damköhler number,
followed by a linear stability analysis in § 4.4 using the planar
Burke–Schumann flame as the base state. In § 4.5 we solve the linear
stability problem for the growth rate eigenvalue numerically and
analytically as far as possible to investigate the Rayleigh number at
which the planar Burke–Schumann flame becomes unstable. In § 4.6 we
present the results of the linear stability analysis, including how the
critical Rayleigh number depends on the position of the flame in the
channel. Finally, we compare these results in § 4.7 with a full
numerical treatment to investigate the accuracy of the Boussinesq
approximation and the effects of compressibility upon the stability of
the system, followed by a short investigation of the effect of finite
chemistry. The chapter is closed with a discussion of the main findings
and recommendations for future related studies.

### 4.2 Formulation

We investigate the problem of the stability of a planar diffusion flame
in an infinitely long channel of height @xmath . The channel walls are
assumed to be porous with the fuel being provided at the upper wall and
the oxidiser provided at the lower wall (see figure 4.1 ); for
simplicity, the temperatures of the walls are assumed to be equal.
Although this setup may be difficult to achieve experimentally, it is
adopted here as a simple theoretical model to aid understanding of the
effect of gravity on the planar diffusion flame. A similar setup has
been used in several previous theoretical investigations (see e.g. [ 109
, 43 , 110 ] ). Since we are taking the effects of density changes and
gravity into account, the governing equations will consist of the
Navier–Stokes equations, coupled to equations for temperature and mass
fractions of fuel and oxidiser. The combustion is modelled as a single
irreversible one-step reaction of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where F denotes the fuel and O the oxidiser. The quantity @xmath denotes
the mass of oxidiser consumed and @xmath the heat released, both per
unit mass of fuel.
The overall reaction rate @xmath is taken to follow an Arrhenius law of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
the density, the fuel mass fraction, the oxidiser mass fraction, the
universal gas constant, the temperature, the pre-exponential factor and
the activation energy of the reaction, respectively.

#### 4.2.1 Governing Equations and Boundary Conditions

In the low Mach number approximation, the governing equations are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath notation denotes dimensional terms and @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath denote the diffusion coefficients of heat, fuel and
oxidiser respectively. Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all assumed
constant, as are the specific heat capacity @xmath , thermal
conductivity @xmath and dynamic viscosity @xmath .

As shown in figure 4.1 the walls are assumed to be rigid, porous and at
the same temperature, giving the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Before continuing we note that equations ( 4.3 )-( 4.5 ) have a steady,
one dimensional solution with no flow which, for large activation energy
@xmath , as typically encountered in combustion, is very close to the
frozen solution (with zero reaction rate @xmath ) given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 4.9 )-( 4.11 ) determine the location of the stoichiometric
surface @xmath , where @xmath , and the values of the mass fractions
there in the absence of combustion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalised stoichiometric coefficient.

We now introduce the non-dimensional variables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

note that @xmath is the hydrodynamic pressure with reference unit @xmath
= @xmath . Here the reference length @xmath is the height of the
channel. @xmath is the adiabatic flame temperature given by @xmath . The
non-dimensional governing equations are then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . Note that
@xmath is a modified pressure given by @xmath . The non-dimensional
parameters are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which are the Rayleigh number, the Damköhler number, the Prandtl number
and the fuel and oxidiser Lewis numbers, respectively. Here, @xmath is
the kinematic viscosity @xmath and @xmath is the Zeldovich number or
non-dimensional activation energy defined as @xmath . It is worth
mentioning that we have defined the Rayleigh number to be of the form
@xmath , where @xmath measures the temperature difference and @xmath is
a reference temperature taken here to be @xmath . This form has been
adopted previously in the literature, for example by Fröhlich et al. [
111 ] , where the reference temperature was taken to be an average
value.
The non dimensional reaction rate is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the ideal gas equation ( 4.6 ) takes the non-dimensional form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, ( 4.7 )-( 4.8 ) and ( 4.12 ) imply that the boundary conditions
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-dimensional problem is now fully formulated and is given by
equations ( 4.13 )-( 4.19 ) with boundary conditions ( 4.20 ) and ( 4.21
). The non-dimensional parameters in this problem are @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 Mixture fraction formulation

##### Formulation

We can simplify the problem by making the assumption of unity Lewis
numbers,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case we note that, from equations ( 4.15 )-( 4.17 ) and the
boundary conditions ( 4.20 )-( 4.21 ), the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly @xmath is a stationary solution of ( 4.24 )-( 4.25 ). This will
be the only solution we retain, in view of the focus of our linear
stability analysis on the base state with no flow and @xmath . A
justification for retaining only this solution is presented below.

For solutions that are periodic in @xmath of period @xmath , define the
@xmath scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Then equation ( 4.24 ) leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using integration by parts and equation ( 4.13 ), this can be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, using the Poincaré inequality and the fact that @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We therefore conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which justifies retaining only the stationary solution @xmath .

It follows on using ( 4.23 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now observe, by adding equations ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.16 ), that the
quantity @xmath satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This suggests defining the mixture fraction @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The governing equations ( 4.13 )-( 4.17 ) then become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
     @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given by equation ( 4.19 ). These equations are subject to
the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Stationary planar diffusion flame

The problem defined by ( 4.32 )-( 4.38 ) admits a stationary planar
solution with no flow given by @xmath . The temperature can then be
determined, using ( 4.34 ), by the numerical solution to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the Rayleigh number merely affects the pressure (as dictated
by equation ( 4.33 )) in the one-dimensional stationary system and does
not affect the solution for temperature.

We now let @xmath and @xmath take typical values of 10, 0.85 and 1
respectively and solve equation ( 4.39 ) with conditions ( 4.40 ) and (
4.41 ) for selected values of the Damköhler number @xmath . We use the
boundary value problem solver BVP4C, a finite difference code that
implements the three-stage Lobatto IIIa formula in Matlab [ 75 ] . We
then plot the maximum temperature of the solution against @xmath .
Figure 4.2 shows the S-shaped curve that is generated; this is a
classical curve characterising diffusion flames and has been
comprehensively studied in the context of the constant density
approximation [ 112 ] . The upper and lower branches are known as the
strongly burning and weakly burning branches respectively, and both have
been shown to be stable in the context of constant density diffusion
flames, while the middle branch has been shown to be unstable [ 113 ] .

Notable in figure 4.2 is the presence of an extinction and an ignition
value of the Damköhler number represented by points @xmath and @xmath
respectively; for values of @xmath below the extinction value the
strongly burning solution cannot exist and for @xmath above the ignition
value there is no weakly burning solution.

We are interested in instabilities caused by the effect of the
hydrodynamics on the upper branch of the S-shaped curve, in particular
in the Burke–Schumann limit of infinite Damköhler number. In § 4.7 , we
will numerically solve the governing equations in the mixture fraction
formulation to investigate these instabilities; however, in order to
treat the problem analytically as far as possible we now proceed with a
reformulation of the problem in the Boussinesq approximation.

#### 4.2.3 Boussinesq approximation

For a detailed derivation of the governing equations of combustion
theory in the Boussinesq approximation in the context of a premixed
flame see [ 114 ] . Here we use a similar approach and assume that the
thermal expansion parameter @xmath is small. Thus we expand equation (
4.19 ) as @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this result, and expanding all variables in successive powers of
@xmath in equations ( 4.32 )-( 4.38 ), yields to leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath      (4.43)
     @xmath      (4.44)
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are subject to the boundary conditions ( 4.37 )-( 4.38 ).

We have thus reduced the number of equations in the unity Lewis number
case so that the problem is now given by equations ( 4.42 )-( 4.45 )
with boundary conditions ( 4.37 )-( 4.38 ). We proceed with an
asymptotic analysis of the problem in the infinitely fast chemistry
limit @xmath , which will reduce the problem to a form comparable to the
classic non-reactive case studied in [ 86 ] and others.

### 4.3 Asymptotic analysis

We now study the problem of the Burke–Schumann diffusion flame, which
arises in the limit of infinite Damköhler number. In this case @xmath
throughout the domain to prevent an unbounded reaction rate, except at
an (infinitely thin) reaction sheet located at @xmath , say, where the
temperature is equal to its adiabatic value. Hence, using ( 4.30 )-(
4.31 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus the domain is split into two parts: the region above the reaction
sheet and the region below it, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that ( 4.48 ) and ( 4.49 )-( 4.50 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which defines the stoichiometric mixture fraction @xmath .

We expand all variables outside the thin reaction zone, as @xmath , in
terms of the thickness of the reaction zone @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This scaling follows from a reactive-diffusive balance in the reaction
sheet. Indeed, writing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with @xmath inside the
reaction sheet gives, from the leading order of equation ( 4.15 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Thus, since the diffusion term and the reaction term
(which are given by the left hand side and the right hand side of the
equation above, respectively) must balance, we have the required
scaling. We therefore write the outer expansions as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now substitute into the governing equations ( 4.42 )-( 4.45 ) which
become, to leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
     @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

from equations ( 4.49 )-( 4.50 ), so that the equation for @xmath is not
necessary. These equations are subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

from ( 4.37 )-( 4.38 ).

To close the problem we need to provide jump conditions across the
reaction sheet located at @xmath . These are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a coordinate normal to the reaction sheet. A
derivation of these in a general context has been presented by Cheatham
and Matalon [ 98 ] , who assumed a large activation energy parameter
@xmath , with leakages of the components through the reaction sheet.
Since this is not the case here, for the convenience of the reader a
short explanation of the derivation of conditions ( 4.59 )-( 4.61 ) is
given in the remainder of this section, which can be skipped by those
familiar with such an approach.

Consider a small neighbourhood of a point @xmath on the reaction sheet,
which has normal @xmath as shown in figure 4.3 . We temporarily consider
a coordinate system with origin @xmath and the @xmath -axis directed
along @xmath . Thus in a small neighbourhood of @xmath the reaction
sheet is located at @xmath . We begin by assuming all state variables
are continuous across the reaction sheet:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the notation @xmath .

Now we introduce a stretched variable @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and inner expansions in the thin reaction layer for all variables in
terms of the thickness of the reaction sheet @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that a subscript denotes successive terms in the inner expansion
and a superscript denotes successive terms in the outer expansion of a
variable. The inner and outer variables must satisfy matching conditions
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the velocity (and similar conditions on the other variables). Note
that by expanding the outer solution around @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the velocity (and similar conditions on the other variables). We
substitute the inner variables into equations ( 4.42 )-( 4.45 ) and
apply the matching conditions in order to derive jump conditions for the
outer variables across the reaction sheet located at @xmath .

To leading order in equations ( 4.42 )-( 4.43 ), after substituting in
the inner expansions ( 4.62 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be integrated, using matching condition ( 4.63 ), to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At @xmath in the @xmath momentum equation ( 4.43 ), after noting ( 4.65
), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating matching condition ( 4.64 ) with respect to @xmath and
applying to an integration of ( 4.66 ) then leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we look to @xmath in the @xmath momentum equation ( 4.43 )
and apply the differentiated form of matching condition ( 4.64 ) to find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the temperature is adiabatic at the flame we already have
condition ( 4.48 ) on the outer temperature profile, which gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, we have the jump condition on the mixture fraction, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is found by substituting ( 4.62 ) into ( 4.45 ) and integrating
across the reaction sheet. From the relations ( 4.56 ) between @xmath
and @xmath , this gives the final condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The jump conditions above are valid at @xmath in the coordinate system
chosen. We can now generalise this to all points lying on the reaction
sheet instead of just a neighbourhood of @xmath (since @xmath is
arbitrary) and thus, by substitution of @xmath with the normal
coordinate @xmath , the conditions at the reaction sheet are given by
conditions ( 4.59 )-( 4.61 ) across @xmath .

### 4.4 Linear stability analysis

To summarise, dropping the superscript notation from equations ( 4.52
)-( 4.56 ) gives the governing equations as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
     @xmath      (4.68)
     @xmath      (4.69)
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are to be solved on both sides of the reaction sheet located at
@xmath , with the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the jump conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.75)
              @xmath      (4.76)
     @xmath               (4.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

across @xmath (where @xmath denotes a coordinate normal to the reaction
sheet).

#### 4.4.1 Base State

Equations ( 4.67 )-( 4.70 ) admit a stationary planar solution with no
flow given by, using bars to denote the base state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to boundary conditions ( 4.73 ) and ( 4.74 ). Jump conditions (
4.75 )-( 4.77 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath               (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It follows from ( 4.78 )-( 4.80 ) and conditions ( 4.73 )
and ( 4.74 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, using the condition on the right of ( 4.80 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the base state pressure profile @xmath can be found by
integrating the equation on the left of ( 4.78 ) with respect to @xmath
.

#### 4.4.2 Linear stability problem

We now perturb the base state by writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a small parameter measuring the magnitude of the
perturbations (denoted by tilde). To @xmath in equations ( 4.67 )-( 4.70
) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
     @xmath      (4.88)
     @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The wall boundary conditions on the perturbed variables are given by,
using ( 4.73 )-( 4.74 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we transfer the conditions ( 4.75 )-( 4.77 ) at the reaction
sheet @xmath to @xmath by using a Taylor expansion around @xmath . For
example,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, using the perturbation to @xmath in ( 4.86 ), becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore, at @xmath of the condition to the left of ( 4.77 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, using the base state solution ( 4.84 )-( 4.85 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The other reaction sheet conditions can be derived similarly, noting
that @xmath , @xmath , their derivatives and @xmath are continuous
across the reaction sheet in the base state. This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

The linear stability problem has now been derived and is given by
equations ( 4.87 )-( 4.90 ) for @xmath , subject to the boundary
conditions ( 4.91 )-( 4.92 ) and the jump conditions ( 4.93 )-( 4.94 )
across @xmath . It is worth noting that @xmath takes different values
below and above the reaction sheet, given by ( 4.84 ) and ( 4.85 ),
respectively.

Before continuing, it can be noted that equations ( 4.87 )-( 4.90 ),
which are four equations in four variables, can be simplified into two
equations in two variables. To this end, we first take @xmath ( 4.88 )+
@xmath ( 4.89 ), which with the use of ( 4.87 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then take @xmath ( 4.89 ) to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, substitution of ( 4.95 ) into ( 4.96 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the perturbations @xmath and @xmath are governed by equations (
4.90 ) and ( 4.97 ).

#### 4.4.3 Fourier analysis

We consider normal mode solutions by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point it should be noted that three-dimensional perturbations of
the form @xmath , say, do not need to be considered because they lead to
exactly the same problem, as derived below, if the substitution @xmath
is made (known as Squire’s transformation).

##### Governing equations

Note that for the derivation of the governing equations of the linear
stability problem we do not need to consider @xmath or @xmath , but we
shall here nevertheless write the continuity equation and the momentum
equations in terms of the Fourier variables, which follows from
substituting ( 4.98 ) into ( 4.87 )-( 4.89 ), for future use:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.99)
     @xmath      (4.100)
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Continuing with the equations for @xmath and @xmath , which follow from
substituting ( 4.98 ) into ( 4.90 ) and ( 4.97 ), we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .
Substitution of ( 4.102 ) into ( 4.103 ) gives a single equation for
@xmath in each region

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, we have derived equations in the regions above and below
the reaction sheet, which depend on the derivative of the base
temperature in the respective region, given by ( 4.84 ) for @xmath and (
4.85 ) for @xmath .

Finally note that ( 4.103 ) implies that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.105)
  -- -- -- ---------

which will be useful when deriving the boundary conditions in the next
section.

##### Boundary conditions

On using equations ( 4.99 ) and ( 4.105 ), which give @xmath in terms of
@xmath and @xmath respectively, boundary conditions ( 4.91 )-( 4.92 )
become, after substituting in ( 4.98 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Jump conditions

Conditions ( 4.94 ) can be written, after substituting in ( 4.98 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The velocity jump conditions ( 4.93 ) convert to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also on using ( 4.93 ) we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, considering equation ( 4.99 ) and its successive differentiations
we can convert ( 4.108 ) to conditions on @xmath , namely,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, using ( 4.109 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, substitution of ( 4.99 ) into ( 4.100 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence ( 4.110 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the linear stability problem for the system is fully formulated. It
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
     @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the wall boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the mass/momentum jump conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the reaction sheet conditions, which follow from using ( 4.105 ) in
( 4.107 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 (4.115)
                 (4.116)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the averaged flame position is given by @xmath .

We now have a sixth order ordinary differential equation for the
velocity perturbation @xmath in each region, with 13 auxiliary
conditions (six boundary conditions at the wall and seven conditions at
the averaged reaction sheet). These conditions are sufficient to
determine @xmath along with the eigenvalue @xmath , which will determine
the linear stability of the Burke–Schumann diffusion flame. For given
values of @xmath and @xmath , if the real part of the growth rate @xmath
is greater than zero for any value of the wavenumber @xmath , the system
is unstable. If the real part of @xmath is negative for all values of
@xmath the system is stable.

### 4.5 Solution of the linear stability problem

It is worth noting at this point that in the non-reactive case it can be
shown that the growth rate @xmath is real and the marginal state is
characterised by @xmath ; this is called the principle of the exchange
of stabilities [ 86 , pp. 24–26] . Since this is not straightforward in
our case, we instead begin by solving the linear stability problem
numerically using the BVP4C solver in Matlab to find the eigenvalue
@xmath and investigate whether its imaginary part is zero at marginal
stability. If so, we can characterise the marginal state as the state
where @xmath and proceed to solve the problem in a similar approach to
the non-reactive case.

#### 4.5.1 Numerical solution for @xmath

In this section, we numerically solve equations ( 4.111 ) and ( 4.112 )
with conditions ( 4.113 )-( 4.117 ). We use the
eigen-boundary-value-problem Matlab solver BVP4C [ 75 ] to find the
value of the growth rate @xmath for given values of the wavenumber
@xmath , the Rayleigh number @xmath and the stoichiometric coefficient
@xmath . The key result is that @xmath is always found to be real.
Figure 4.4 shows that as @xmath increases for selected values of @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath passes from negative values to positive values and
there is a marginal value of @xmath at which the system changes from
stability to instability and @xmath . We also plot the effect of the
wavenumber on the growth rate for several values of the Rayleigh number
in figure 4.5 , which clearly shows the existence of a critical Rayleigh
number. If the Rayleigh number takes a value higher than its critical
value, there is a band of wavenumbers for which @xmath and the system is
unstable.

At this point we could produce many more plots investigating the
stability of the system, however to avoid repetition we merely note that
the growth rate is always found to be real and thus @xmath characterises
the marginal state. We can therefore simplify the problem by setting
@xmath in the governing equations and then solve to find the marginal
Rayleigh number. In the next section we will solve the marginal problem
and then discuss the stability of the system in more detail.

#### 4.5.2 Marginal state

Motivated by the conclusions of the previous section, here we set @xmath
in equations ( 4.111 ) and ( 4.112 ) with conditions ( 4.113 )-( 4.117
), characterising the marginal state. This is the state at which the
system passes from being stable to being unstable, and thus the Rayleigh
number for which this state exists for a given wavenumber @xmath is the
marginal Rayleigh number at that wavenumber. Hence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the wall boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the mass/momentum jump conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the reaction sheet conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.122)
     @xmath      (4.123)
     @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the averaged flame position is given by @xmath .

Following a similar approach to that of Chandrasekhar [ 86 , pp. 36–42]
, we let the velocity perturbation @xmath take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we let

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we find that the roots of these equations are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have six roots for the solution below the reaction sheet and six
roots for the solution above it, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where * denotes the complex conjugate. Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the solution for the velocity perturbation can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.126)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.127)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

The problem has 13 auxiliary conditions while the general solution has
12 constants of integration. We therefore need to apply 12 conditions in
order to determine @xmath for a specified value of @xmath and use the
13th condition to determine @xmath , from which we can find the marginal
Rayleigh number using the formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To write the boundary conditions on @xmath in matrix form, we begin by
noting, using ( 4.126 )-( 4.127 ), that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The conditions ( 4.120 )-( 4.123 ) can then be written in the matrix
form @xmath for the vector of constants @xmath , which can be solved
using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then write the final condition ( 4.124 ), say, as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a vector. A solution that satisfies all of the auxiliary
conditions can therefore be found by solving the matrix equation ( 4.129
) for given values of @xmath and @xmath in Matlab to find @xmath and
then using Matlab’s fzero function with @xmath as the input. This will
lead to a solution for @xmath and @xmath , from which the marginal
Rayleigh number can be found using equation ( 4.128 ). Note that the
temperature perturbation profile can be recovered from the velocity
perturbation profile using the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are found by setting @xmath in ( 4.105 ) and using ( 4.125 ).

### 4.6 Discussion of results

In this section we present the results found by solving the problem in
the marginal state using the method described at the end of the previous
section. The aim is to calculate the critical Rayleigh number @xmath ,
which characterises the conditions at the threshold of instability, and
its dependence upon the stoichiometric coefficient @xmath .

We begin with plots of how the Rayleigh number in the marginal state
varies with the wavenumber @xmath for two selected values of the
stoichiometric coefficient @xmath , provided in figure 4.6 . Indicated
in the figure are the calculated values of the critical Rayleigh number
@xmath and the corresponding critical wavenumber @xmath for each value
of @xmath . It can be seen that, for a given value of @xmath , if @xmath
there is a band of wavenumbers for which the growth rate @xmath ; thus
if @xmath the perturbations made to the base state grow exponentially in
time and the system is unstable. Velocity perturbation profiles versus
@xmath at the onset of instability @xmath for selected values of @xmath
are presented in figure 4.7 .

Next we plot, in figure 4.8 , the variation in @xmath with the
stoichiometric coefficient @xmath and the flame position @xmath .
Indicated in each plot is the critical Rayleigh number given in
Chandrasekhar [ 86 , p. 39] for the non-reactive problem with two rigid
boundaries. The fact that @xmath in our reactive case is found to be
very close to the non-reactive critical Rayleigh number for large values
of @xmath , but not exactly equal in the limit @xmath , can be explained
by considering the equations governing the marginal state. As @xmath ,
the problem in the upper half-space above the reaction sheet reduces to
the non-reactive problem with two rigid boundaries, except for the
conditions ( 4.122 ) and ( 4.123 ) at the reaction sheet. Thus, as
@xmath the critical Rayleigh number approaches a value slightly
different to the non-reactive critical Rayleigh number, as can be seen
in figure 4.8 . It is found that as the flame moves away from the lower
boundary, @xmath first decreases slightly then increases to very large
values as the flame approaches the upper boundary.

It can be seen in figure 4.8 that the order of magnitude of @xmath can
significantly deviate from the order of magnitude of the critical
Rayleigh number in the non-reactive case, especially as @xmath . In
order to facilitate comparison with the non-reactive case, we scale the
Rayleigh number, by using as reference length the distance of the flame
from the upper boundary @xmath instead of @xmath . This scaled Rayleigh
number is more comparable to the Rayleigh number in the non-reactive
case because both use as reference length the distance from the hot
surface to the cold upper boundary. The scaled critical Rayleigh number
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In figure 4.9 we plot @xmath against the flame position @xmath and the
stoichiometric coefficient @xmath and compare with two non-reactive
cases. The first is the case of two rigid boundaries; the second is the
case of one rigid boundary and one free-surface boundary. Similarly to
above it is found that, as @xmath , @xmath is of the order of magnitude
of the critical Rayleigh number in the rigid-rigid non-reactive case. It
is also found that for @xmath (i.e. @xmath ), @xmath is of the order of
magnitude of the critical Rayleigh number in the rigid-free non-reactive
case. As the flame approaches the upper boundary, in the limit @xmath ,
@xmath decreases to lower values.

### 4.7 Numerical study

We now proceed to a full numerical treatment of the problem, using the
finite element package Comsol Multiphysics to directly simulate the
physical system. We solve the time-dependent equations ( 4.32 )-( 4.36 )
with boundary conditions ( 4.37 )-( 4.38 ). As initial condition we use
the planar strongly burning planar diffusion flame (which is found on
the upper branch of the curve in figure 4.2 ). The aims in this section
are: first, to investigate the nature of the instabilities that occur
for values of the Rayleigh number slightly higher than @xmath ; second,
to test the results of the linear stability analysis presented in the
previous section against numerical results; finally, to test the effect
of thermal expansion and finite chemistry on @xmath .

All numerical calculations are performed for the parameter values @xmath
and @xmath , in a numerical domain of aspect ratio 10; this aspect ratio
has been shown to be sufficiently large to approximate an infinite
domain in the non-reactive case by Gelfgat [ 115 ] . The domain is
discretised into a non-uniform grid of approximately 120,000 triangular
elements, with local refinement around the reaction zone and the upper
and lower boundaries; various tests have been performed to ensure the
mesh-independence of the results. We use a value of @xmath x @xmath to
approximate an infinite Damköhler number in all calculations unless
otherwise specified.

We begin with an illustrative calculation, shown in figure 4.10 , which
displays the nature of the instability that occurs if @xmath takes a
value slightly higher than @xmath . The figure shows the stationary,
stable states that the system reaches for two selected values of @xmath
when @xmath . The mechanism of the fluid instability is similar to that
of the non-reactive case, described in detail by Chandrasekhar [ 86 ,
pp.9–10] and Getling [ 87 , p. 12] , whereby fluid of higher density
lies above the hotter, lower density fluid causing convection to occur.
The induced flow enhances the transport of fuel and oxidiser to certain
parts of the flame, generating a cellular structure, as shown in the
figure.

Next, we test the validity of the linear stability results in the
Boussinesq approximation and the effect of compressibility on the
critical Rayleigh number. In figure 4.11 we plot the relationship
between (a) @xmath and @xmath and (b) @xmath and @xmath for several
values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . We also plot @xmath
as predicted by the linear stability analysis, for comparison. As
expected, the values of @xmath calculated for a low value of @xmath are
similar to the values calculated in the linear stability analysis. This
is because the Boussinesq approximation is derived from an expansion in
small @xmath of the governing equations.

The numerical results corresponding to larger, more realistic values of
the thermal expansion coefficient show several discrepancies with those
of the linear stability analysis. Firstly, the non-Boussinesq system is
found to be more stable, a well known result in non-reactive
Rayleigh–Bénard convection [ 116 ] . Secondly, the system is found to
exhibit hysteresis at the onset of instability, whereby the system
allows two different steady states for the same parameter values as
shown in figure 4.12 ; again, it is well known in the literature for the
non-reactive case that this is associated with departures from the
Boussinesq approximation [ 111 , 87 ] . Despite these differences,
figure 4.11 shows that the relationship between @xmath and @xmath is
found to be qualitatively similar for all of the selected values of
@xmath .

To close this section, we now test the effect of finite chemistry on the
critical Rayleigh number by varying the Damköhler number @xmath . The
results, presented in figure 4.13 , show that @xmath decreases as @xmath
decreases. In the limit @xmath there is little change in @xmath as
@xmath varies; indeed, the curve in the figure can be seen to flatten
out near @xmath . Thus the value @xmath used previously to approximate
infinitely fast chemistry is sufficiently large. As @xmath approaches
its extinction value @xmath the system becomes considerably more
unstable and @xmath is reduced significantly.

### 4.8 Conclusion

We have studied, using analytical and numerical methods, the stability
of a planar diffusion flame in an infinitely long channel with porous
walls, under gravitational effects. The conditions under which the
diffusion flame becomes unstable have been determined by calculation of
the critical Rayleigh number, which defines the threshold of
instability. Such results do not seem to be available in the literature.

First, we have investigated the stability of the Burke–Schumann flame,
using a linear stability analysis in the Boussinesq approximation. The
relationship between the position of the flame in the channel (governed
by the stoichiometric coefficient) and the critical Rayleigh number has
been determined. The growth rate of the linear stability problem was
first confirmed to be real using numerical methods, so that the system
could be studied analytically in the marginal state using a similar
method to that of the non-reactive problem.

Results have been presented, which show that as the flame approaches the
lower boundary with increasing stoichiometric coefficient, the critical
Rayleigh number is close to the well-known value it takes in the
non-reactive case with two rigid boundaries. A rescaling of the Rayleigh
number using the distance between the flame and the cold upper boundary
as reference length was performed to aid in the comparison between the
reactive and non-reactive problems. The scaled critical Rayleigh number
was found to be (a) of the order of magnitude of the critical Rayleigh
number in the non-reactive problem with two rigid boundaries, as the
flame approaches the lower wall and (b) of the order of magnitude of the
critical Rayleigh number in the non-reactive problem with one rigid and
one free-surface boundary, when the flame is located a certain distance
from the lower wall (which has been calculated).

Second, we have provided numerical solutions of the full set of
governing equations for several values of the thermal expansion
coefficient using a finite-element method with a high Damköhler number.
The results show that when the Rayleigh number is higher than its
critical value, the fluid forms convection rolls as in the non-reactive
case, which interact with the flame to generate cellular structures.

For weak values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath , which
corresponds to conditions in which the Boussinesq approximation is
expected to be valid, the numerical results show strong agreement with
those of the linear stability analysis. For larger values of @xmath ,
there is qualitative agreement between the numerical and analytical
results but several discrepancies caused by a higher thermal expansion
coefficient. The non-Boussinesq system was found to be more stable than
the system in the Boussinesq approximation and to exhibit hysteresis at
the onset of instability, which are well known results in the
non-reactive case.

Finally, we have investigated the effect of finite chemistry on the
system. The results show that the system becomes less stable as the
Damköhler number @xmath is decreased, especially as @xmath approaches
its extinction value @xmath , below which the strongly burning diffusion
flame cannot exist. For large values of @xmath the decrease in the
critical Rayleigh number with decreasing @xmath was found to be small.

The results in this study are a crucial step in the understanding of
gravitational effects on diffusion flames with important ramifications
to combustion in non-uniform mixtures such as triple flames. Chapter 5
will concentrate on the effect of gravity on steadily propagating triple
flames, using the characterisation of the instability of the trailing
planar diffusion flame in this study as a basis.

## Chapter 5 The effect of gravity and thermal expansion on the
propagation of a triple flame in a horizontal channel

### 5.1 Introduction

The study of triple flames, which consist of two premixed branches and a
trailing diffusion flame, has been extensive since their first
experimental observation by Phillips [ 26 ] . Early analytical studies
were carried out by Ohki and Tsuge [ 27 ] , followed by Dold and
collaborators [ 28 , 29 ] . These initial studies utilised the constant
density approximation, decoupling the underlying hydrodynamics of the
system from the equations of heat and mass. Most analytical studies
since have used this approximation while investigating several practical
aspects affecting triple flames. These aspects include preferential
diffusion [ 117 , 118 ] , heat losses [ 119 , 120 , 121 ] ,
reversibility of the chemical reaction [ 122 , 123 ] and the presence of
a parallel flow [ 110 ] . For further references see the review papers [
30 ] and [ 31 ] .

In this chapter, which is based on a paper by Pearce and Daou [ 1 ] , we
dispense with the constant density approximation in order to describe
the coupled effect of thermal expansion and gravity on the propagation
of a triple flame. To this end, it is imperative to first understand
this effect on the “strongly burning” diffusion flame, which forms one
of the triple flame’s branches. Steadily propagating triple flames are
only expected for parameter values for which the diffusion flame exists
and is stable. In Chapter 4 , we undertook a comprehensive study on the
stability of a diffusion flame under the influence of gravity and
thermal expansion in the channel configuration adopted in the present
chapter (see also the paper by Pearce and Daou [ 2 ] on this topic).
There is thus a clear understanding of the values that the parameters
can take to ensure the existence and stability of the trailing diffusion
flame.

The first attempt to understand the effects of variable density on
triple flames was undertaken by Ruetsch et al. [ 32 ] , who investigated
the problem numerically. They have also derived a scaling law describing
the increase in the propagation speed of the triple flame above the
planar premixed flame speed due to thermal expansion. The increase was
attributed to the divergence of the flow field ahead of the flame. The
result was confirmed in [ 124 ] using numerical simulation; further
related numerical studies were carried out in [ 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 ] .

Triple flames propagating in a direction parallel to the direction of
gravity have been investigated numerically and experimentally in [ 37 ,
38 , 39 , 40 ] . It has been found that the propagation speed of a
triple flame propagating downwards is decreased in comparison to that of
a triple flame in the absence of gravity. The change in the propagation
speed has been explained in [ 39 ] as being due to an increase in the
acceleration of the gas ahead of the triple flame leading edge, caused
by buoyancy. Conversely, upward propagation leads to an increase in the
propagation speed. To our knowledge no dedicated studies have been
undertaken on triple flames propagating in a direction perpendicular to
gravity.

In the present chapter we investigate the combined effect of thermal
expansion and gravity on the propagation of a triple flame in a
horizontal channel with rigid walls, through which fuel and oxidiser are
injected. The main aim is to describe the behaviour of the triple flame
in terms of three non-dimensional parameters; the flame-front thickness,
the thermal expansion coefficient and the Rayleigh number.

The chapter is structured as follows. In § 5.2 we provide a
non-dimensional formulation of the problem. In § 5.3 we present some
important preliminary results used in later discussions, related to the
planar premixed flame and to the existence and stability of the planar
diffusion flame. In § 5.4 , we present the numerical results obtained.
In particular, the effect of thermal expansion and gravity on a triple
flame is described, with special emphasis on the relationship between
the propagation speed @xmath and the flame-front thickness @xmath for
various values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath and the
Rayleigh number @xmath . We close the chapter with a summary of the main
findings and recommendations for future studies.

### 5.2 Formulation

We investigate the problem of a triple flame propagating through an
infinitely long channel of height @xmath , where fuel is provided at the
upper wall and oxidiser at the lower wall, as shown in figure 5.1 . For
simplicity, the temperatures of the walls are assumed to be equal. The
governing equations consist of the Navier–Stokes equations coupled to
equations for temperature and mass fractions of fuel and oxidiser. The
combustion is modelled as a single irreversible one-step reaction of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where F denotes the fuel and O the oxidiser. The quantity @xmath denotes
the mass of oxidiser consumed and @xmath the heat released, both per
unit mass of fuel.
The overall reaction rate @xmath is taken to follow an Arrhenius law of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
the density, the fuel mass fraction, the oxidiser mass fraction, the
universal gas constant, the temperature, the pre-exponential factor and
the activation energy of the reaction, respectively.

#### 5.2.1 Governing Equations

The governing equations in the low Mach number formulation will be
written here using a co-ordinate system attached to the flame front.
More precisely, if @xmath denotes the propagation speed of the flame
front relative to the laboratory (with @xmath indicating a propagation
to the left), we shall use the co-ordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Dropping primes, we write the governing equations as the continuity
equation

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.1)
  -- -- -- -------

momentum equations

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.2)
           (5.3)
  -- -- -- -------

temperature equation

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.4)
  -- -- -- -------

fuel and oxidiser mass fraction equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the equation of state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the hydrodynamic pressure and @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath denote the diffusion coefficients of heat, fuel and oxidiser,
respectively. @xmath refers to the temperature of the unburnt mixture
which is also the temperature of both channel walls, while @xmath is the
density of the unburnt mixture. We assume that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are constant, as are the specific heat capacity @xmath , thermal
conductivity @xmath and dynamic viscosity @xmath . The flame speed
@xmath is an eigenvalue of the problem and must be determined as part of
the solution.
The conditions as @xmath correspond to the frozen solution with no flow,
which is independent of @xmath and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.8)
     @xmath      (5.9)
     @xmath      (5.10)
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath refer to the prescribed mass fractions at the
fuel and oxidiser sides respectively. The channel walls are also
considered rigid; thus the lateral boundary conditions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Downstream as @xmath the solution corresponds to the one-dimensional
strongly burning solution of the diffusion flame, which is again
independent of @xmath .
For large activation energies, the flame-front region is expected to be
centred around the stoichiometric surface @xmath where @xmath .
Upstream, the position of the stoichiometric surface can be determined
from equations ( 5.8 )-( 5.10 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalised stoichiometric coefficient.
We now introduce the non-dimensional variables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the subscript ’st’ denotes values at the upstream stoichiometric
surface. Here @xmath is the adiabatic flame temperature, @xmath is the
Zeldovich number or non-dimensional activation energy and @xmath is the
thermal expansion coefficient. In non-dimensionalising we have used as
unit speed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the laminar burning speed of the stoichiometric planar flame to
leading order for @xmath .
Inserting the scalings above into equations ( 5.1 )-( 5.7 ) leads to the
non-dimensional equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
     @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath      (5.18)
     @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a modified pressure given by @xmath and @xmath is the
non-dimensional propagation speed relative to the laboratory. The
non-dimensional parameters are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are the Rayleigh number, the flame-front thickness @xmath measured
against the unit length @xmath , the fuel and oxidiser Lewis numbers and
the Prandtl number, respectively. Here @xmath is the kinematic viscosity
@xmath . Note that @xmath is related to the Damköhler number used in
Chapter 4 by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The non-dimensional reaction rate is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a heat release parameter given by @xmath . Note that in
the low Mach number approximation the two parameters @xmath and @xmath
are in fact equal, which follows from equation ( 5.7 ). In this study,
however, we leave the two distinct to aid comparison of our results with
those previously obtained in the constant density approximation [ 118 ]
, where @xmath appears in the reaction term @xmath and only there. To
assess the effect of thermal expansion we shall vary the coefficient
@xmath , while maintaining @xmath constant, as in [ 118 , 119 ] . Thus
as @xmath the equations in our study reduce to those of the constant
density approximation ¹ ¹ 1 In asymptotic studies with @xmath , of
course @xmath is unimportant and can be set to zero. However, for finite
values of @xmath , say @xmath (which is commonly used in numerical
studies), @xmath has a noticeable effect. .

Finally, ( 5.12 )-( 5.13 ) imply that the boundary conditions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath      (5.27)
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-dimensional problem is now fully formulated and is given by
equations ( 5.16 )-( 5.22 ), subject to the boundary conditions ( 5.24
)-( 5.28 ). The non-dimensional parameters in this problem are @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Throughout this study we will make the assumption of unity Lewis
numbers,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.3 Preliminary study: the planar premixed flame and the planar
diffusion flame

As a preliminary study whose results will be useful for subsequent
discussions, in this section we investigate the planar premixed flame
and the planar diffusion flame. We will begin with a discussion of how
the propagation speed of the planar premixed flame is affected by the
parameters @xmath and @xmath . We will then study the planar diffusion
flame to determine the values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for which it
is expected to exist in a stable state.

#### 5.3.1 Planar premixed flame

The equations governing the planar premixed flame are the stationary,
@xmath -independent form of equations ( 5.16 )-( 5.22 ), subject to the
boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stationary, one-dimensional problem is solved using the
finite-element package Comsol Multiphysics. The aim is to investigate
the effect of the parameters @xmath and @xmath on the numerically
calculated planar premixed flame propagation speed @xmath , which can be
compared to its asymptotic value as @xmath . We give the other
parameters fixed values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

In the limit @xmath the (dimensional) propagation speed of the
stoichiometric planar flame undergoing thermal expansion should approach
the asymptotically derived value @xmath , given by equation ( 5.15 ).
Thus, since we have scaled the velocity by this value, the numerically
calculated propagation speed @xmath should approach unity for all values
of @xmath as @xmath . Figure 5.2 shows that the numerically calculated
value of @xmath does indeed approach unity with increasing @xmath for a
fixed value of @xmath , as expected.

For the remainder of this study we let @xmath take a typical value,
namely @xmath . From figure 5.2 it can be seen that for this value of
@xmath , the propagation speed @xmath deviates from its expected value
of unity by about 12%. However, to achieve a notable increase in
accuracy would involve significant extra computational cost.

It will also be useful in later discussions to describe how @xmath
varies with the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . Figure 5.3
presents a plot of @xmath versus @xmath for a fixed value of @xmath .

#### 5.3.2 Planar diffusion flame

Steadily propagating triple flames are not expected if @xmath exceeds
the extinction value @xmath of the planar diffusion flame. Here we
therefore numerically solve the underlying one-dimensional equations
independent of @xmath , to produce a plot of @xmath versus @xmath ,
which is provided in figure 5.4 .

A plot of the values of @xmath for which the trailing planar diffusion
flame becomes unstable under gravity will also be useful in later
discussions. This stability problem was investigated in Chapter 4 (see
also the paper by Pearce and Daou [ 2 ] ), from which important results
relevant to our study are summarised in figure 5.5 . Shown is an
adaptation of figure 4.13 , plotting the critical value of @xmath versus
the Rayleigh number @xmath , for @xmath . This critical value defines
the neutral stability curve which separates the two stability regions in
the figure. These regions, labelled A and B, define the regions of
stability and instability of the planar diffusion flame, respectively.

### 5.4 Results for a triple flame propagating in a channel

In this section we present the results obtained by solving the
stationary form of equations ( 5.16 )-( 5.22 ) with boundary conditions
( 5.24 )-( 5.28 ), using the finite-element package Comsol Multiphysics.
The main aim of the work is to calculate the propagation speed @xmath in
terms of the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which represent
thermal expansion, strain rate and gravity, respectively. The other
parameters are assigned the values @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath throughout this section. We begin with an investigation into the
effect of thermal expansion on a triple flame in the absence of gravity.
This is followed by a study on the combined effect of gas expansion and
gravity.

#### 5.4.1 Effect of thermal expansion on a triple flame in the absence
of gravity

In this section we investigate the effect of thermal expansion on a
triple flame in the absence of gravity. We therefore let @xmath
throughout the section. Since the aim of the study is to calculate
@xmath , we will begin with a plot of @xmath versus @xmath for several
values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . In order to fully
understand the effect of the two parameters @xmath and @xmath , we will
end with a comparison of how the streamlines and reaction rate contours
change with increasing @xmath for several fixed values of @xmath .

##### Propagation speed of a triple flame

Figure 5.6 shows a plot of the propagation speed @xmath of the triple
flame (scaled by the numerically calculated propagation speed @xmath of
the planar premixed flame, shown in figure 5.3 ) versus @xmath for
several values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . The maximum
value @xmath can take for each @xmath is the extinction value @xmath of
the trailing planar diffusion flame, which can be found in figure 5.4 .
The monotonic relationship between @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath
decreasing to negative values when @xmath is close to @xmath , is a well
known property of constant density triple flames with Lewis numbers
greater than or equal to unity [ 118 ] . It is found that this property
remains valid for triple flames undergoing thermal expansion, for all
values of @xmath , as shown in figure 5.6 .

It can also be seen in figure 5.6 that, if @xmath , @xmath approaches a
value larger than that of the planar premixed flame as @xmath approaches
zero (i.e. @xmath as @xmath ). This result agrees with previous studies,
which have found that thermal expansion causes an increase in the
propagation speed of a triple flame above the speed of the planar
premixed flame [ 32 , 124 ] .

In fact, it can be derived (see [ 32 ] ) that under the influence of
thermal expansion, and in the limit @xmath , the ratio of the
propagation speed of the triple flame to that of the planar premixed
flame can be approximated by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus in the case @xmath , say, the propagation speed of the triple flame
(when scaled by the propagation speed of the planar premixed flame) can
be expected to approach approximately the value 2.58 as @xmath .
Therefore our results are in good agreement with the predictions made in
[ 32 ] , as can be seen in figure 5.6 .

##### Comparative cases for fixed @xmath

Figures 5.7 – 5.10 show the reaction rate contours and streamlines of
the system for increasing values of @xmath , with several fixed values
of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath . Examining, for example,
figure 5.10 shows the mechanism for the increase in triple flame speed
above that of the planar premixed flame with thermal expansion as @xmath
, discussed in the previous section.

The figure shows that, for small @xmath , ahead of the flame front the
streamlines diverge. As explained in detail in [ 32 ] , the divergence
of the streamlines occurs because the fluid velocity normal to the flame
front increases with thermal expansion, while the fluid velocity
tangential to the flame front remains the same. The flow velocity vector
is therefore bent towards the centreline (or stoichiometric surface) of
the triple flame as it crosses the flame front. This must be
accommodated by a divergence of the streamlines, which causes a drop in
the horizontal component of the fluid velocity just ahead of the flame
front. For small @xmath , since the flame front is quasi-planar, the
fluid velocity just ahead of the flame should be approximately equal to
the propagation speed of the planar-premixed flame @xmath . Thus, since
the fluid velocity drops ahead of the flame front, the fluid velocity
upstream of the flame must be above @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Effect of gravity on a triple flame

In this section we investigate the combined effect of thermal expansion
and gravity on a triple flame. Throughout this section we let the
thermal expansion coefficient take the typical value @xmath . Note that
we only consider values in parameter space for which the underlying
planar diffusion flame is stable, as shown in figure 5.5 . Since the aim
of the study is to calculate the propagation speed @xmath , we will
begin with a plot of @xmath versus @xmath for several values of the
Rayleigh number @xmath . We will then plot graphs of @xmath versus
@xmath for selected values of @xmath to further capture the complex
relationships that are displayed between the physical parameters and the
propagation speed. We will end with a comparison of how the streamlines
and reaction rate contours change with increasing @xmath for several
fixed values of @xmath .

##### Propagation speed of a triple flame

Figure 5.11 shows a plot of the propagation speed @xmath of the triple
flame versus @xmath , for selected values of the Rayleigh number @xmath
. The figure shows, firstly, that in the limit @xmath the Rayleigh
number has very little effect on the propagation speed of a triple
flame. This could be easily deduced by considering equation ( 5.18 ) and
noting that, as @xmath , the buoyancy term does not enter the problem at
@xmath unless @xmath . Secondly, the figure shows that there is a
critical Rayleigh number, calculated as approximately @xmath , above
which the graph of @xmath versus @xmath ceases to be monotonic. Finally,
it shows the complex behaviour of the system for even higher values of
@xmath . It is found that there can exist three different steady
solutions for some low values of @xmath (i.e. the system exhibits
hysteresis). It is also found that at @xmath , there is a local maximum
in the graph of @xmath versus @xmath . As @xmath approaches its
extinction value @xmath , @xmath is found to fall to negative values as
in the case without gravity.

Some of the complex behaviour of the system can be captured by
maintaining @xmath fixed and varying @xmath . Graphs of @xmath versus
@xmath for selected values of @xmath are plotted in figure 5.12 . In
figures 5.12 – 5.12 , in which @xmath takes a low value, the hysteresis
displayed by the system can be clearly seen, whereby for certain values
of @xmath there are three solutions for @xmath . The middle branches of
these hysteresis curves have been found to consist of unstable
solutions. For a slightly higher value of @xmath there is no longer
found to be a multiplicity of solutions; the propagation speed has a
local minimum at a certain value of @xmath before increasing as @xmath
reaches higher values, as shown in figure 5.12 . In figure 5.12 , in
which @xmath , @xmath is seen to increase monotonically with @xmath .
Figure 5.12 shows that if @xmath for a triple flame without gravity, the
propagation speed remains near zero as @xmath increases. Finally, figure
5.12 shows that when @xmath is near its extinction value (with the
propagation speed being negative), @xmath decreases monotonically with
@xmath .

For sufficiently small @xmath , as in figures 5.12 – 5.12 , it can be
seen that @xmath decreases with increasing @xmath for not too large
@xmath . This can be explained by considering the physical behaviour of
the system, which we proceed to investigate next.

##### Comparative cases for fixed @xmath

Figures 5.13 – 5.15 show the reaction rate contours and streamlines of
the system with increasing values of @xmath , for several fixed values
of @xmath . ² ² 2 It is important to note that the solutions plotted for
@xmath in figures 5.13 – 5.15 lie on the upper branch of the hysteresis
curves described in § 5.4.1 , where applicable. All of the steady
solutions plotted in figures 5.13 – 5.15 have been found to be stable by
running time-dependent simulations. From these diagrams it can be seen
that buoyancy forces cause the formation of vortices upstream of the
flame (or downstream of a negatively propagating triple flame). For
higher values of @xmath , the vortex formed is found to be larger in its
size and the strength of its flow.

These vortices can be explained as being caused by the temperature
gradient from cold to hot along the positive @xmath -direction in the
channel. It has been found that in a channel or pipe in the absence of a
flame, differentially heated end walls cause the fluid in the channel or
pipe to flow from hot to cold along the top of the domain, and from cold
to hot along the bottom of the domain [ 125 ] . The flow is explained in
[ 125 ] as being due to buoyancy forces caused by the change in density
with temperature. A similar mechanism can explain the vortices caused by
a triple flame in a channel and thus the reduction in the propagation
speed of the triple flame for small values of @xmath , when the Rayleigh
number is increased above zero.

The flow of fluid from hot to cold at the top of the domain and cold to
hot at the bottom causes a downward flow in front of a positively
propagating triple flame, bending the stoichiometric isosurface ahead of
the flame downwards. Effectively this reduces the component of the
propagation velocity in the horizontal direction.

More precisely, for small values of @xmath (for which the flame front is
quasi-planar), the fluid velocity perpendicular to the flame front
across the flame is approximately given by the planar premixed flame
speed @xmath . Thus, when the stoichiometric isosurface ahead of the
flame is bent to an angle @xmath to the horizontal by the downward flow
ahead of the flame, the propagation speed can be expected to be
approximately @xmath , as shown in figure 5.16 . Therefore for small
@xmath , an increase in the Rayleigh number (which causes the vortices
ahead of the flame to be stronger, and hence bends the stoichiometric
isosurface further downwards and increases @xmath ) leads to a decrease
in the propagation speed @xmath , in the absence of other effects.

This physical behaviour is best illustrated by considering the triple
flame under the influence of gravity but in the absence of thermal
expansion, so that the acceleration of the flow field as it crosses the
triple flame does not mask the effects of buoyancy. To do this, we must
make use of the Boussinesq approximation, and expand the ideal gas
equation of density, given by equation ( 5.22 ), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives @xmath to leading order in every term in equations ( 5.16 )-(
5.21 ), except the buoyancy term in equation ( 5.18 ), which becomes
@xmath .

Now we numerically solve equations ( 5.16 )-( 5.21 ) with boundary
conditions ( 5.24 )-( 5.28 ) in the Boussinesq approximation, for a
small value of the Rayleigh number, as @xmath . Plotted in figure 5.17
is the vertical component of the velocity along the centreline of the
triple flame located at @xmath . It can be seen that there is a
downwards flow upstream of the point where the reaction rate reaches a
maximum, and an upwards flow downstream of it. This clearly illustrates
the vortex formed by the triple flame and the downwards flow ahead of
the flame front.

### 5.5 Conclusion

In this study, the effect of thermal expansion and gravity on a triple
flame propagating in a horizontal channel where the fuel and oxidiser
concentrations are prescribed at the walls has been investigated. This
seems to be the first investigation dedicated to triple flame
propagation in a direction perpendicular to gravity. The problem has
been formulated in the low Mach number approximation and solved
numerically. The effect of the flame-front thickness @xmath on the
propagation speed @xmath has been described for several values of the
thermal expansion coefficient @xmath and the Rayleigh number @xmath .

It has been found that the well-known monotonic relationship between
@xmath and @xmath that is present in the constant density case (which
arises in the limit @xmath ) remains valid for @xmath , when @xmath
(i.e. in the absence of gravity). In fact, the influence of @xmath on
the triple flame for @xmath is found to agree with the conclusions of
the study [ 32 ] , where the physical mechanism for the increase in
propagation speed has been explained.

Under the influence of gravity we have shown that the monotonic
relationship between @xmath and @xmath is only present for values of
@xmath below a critical value which has been determined. Further, it has
been shown that, if @xmath takes a value higher than this critical
value, there is a local maximum in the graph of @xmath versus @xmath ,
as can be seen in figure 5.11 . The system has been shown to exhibit
hysteresis for even higher values of the Rayleigh number.

The complex relationship between @xmath and @xmath has been further
investigated by fixing @xmath and varying @xmath . It has been found
that the graph of @xmath versus @xmath (see figure 5.12 ) depends
strongly on the value of @xmath chosen. Time-dependent simulations have
shown that all of the steady solutions presented are stable, except for
solutions on the middle branch of the hysteresis curves presented in
figure 5.12 . Finally, a physical argument has been provided, which
explains the decrease of @xmath with increasing gravity for small values
of @xmath .

The results of this study provide valuable insight into the behaviour of
a triple flame under gravitational effects and illustrate the complexity
and variety of the scenarios that arise. A further aspect of the problem
that has yet to be studied is the transient behaviour of a triple flame
that is unstable due to gravitational effects. This will be addressed in
Chapter 6 , which involves the numerical solution of the time-dependent
equations for values of @xmath higher than the critical Rayleigh number
for the instability of a planar diffusion flame.

## Chapter 6 Initiation and instability of triple flames subject to
thermal expansion and gravity

### 6.1 Introduction

Understanding the transient behaviour of a flame from initiation to
steady propagation, and in some cases instability, is a vital part of
fundamental combustion research. In this chapter we study the problem of
triple flame initiation in a mixing layer, taking the combined effect of
thermal expansion and gravity into account. As well as investigating the
effect of these phenomena on the energy required for initiation of
triple flames from a two-dimensional ignition kernel, we study the
transient behaviour of a triple flame with a trailing diffusion flame
that is either stable or unstable due to gravitational effects.

The problem of ignition in homogeneous mixtures, which leads to the
propagation of premixed flames, has been the focus of a large amount of
research. In the particular case of spherically expanding premixed
flames, a criterion for the energy required for ignition is provided by
the thermal energy of a non-propagating, spherically symmetric solution
of the governing equations known as a Zeldovich flame ball [ 126 ] .
Flame balls have been found to be typically unstable under adiabatic
conditions, and small perturbations can lead to either an outwardly
propagating flame or an inwardly propagating flame and eventual
extinction [ 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 ] . Further studies in the literature
have investigated the transient behaviour of spherical premixed flames
from an initial ignition kernel, depending on aspects such as heat loss
and Lewis numbers (see e.g. [ 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 ] ).

There has been considerably less focus on flame ignition in situations
where the reactants are non-premixed. The work that has been done on
both laminar and turbulent non-premixed ignition is summarised in the
detailed review paper [ 134 ] . Most studies on non-premixed flame
ignition have been concerned with autoignition, sometimes referred to as
“self-ignition”. There are very few papers that have investigated the
energy required for “forced ignition” of non-premixed flames by an
external heat source or spark. The transient behaviour of flames in
inhomogeneous mixtures from forced ignition has been investigated using
Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) in the laminar case in [ 124 , 135 ]
, and more recently with the effects of turbulence included in [ 136 ,
137 , 138 , 139 ] . These numerical studies do not, however, contain a
detailed investigation of the energy required for ignition. To our
knowledge there have been no dedicated investigations of the energy
required for forced ignition of laminar two-dimensional triple flames in
mixing layers, even without taking thermal expansion and gravity into
account.

Some recent papers have extended the concept of Zeldovich flame balls to
the inhomogeneous case, theoretically [ 41 ] and numerically [ 42 ]
describing the existence and properties of flame balls in reactive
mixing layers. Similarly to Zeldovich flame balls, these inhomogeneous
flame balls may provide a corresponding criterion for the minimum energy
for the successful flame ignition of axisymmetric flames in the mixing
layer. Here we extend the current understanding of flame ignition by
providing a criterion for the minimum ignition energy for
two-dimensional triple flames in the mixing layer, via a two-dimensional
ignition kernel. This is achieved by first investigating steady,
two-dimensional, non-propagating solutions of the governing equations
which we refer to as “flame tube” solutions. Such solutions have been
observed in previous numerical simulations [ 140 , 141 , 30 , 142 ]
where the planar solutions are prone to cellular instabilities due to
Lewis number effects [ 141 ] , but these studies were not concerned with
ignition. More relevant to the ignition problem are the papers [ 43 ]
and [ 44 ] . These studies include investigations of “flame isolas” and
“flame disks”, respectively, which are similar axisymmetric, stationary
solutions of the governing equations. Although [ 43 ] and [ 44 ] only
partially address the ignition problem, in the paper [ 44 ] ,
non-propagating “flame disk” solutions are argued to indicate that a
minimum energy is required for ignition of axisymmetric flames in the
mixing layer. To our understanding, no such study has yet been performed
for two-dimensional triple flames in the mixing layer, as investigated
in this chapter, with the effects of thermal expansion and gravity
included.

In this chapter we also investigate the transient evolution of the
propagating triple flames that arise when a perturbation is added to the
unstable flame tube solutions. Steadily propagating triple flames are
well studied. Aspects of these structures that have been investigated
include preferential diffusion [ 117 , 118 ] , heat losses [ 119 , 120 ,
121 ] , reversibility of the chemical reaction [ 122 , 123 ] , the
presence of a parallel flow [ 110 ] and thermal expansion [ 32 , 1 ] ;
for further references see the review papers [ 30 ] and [ 31 ] . Here we
are specifically interested in the combined effect of thermal expansion
and gravity on both the ignition energy of triple flames from
two-dimensional ignition kernels and the transient behaviour of the
triple flames.

When investigating triple flames propagating perpendicular to the
direction of gravity it is crucial to first understand whether or not
the planar diffusion flame is stable, since this forms the trailing
branch of the triple flame. In Chapter 4 we provided such a study; we
have also investigated, in Chapter 5 , the combined effect of thermal
expansion and gravity on steadily propagating triple flames (see also
the papers by Pearce and Daou [ 1 , 2 ] ). The current chapter completes
the picture by investigating the transient behaviour of triple flames
from their initiation in contexts where the underlying planar diffusion
flame is either stable or unstable.

The chapter is structured as follows. In § 6.2 we formulate the problem.
In § 6.3 we provide the results obtained from the numerical solution of
the governing equations. § 6.3 is split into three parts: the first part
consists of important preliminary results; the second part provides the
results of numerical simulations for values of the parameters where the
underlying diffusion flame is stable; and the third part is concerned
with areas of parameter space where the underlying diffusion flame is
unstable. Finally, we end the chapter with conclusions in § 6.4 .

### 6.2 Formulation

We investigate the problem of triple flame initiation in an infinitely
long channel of height @xmath , where fuel is provided at the upper wall
and oxidiser at the lower wall, as shown in figure 6.1 . The walls are
taken to be rigid, porous, isothermal and of equal temperature. The
governing equations for fuel and oxidiser are coupled to the
Navier–Stokes equations for the fluid velocity vector @xmath in order to
take thermal expansion and gravity into account. For simplicity, the
combustion is modelled as a single irreversible one-step reaction of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where F denotes the fuel and O the oxidiser; @xmath denotes the mass of
oxidiser consumed and @xmath the heat released, both per unit mass of
fuel. The overall reaction rate @xmath is taken to follow an Arrhenius
law of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
the density, the fuel mass fraction, the oxidiser mass fraction, the
universal gas constant, the temperature, the pre-exponential factor and
the activation energy of the reaction, respectively.

#### 6.2.1 Governing equations

We adopt the low Mach number formulation and assume that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are constant, where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the
diffusion coefficients of heat, fuel and oxidiser, respectively. We also
assume that the specific heat capacity @xmath , the thermal conductivity
@xmath and the dynamic viscosity @xmath are constant. These assumptions
lead to the governing equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
     @xmath      (6.2)
     @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath      (6.5)
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the hydrodynamic pressure, @xmath is the temperature of
the unburnt mixture and the channel walls, and @xmath is the density of
the unburnt mixture. The mass fractions at the channel walls, which are
assumed to be rigid, are also prescribed; the boundary conditions at the
walls are therefore given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this chapter we are concerned with the initiation of a pair of triple
flames, which are expected to propagate in opposite directions [ 124 ,
135 ] ; we therefore impose symmetry conditions at the centreline, which
we take to be located at @xmath , and solve the problem for @xmath . In
the unburnt gas at @xmath we assume that the induced flow is fully
developed and the temperature and mass fractions are “frozen”. The
boundary conditions at @xmath and @xmath are therefore given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.9)
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For large activation energies, the flame-front region is expected to be
centred around the stoichiometric surface @xmath where @xmath . In the
unburnt gas at @xmath , the position of the stoichiometric surface can
be determined from the frozen solution ( 6.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalised stoichiometric coefficient.
We now introduce the non-dimensional variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript ’st’ denotes values at the stoichiometric surface.
Here @xmath is the adiabatic flame temperature, @xmath is the Zeldovich
number or non-dimensional activation energy and @xmath is the thermal
expansion coefficient. In non-dimensionalising we have used as unit
speed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the laminar burning speed of the stoichiometric planar flame to
leading order for @xmath . The scalings ( 6.12 ) are inserted into ( 6.1
)-( 6.6 ) to give the non-dimensional governing equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
     @xmath      (6.15)
     @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath      (6.17)
     @xmath      (6.18)
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-dimensional parameters are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are the Rayleigh number, the flame-front thickness @xmath measured
against the unit length @xmath , the fuel and oxidiser Lewis numbers and
the Prandtl number, respectively. Here @xmath is the kinematic viscosity
@xmath . Note that @xmath is related to the Damköhler number used in
Chapter 4 by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The non-dimensional reaction rate is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a heat release parameter given by @xmath . Although they
are technically equal in the low Mach number approximation, here we have
followed [ 1 ] and kept the parameters @xmath and @xmath distinct; we
set @xmath throughout the chapter and vary @xmath in order to assess the
effect of thermal expansion without changing the Arrhenius reaction term
( 6.20 ). Thus when @xmath the equations reduce to those of the constant
density approximation.

Finally, with the scalings ( 6.12 ) inserted into ( 6.7 )-( 6.10 ), the
non-dimensional boundary conditions can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
     @xmath      (6.22)
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suitable initial conditions must also be prescribed. The non-dimensional
problem is now fully formulated and is given by equations ( 6.14 )-(
6.20 ), subject to the boundary conditions ( 6.21 )-( 6.23 ). The
non-dimensional parameters in this problem are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 6.2.2 Mixture fraction formulation

In this section we simplify the problem in the special case of unity
Lewis numbers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We set the Lewis numbers equal to unity in order to concentrate on the
effects of thermal expansion and gravity on triple flames, without the
added complication of thermo-diffusive instabilities. Following the
method of § 4.2.2 in Chapter 4 , we note that for @xmath the mixture
fraction @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath      (6.27)
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can therefore solve the reaction-free equation ( 6.26 ) and use
equation ( 6.25 ) to find the fuel and oxidiser mass fractions if
necessary. Thus the governing equations simplify to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
     @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath      (6.31)
     @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
     @xmath      (6.35)
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and suitable initial conditions. The non-dimensional problem is now
formulated in terms of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In the next section we solve this problem
numerically, with particular emphasis on the effect of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

At this point it is instructive to briefly discuss the limitations of
the model used. First, the model utilised here is two-dimensional.
Although in Chapter 4 we showed that three-dimensional effects do not
affect the critical Rayleigh number for the onset of gravitational
instabilities of the planar diffusion flame, far beyond the threshold of
instability these effects may become important. However, currently a
transient simulation of the three-dimensional problem would involve
prohibitively expensive computations. Understanding the two-dimensional
problem is an important step towards a full description of the effect of
gravity on triple flames. Second, we neglect the effects of heat-loss,
differential diffusion and the stoichiometric coefficient @xmath ; these
aspects of the problem would be interesting to investigate in future
studies but are ignored here for the sake of simplicity and clarity.
Finally, in simulations of the non-reactive problem of a fluid layer
heated from below, it is well known that the problem can become
dependent on the initial conditions at high values of the Rayleigh
number [ 143 ] . In all time-dependent simulations in this chapter we
take the initial conditions to be a steady flame tube solution (plus a
small perturbation) and acknowledge that, far beyond the threshold of
gravitational instability, different behaviour may arise if the initial
conditions are taken to be different.

### 6.3 Results and discussion

In this section we present the results obtained by numerically solving
the problem ( 6.29 )-( 6.36 ) in the finite element package Comsol
Multiphysics. This has been extensively tested in combustion
applications, including our previous publications on diffusion flames [
2 ] and triple flames [ 1 ] . The domain is covered by a grid of
approximately 200,000 triangular elements, with local refinement around
the reaction zone. Solutions have been tested to be independent of the
mesh and the size of the domain.

The section is split into three parts. First, we provide some important
preliminary results. Second, we investigate the transient initiation of
triple flames in situations where the underlying diffusion flame is
stable, including a study on the energy required for ignition. Third, we
investigate the ignition energy and transient behaviour of a triple
flame with a trailing diffusion flame that is unstable due to
gravitational effects.

In order to provide a criterion for the energy required for initiation
of triple flames, we investigate steady, non-propagating solutions of
equations ( 6.29 )-( 6.36 ), which we refer to as flame tubes . The
energy of these flame tube solutions can be the required criterion for
the ignition energy of a triple flame. We define the energy @xmath of a
flame (per unit depth) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is found that if a flame tube with a small “energy-increasing”
perturbation is used as an initial condition for time-dependent
simulations, a triple flame forms, which propagates into the unburnt
gas. A flame tube with a small “energy-decreasing” perturbation leads to
extinction. The perturbations are added to the temperature field as a
kernel of finite size, surrounding the flame tube, and of order of
magnitude @xmath . Throughout the chapter we provide illustrative
examples of the two outcomes for various values of the parameters.

#### 6.3.1 Preliminary results

In this section we provide some preliminary results that will be useful
in the following sections. We begin by investigating the effects of
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath , the value of @xmath below which positively
propagating triple flames cannot exist . This preliminary study is
important because flame tubes are not expected to exist for @xmath .
Figure 6.2 shows a) the effect of @xmath on @xmath for @xmath and b) the
effect of @xmath on @xmath for @xmath .

It should be noted that technically flame tube solutions also do not
exist in the asymptotic limit @xmath . This can be seen by considering
the problem ( 6.29 )-( 6.36 ) in the limit of infinite activation energy
and taking @xmath . The problem reduces to finding stationary, two
dimensional tubes in a homogeneous mixture; such a problem is known to
have no solution. This is because the leading order term for the
temperature is governed by the cylindrically symmetrical Laplace
equation in the unburnt gas, whose only solution that satisfies the
boundary conditions in the far field is @xmath . This, of course, is a
contradiction since the temperature should be given by @xmath at the
reaction zone.

Next, we mention results obtained in Chapter 4 , on the instability of a
planar diffusion flame in an infinitely long channel. The results are
summarised in figure 5.5 , which plots the critical Rayleigh number
@xmath against @xmath in the case @xmath . For values of the Rayleigh
number below @xmath , a stable planar diffusion flame exists and a
stable triple flame is expected to propagate along the channel. If
@xmath , the planar diffusion flame is unstable.

Finally, figure 6.3 shows the propagation speed of steadily propagating
triple flames versus @xmath , for selected values of the parameters,
corresponding to the range of values that will be used for
time-dependent simulations in later sections. These results were
obtained by solving ( 6.29 )-( 6.36 ) in a coordinate system attached to
the flame front, which travels at speed @xmath relative to the
laboratory, i.e. @xmath . Figure 6.3 is important because it is expected
that if initiation is successful, a steadily propagating triple flame
with propagation speed given in the figure will be the result.

Figure 6.3 provides similar results to those found in Chapter 5 . The
difference between the results in figure 6.3 and the results in figures
5.6 and 5.11 is in the boundary conditions imposed; in the current
chapter we consider a pair of triple flames propagating away from each
other towards open boundaries, with symmetric conditions imposed at
@xmath . Chapter 5 was concerned with a triple flame propagating into an
undisturbed fluid, with zero gradients imposed downstream.

#### 6.3.2 Initiation of triple flames

We proceed with an investigation of the energy required for initiation
of a triple flame in an infinitely long channel and the transient
behaviour of a triple flame after initiation. In this section we focus
on values of the parameters for which the underlying diffusion flame is
stable , as summarised in figure 5.5 . The effects of the flame-front
thickness @xmath , the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath and the
Rayleigh number @xmath will all be investigated in separate sections.

##### Effect of @xmath

In this section we investigate the effect of the flame-front thickness
@xmath on the initiation of a triple flame. The ignition energy @xmath
is given by the energy of steady flame tube solutions of equations (
6.29 )-( 6.36 ). It is instructive to begin by showing where the flame
tube solutions lie in parameter space and in particular in relation to
the well-known S-shaped curve of one-dimensional diffusion flame
solutions.

The S-shaped curve, generated by plotting the maximum temperature of
one-dimensional, steady diffusion flame solutions of ( 6.29 )-( 6.36 )
(with @xmath ) in terms of @xmath , is given in figure 6.4 . The curve
consists of an upper (stable) “strongly burning” branch, a middle
(unstable) branch and a lower (stable) “weakly burning” branch (not
shown). As expected, the maximum value of @xmath for which flame tubes
can exist is given by @xmath , the value at which a triple flame has
zero propagation speed. The curve of flame tube temperature versus
@xmath terminates on the upper branch of the S-shaped curve at @xmath .
The figure shows that, although flame tube solutions do not exist in the
limit @xmath (as discussed in § 6.3.1 ), solutions have been calculated
numerically for very small values of @xmath .

We plot the flame tube energy @xmath and the maximum flame tube
temperature @xmath versus @xmath for selected values of @xmath and
@xmath in figure 6.5 . It can be seen that @xmath monotonically
increases with increasing @xmath in all cases. When thermal expansion is
present but gravity is not taken into account, the ignition energy for
each value of @xmath is lower than in the constant density case @xmath ,
@xmath . It can be seen that the ignition energy increases sharply as
@xmath approaches @xmath , which is the value of @xmath at which the
triple flame speed is zero (see figure 6.2 ) and above which no flame
tube solutions are found. The effects of thermal expansion and gravity
will be described in more detail in the following sections.

Now we investigate the transient behaviour of the unstable flame tube
solutions for @xmath , @xmath when they are subject to small
perturbations. Plotted in figures 6.6 and 6.7 , in which @xmath and
@xmath respectively, are the maximum temperature @xmath and flame energy
@xmath for flame tubes subject to either an energy-increasing or an
energy-decreasing perturbation. These figures show that, if an
energy-increasing perturbation is added, the flame tube solution will
evolve in time into a steadily propagating triple flame, with speed
given in figure 6.3 . If an energy-decreasing perturbation is added, the
flame extinguishes and the maximum temperature and flame energy both
decay to zero.

Illustrative examples of this behaviour for two selected values of
@xmath are shown in figure 6.8 . The upper rows in figures 6.8 and 6.8
show, for @xmath and @xmath respectively, reaction rate contours for a
flame tube subject to an energy-increasing perturbation, which leads to
a triple flame. The lower rows in figures 6.8 and 6.8 show a flame tube
decaying to extinction due to an energy-decreasing perturbation.

##### Effect of @xmath

In this section we investigate the effect of thermal expansion on the
ignition of a triple flame in the absence of gravity. Figure 6.9 shows
the ignition energy @xmath and the maximum flame tube temperature @xmath
versus the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath for selected values of
@xmath . It can be seen that, for a fixed value of @xmath , increasing
@xmath leads to a monotonic decrease in the ignition energy @xmath . A
key result of these calculations is that for all values of @xmath , the
flame tube solutions have @xmath . This is physically plausible since
@xmath solves the stationary form of the governing equations ( 6.29 )-(
6.33 ) if @xmath , as well as the boundary conditions ( 6.34 )-( 6.36 ).
This is a significant simplification of the governing equations and
represents an efficient way to numerically calculate flame tube
solutions, if gravity is not accounted for.

Now we investigate the transient behaviour of the unstable flame tube
solutions when thermal expansion is accounted for, by setting @xmath .
Figure 6.10 , with @xmath , plots a) maximum temperature @xmath and b)
flame energy @xmath against time after an energy-increasing and an
energy-decreasing perturbation. As can be seen from the figure, after an
energy-increasing perturbation the maximum temperature increases
monotonically from that of the flame tube to that of the steadily
propagating triple flame, which has propagation speed given in figure
6.3 . An energy-decreasing pertubation again leads to extinction.

An illustrative example of this behaviour for @xmath is shown in figure
6.11 . The upper row shows the reaction rate for a flame tube subject to
an energy-increasing perturbation, which leads to a triple flame. The
lower row in figure 6.11 shows a flame tube decaying to extinction due
to an energy-decreasing perturbation.

##### Effect of @xmath

In this section we investigate the combined effect of thermal expansion
and gravity on the initiation of a triple flame. Figure 6.12 shows the
ignition energy @xmath and the maximum flame tube temperature @xmath
versus the Rayleigh number @xmath for selected values of @xmath . It can
be seen that the relationship between @xmath and @xmath is dependent
upon the value of @xmath , however for all values of @xmath an increase
in @xmath leads to an increase in the ignition energy @xmath . For large
values of @xmath , an increase in @xmath leads to a larger increase in
@xmath than for smaller values of @xmath .

Unlike in the previous sections, when gravity is present the flame tube
solutions do induce a flow due to the temperature gradient from the
flame tube at @xmath to the cold gas at @xmath , as was found in the
context of triple flames in Chapter 5 . An important result that can be
seen in figure 6.12 is that flame tube solutions still exist for values
of @xmath where the planar diffusion flame is unstable - this will be
discussed further in the following section.

Now we investigate the transient behaviour of the unstable flame tube
solutions when thermal expansion and gravity are accounted for, by
setting @xmath and @xmath . Figure 6.13 plots a) maximum temperature
@xmath and b) flame energy @xmath against time after an
energy-increasing and an energy-decreasing perturbation, for @xmath . As
can be seen from the figure, after an energy-increasing perturbation the
maximum temperature increases monotonically from that of the flame tube
to that of the steadily propagating triple flame, which has propagation
speed given in figure 6.3 . An energy-decreasing pertubation again leads
to extinction. An illustrative example of this behaviour for @xmath is
shown in figure 6.14 .

#### 6.3.3 Gravitational instability of triple flames

In this section we investigate the initiation of triple flames in
situations where the underlying diffusion flame is unstable. As was
demonstrated in figure 6.12 of the previous section, unstable flame tube
solutions still exist for values of the Rayleigh number where the
underlying planar diffusion flame is unstable. Therefore, we can still
provide a criterion for the ignition energy of a triple flame in this
case. Plots of the ignition energy @xmath and maximum flame tube
temperature @xmath versus @xmath for @xmath are provided in figure 6.15
. For this value of the Rayleigh number, the underlying diffusion flame
is unstable for all values of @xmath , as can be seen in figure 5.5 .

We can therefore use flame tubes (with energy shown in figure 6.15 ) as
an initial condition for time-dependent calculations to investigate the
evolution of triple flames with a trailing diffusion flame which is
unstable due to gravitational effects. The transient behaviour of the
triple flames that arise after an energy-increasing perturbation to the
flame tube solutions for @xmath is shown in figure 6.16 , which plots
reaction rate contours at several points in time. It can be seen that
initially, a triple flame propagates, similarly to the flames that were
shown in the previous section. After a certain amount of time, however,
the trailing diffusion flame becomes unstable due to gravity, causing
convection in the fluid, which leads to a cellular trailing diffusion
flame. The induced convection can be strong enough to cause local
extinction, which occurs first at the axis of symmetry located at @xmath
, as can be seen from figure 6.16 .

The induced convection can be seen in figure 6.17 , which plots the
vertical component of the velocity @xmath along the centreline of the
channel located at @xmath , at several values of the time @xmath . The
figure shows the vortex induced by the temperature gradient from the hot
triple flame to the cold unburnt gas, as discussed in detail in § 5.4.2
of Chapter 5 . This vortex propagates along the channel with the tip of
the triple flame. The triple flame initially leaves behind a trailing
diffusion flame. As can be seen from figure 6.17 , at approximately
@xmath the diffusion flame starts to induce convection. The magnitude of
the induced convection increases, with the largest magnitude of @xmath
occurring at the axis of symmetry @xmath , which causes the local
extinction that was seen in figure 6.16 .

### 6.4 Conclusion

In this chapter we have investigated the combined effect of thermal
expansion and gravity on the ignition energy of triple flames by
studying stationary, non-propagating solutions of the governing
equations, which have been referred to as “flame tubes”. We have also
described the transient initiation of two-dimensional triple flames in
the mixing layer, using the (unstable) flame tube solutions as initial
conditions. Finally, we have investigated the time-dependent behaviour,
from initiation to instability, of triple flames in situations where the
underlying diffusion flame is unstable due to gravitational effects.

The chapter provides several new contributions. It is the first work to
provide a detailed parametric study of “flame tube” solutions in
two-dimensional mixing layers, providing an equivalent criterion for the
ignition energy of triple flames to the one provided by Zeldovich flame
balls for premixed flames and corresponding flame balls in axisymmetric
mixing layers. It has been found that the flame tube solutions exist
only for @xmath , where @xmath is the value of the flame-front thickness
@xmath for which a triple flame has zero propagation speed. Flame tubes
are not expected to exist in the asymptotic limit @xmath , but have been
found to exist numerically for small values of @xmath . The flame tubes
are unstable and it has been found that an “energy-increasing”
perturbation leads to the propagation of a triple flame and an
“energy-decreasing” perturbation leads to extinction.

This study is also the first to describe the initiation of triple flames
in a horizontal channel with the combined effect of thermal expansion
and gravity taken into account. In cases where gravity is not present,
it is found that the flow velocity @xmath , so that the Navier–Stokes
equations do not need to be solved. However, when gravity is present, a
flow is induced by the temperature gradient from the flame tube to the
cold gas. The relationship between @xmath and the energy @xmath of the
flame tubes is found to depend on @xmath . A key result from these
calculations is that flame tube solutions are still found to exist for
values of the Rayleigh number above its critical value for the
gravitational instability of the planar diffusion flame. Therefore a
criterion for the ignition energy of a triple flame can still be given
even though its trailing diffusion flame is expected to be unstable.

The final contribution of the chapter is the investigation of the
transient behaviour of a triple flame from its initiation (using a flame
tube as initial condition) to the eventual instability of its trailing
diffusion flame for large enough values of @xmath . It has been found
that initially a triple flame forms and propagates into the unburnt gas.
After a certain amount of time, the trailing diffusion flame becomes
unstable and forms convection rolls, as predicted in Chapter 4 . These
can lead to local extinction of the trailing diffusion flame, which
occurs first at the axis of symmetry located at @xmath .

## Chapter 7 Conclusion

The main aim of this thesis has been to assess the combined effect of
thermal expansion and gravity on the propagation and stability of flames
in inhomogeneous mixtures. Flame propagation has been investigated in
situations where the inhomogeneity is prescribed in the unburned gas,
either a) as a non-uniform flow field against which a premixed flame
propagates or b) as a stratification of the fuel and oxidiser, leading
to the propagation of a triple flame.

In Chapter 2 , we have investigated the propagation of a premixed flame
through a narrow channel against a Poiseuille flow of large amplitude,
taking the effect of the flame on the flow into account through the
action of thermal expansion. The problem has been studied analytically
to determine the effective propagation speed @xmath for a Peclet number
@xmath , in the thick flame asymptotic lmit @xmath with both finite and
asymptotically infinite values of the activation energy @xmath . The
limit @xmath , with @xmath is equivalent to taking the amplitude @xmath
of the Poiseuille flow @xmath , with @xmath . It has been found that, in
the distinguished limit considered, a two-dimensional premixed flame
propagating through a rectangular channel against a Poiseuille flow can
be described by a problem which corresponds to the propagation of a
one-dimensional premixed flame with an effective diffusion coefficient,
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the constant density case and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the variable density case. These effective values correspond to those
found in studies of enhanced dispersion due to a Poiseuille flow in
non-reactive fluids, known as Taylor dispersion. A premixed flame
propagating through a channel in the limit @xmath , with @xmath can
therefore be considered to be in the Taylor regime. The derived
one-dimensional problem has been solved numerically for a full range of
values of the Peclet number and activation energy. An analytical
solution to the one-dimensional problem has also been obtained in the
limit @xmath in both the constant density and variable density cases.
Further results have been obtained by solving the full system of
governing equations for a wide range of values of the parameters. The
asymptotic results have been found to show strong agreement with the
numerical results.

The analytical result obtained in Chapter 2 , given by ( 2.53 ),
predicts that in the thick flame limit considered, the effective
propagation speed has a value that depends only on the Peclet number.
This result may be used to provide a possible explanation of the
so-called bending effect of the turbulent premixed flame speed when
plotted in terms of the turbulence intensity for fixed values of the
Reynolds number (see e.g. [ 57 , 24 ] ). Our distinguished limit, namely
@xmath with @xmath fixed (note that the Reynolds number and Peclet
number are equal if @xmath ), mimics the experimental conditions of
Bradley [ 57 ] and can be used to shed some light on the experimental
findings. A more thorough discussion of the relevance of the asymptotic
results obtained in the thick flame limit to the bending effect is
provided in Chapter 3 . In this chapter, further asymptotic results have
been provided, in order to provide a full asymptotic picture of the
relationship between the effective propagation speed and the parallel
flow amplitude @xmath . A numerical study for a full range of values of
@xmath and @xmath has also been undertaken. The numerical results show
that as the prescribed inflow amplitude @xmath increases to large
values, the effective propagation speed @xmath approaches a constant
value, which depends on the Peclet number. This result is in line with
both the asymptotic results ( 2.53 ) and ( 3.22 ) and with the available
experimental results on turbulent combustion. The asymptotic and
numerical results both show that for small values of @xmath , the
relationship between @xmath and @xmath is linear. Finally, we have
investigated the effect of thermal expansion on the problem; it has been
found that for variable density premixed flames the effective
propagation speed still approaches a constant value which depends on the
Peclet number for large values of @xmath , which again mimics the
behaviour of the turbulent premixed flame experimental findings.

In Chapter 4 , we have investigated the combined effect of gravity and
thermal expansion on the stability of a planar diffusion flame in an
infinitely long channel with rigid walls. The conditions under which the
diffusion flame becomes unstable have been determined by calculation of
the critical Rayleigh number, which defines the threshold of
instability. First, we have investigated the stability of the
Burke–Schumann flame, using a linear stability analysis in the
Boussinesq approximation. The growth rate of the linear stability
problem has been confirmed to be real using numerical methods, so that
it is possible to study the system analytically in the marginal state
using a similar method to that of the non-reactive problem. Results have
been presented, which show that as the flame approaches the lower
boundary of the channel with increasing stoichiometric coefficient, the
critical Rayleigh number is close to the well-known value it takes in
the non-reactive case with two rigid boundaries. Second, we have
performed numerical calculations of the full system of governing
equations for several values of the thermal expansion coefficient, for
large values of the Damköhler number. The results show that when the
Rayleigh number is higher than its critical value, the fluid forms
convection rolls as in the non-reactive case, which interact with the
flame to generate cellular structures. The numerical results show strong
agreement with those of the linear stability analysis. Finally, we have
investigated the effect of finite chemistry on the system. The results
show that the system becomes less stable as the Damköhler number @xmath
is decreased.

Next, in Chapter 5 , the combined effect of thermal expansion and
gravity on a triple flame propagating steadily in a horizontal channel
has been investigated. The results obtained in Chapter 4 have been used
to identify areas of parameter space where a triple flame is expected to
propagate steadily. The effect of the flame-front thickness @xmath on
the propagation speed @xmath of a triple flame has been described for
several values of the thermal expansion coefficient @xmath and the
Rayleigh number @xmath . It has been found that the well-known monotonic
relationship between @xmath and @xmath that is present in the constant
density case (which arises in the limit @xmath ) remains valid for
@xmath , when @xmath (i.e. in the absence of gravity). However, we have
shown that under the influence of gravity the monotonic relationship
between @xmath and @xmath is only present for values of @xmath below a
critical value, which has been determined. Further, it has been shown
that, if @xmath takes a value higher than this critical value, there is
a local maximum in the graph of @xmath versus @xmath . The system has
been shown to exhibit hysteresis for even higher values of the Rayleigh
number. The results in this chapter provide valuable insight into the
behaviour of a triple flame under gravitational effects and illustrate
the complexity and variety of the scenarios that arise.

Finally, in Chapter 6 , we have studied the combined effects of thermal
expansion and gravity on the transient evolution of triple flames from
their initiation via a hot ignition kernel, as well as the energy
required for ignition of triple flames. We have identified
two-dimensional, non-propagating solutions of the governing equations,
which have been referred to as “flame tubes” and which can provide a
criterion for the minimum energy for forced ignition of two-dimensional
triple flames in the mixing layer. We have provided a detailed
parametric study of flame tubes, including the combined effect of
thermal expansion and gravity. We have shown that “energy-increasing”
perturbations to flame tubes (which are unstable) lead to the
propagation of a triple flame and “energy-decreasing” perturbations lead
to extinction. It has been found that flame tubes still exist for values
of the Rayleigh number above the critical value for gravitational
instability of the planar diffusion flame, so that a criterion for the
ignition energy is still available for triple flames in this case.
Finally, the transient behaviour of a triple flame with a trailing
diffusion flame that is unstable due to gravitational effects has been
investigated. It has been found that, after initiation, a triple flame
forms initially before the trailing diffusion flame becomes unstable and
forms a cellular flame due to convection rolls in the surrounding fluid.
The induced convection can be strong enough to cause local extinction.

There are many opportunities for future work in the area of flame
propagation in inhomogeneous mixtures. In the area of premixed flames,
studied in Chapters 2 and 3 , the effect of more complicated flows on
premixed flame propagation would help to further understand the
interaction between laminar premixed flames and flow. This would provide
a platform for a thorough understanding of the behaviour of turbulent
premixed flames, which is currently lacking, as can be seen by the lack
of a convincing explanation for the bending effect of turbulent flames,
discussed in Chapter 3 . Further work in this area could also
investigate the Taylor dispersion regime of premixed flames discussed in
Chapter 2 for more complex flows.

In the area of diffusion flames, discussed in Chapter 4 , work could be
done to further understand the behaviour of diffusion flames that are
unstable due to gravitational effects, including a detailed parametric
study of their behaviour beyond the threshold of gravitational
instability. It would also be interesting to further investigate the
behaviour of the triple flames studied in Chapters 5 and 6 in situations
where the planar diffusion flame is unstable due to gravitational
effects. A future study could also repeat the work of Chapters 4 - 6 in
the case of triple flames in a counterflow configuration. Such a study
could build on the theoretical and numerical investigations in this
thesis, which were the first to describe in detail the combined effect
of thermal expansion and gravity on the propagation and stability of
triple flames propagating in a direction perpendicular to the direction
of gravity.

## References

-    Pearce and Daou [2013a] P. Pearce and J. Daou. The effect of
    gravity and thermal expansion on the propagation of a triple flame
    in a horizontal channel. Combustion and Flame , 160(12):2800–2809,
    2013a.
-    Pearce and Daou [2013b] P. Pearce and J. Daou. Rayleigh–Bénard
    instability generated by a diffusion flame. Journal of Fluid
    Mechanics , 736:464–494, 2013b.
-    Pearce and Daou [2014] P. Pearce and J. Daou. Taylor dispersion and
    thermal expansion effects on flame propagation in a narrow channel.
    Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 754:161–183, 2014.
-    Matkowsky and Sivashinsky [1979] B.J. Matkowsky and G.I.
    Sivashinsky. An asymptotic derivation of two models in flame theory
    associated with the constant density approximation. SIAM Journal on
    Applied Mathematics , 37(3):686–699, 1979.
-    Barenblatt et al. [1962] G.I. Barenblatt, Y.B. Zeldovich, and A.G.
    Istratov. Diffusive-thermal stability of a laminar flame. Zh. Prikl.
    Mekh. Tekh. Fiz , 4:21, 1962.
-    Landau [1944] L.D. Landau. On the theory of slow combustion. Acta
    Physicochim. URSS , 19(1):77–85, 1944.
-    Darrieus [1938] G. Darrieus. Propagation d’un front de flamme. La
    Technique Moderne, France , 1938.
-    Clavin [1985] P. Clavin. Dynamic behavior of premixed flame fronts
    in laminar and turbulent flows. Progress in Energy and Combustion
    Science , 11(1):1–59, 1985.
-    Bychkov and Liberman [2000] V.V. Bychkov and M.A. Liberman.
    Dynamics and stability of premixed flames. Physics Reports ,
    325(4):115–237, 2000.
-    Sivashinsky [1976] G.I. Sivashinsky. On a distorted flame front as
    a hydrodynamic discontinuity. Acta Astronautica , 3(11):889–918,
    1976.
-    Frankel and Sivashinsky [1982] M.L. Frankel and G.I. Sivashinsky.
    The effect of viscosity on hydrodynamic stability of a plane flame
    front. Combustion Science and Technology , 29(3-6):207–224, 1982.
-    Clavin and Williams [1982] P. Clavin and F.A. Williams. Effects of
    molecular diffusion and of thermal expansion on the structure and
    dynamics of premixed flames in turbulent flows of large scale and
    low intensity. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 116:251–282, 1982.
-    Pelce and Clavin [1982] P. Pelce and P. Clavin. Influence of
    hydrodynamics and diffusion upon the stability limits of laminar
    premixed flames. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 124:219–237, 1982.
-    Matalon and Matkowsky [1982] M. Matalon and B.J. Matkowsky. Flames
    as gasdynamic discontinuities. Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,
    124:239–259, 1982.
-    Peters [2000] N. Peters. Turbulent combustion . Cambridge
    University Press, 2000.
-    Daou et al. [2002a] J. Daou, J. Dold, and M. Matalon. The thick
    flame asymptotic limit and Damköhler’s hypothesis. Combustion Theory
    and Modelling , 6(1):141–153, 2002a.
-    Daou and Matalon [2002] J. Daou and M. Matalon. Influence of
    conductive heat-losses on the propagation of premixed flames in
    channels. Combustion and Flame , 128(4):321–339, 2002.
-    Kurdyumov and Fernandez-Tarrazo [2002] V.N. Kurdyumov and
    E. Fernandez-Tarrazo. Lewis number effect on the propagation of
    premixed laminar flames in narrow open ducts. Combustion and Flame ,
    128(4):382–394, 2002.
-    Cui et al. [2004] C. Cui, M. Matalon, J. Daou, and J. Dold. Effects
    of differential diffusion on thin and thick flames propagating in
    channels. Combustion Theory and Modelling , 8(1):41–64, 2004.
-    Kurdyumov [2011] V.N. Kurdyumov. Lewis number effect on the
    propagation of premixed flames in narrow adiabatic channels:
    Symmetric and non-symmetric flames and their linear stability
    analysis. Combustion and Flame , 158(7):1307–1317, 2011.
-    Daou and Sparks [2007] J. Daou and P. Sparks. Flame propagation in
    a small-scale parallel flow. Combustion Theory and Modelling ,
    11(5):697–714, 2007.
-    Short and Kessler [2009] M. Short and D.A. Kessler. Asymptotic and
    numerical study of variable-density premixed flame propagation in a
    narrow channel. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 638:305–337, 2009.
-    Kurdyumov and Matalon [2013] V.N. Kurdyumov and M. Matalon. Flame
    acceleration in long narrow open channels. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 34(1):865–872, 2013.
-    Ronney [1995] P.D. Ronney. Some open issues in premixed turbulent
    combustion. In Modeling in Combustion Science , pages 1–22.
    Springer, 1995.
-    Wu and Moin [2010] X. Wu and P. Moin. Large-activation-energy
    theory for premixed combustion under the influence of enthalpy
    fluctuations. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 655:3–37, 2010.
-    Phillips [1965] H. Phillips. Flame in a buoyant methane layer. In
    Symposium (International) on Combustion , volume 10, pages
    1277–1283. Elsevier, 1965.
-    Ohki and Tsuge [1986] Y. Ohki and S. Tsuge. In Dynamics of Reactive
    Systems: Part I (J.R. Bowen, J.C. Leyer and R.I. Soloukhin Eds.)
    Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics , volume 105 (1986), pages
    233–245, 1986.
-    Dold [1989] J.W. Dold. Flame propagation in a nonuniform mixture:
    analysis of a slowly varying triple flame. Combustion and Flame ,
    76(1):71–88, 1989.
-    Hartley and Dold [1991] L.J. Hartley and J.W. Dold. Flame
    propagation in a nonuniform mixture: analysis of a propagating
    triple-flame. Combustion Science and Technology , 80(1-3):23–46,
    1991.
-    Buckmaster [2002] J. Buckmaster. Edge-flames. Progress in Energy
    and Combustion Science , 28(5):435–475, 2002.
-    Chung [2007] S.H. Chung. Stabilization, propagation and instability
    of tribrachial triple flames. Proceedings of the Combustion
    Institute , 31(1):877–892, 2007.
-    Ruetsch et al. [1995] G. Ruetsch, L. Vervisch., and A. Liñán.
    Effects of heat release on triple flames. Physics of Fluids ,
    7(6):1447–1454, 1995.
-    Katta and Roquemore [1995] V.R. Katta and W.M. Roquemore. Numerical
    studies on the structure of two-dimensional @xmath /air premixed jet
    flame. Combustion and Flame , 102(1):21–40, 1995.
-    Favier and Vervisch [2001] V. Favier and L. Vervisch. Edge flames
    and partially premixed combustion in diffusion flame quenching.
    Combustion and Flame , 125(1):788–803, 2001.
-    Qin et al. [2002] X. Qin, I.K. Puri, and S.K. Aggarwal.
    Characteristics of lifted triple flames stabilized in the near field
    of a partially premixed axisymmetric jet. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 29(2):1565–1572, 2002.
-    Bieri et al. [2011] J.A. Bieri, V.N. Kurdyumov, and M. Matalon. The
    effect of gas expansion on edge flames stabilized in narrow
    channels. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute , 33(1):1227–1234,
    2011.
-    Azzoni et al. [1999] R. Azzoni, S. Ratti, I.K. Puri, and S.K.
    Aggarwal. Gravity effects on triple flames: Flame structure and flow
    instability. Physics of Fluids , 11:3449, 1999.
-    Aggarwal et al. [2001] S.K. Aggarwal, I.K. Puri., and X. Qin. A
    numerical and experimental investigation of “inverse” triple flames.
    Physics of Fluids , 13:265, 2001.
-    Chen and Echekki [2001] J.Y. Chen and T. Echekki. Numerical study
    of buoyancy effects on the structure and propagation of triple
    flames. Combustion Theory and Modelling , 5(4):499–515, 2001.
-    Echekki et al. [2004] T. Echekki, J.Y. Chen, and U. Hegde.
    Numerical investigation of buoyancy effects on triple flame
    stability. Combustion Science and Technology , 176(3):381–407, 2004.
-    Daou and Daou [2014] J. Daou and R. Daou. Flame balls in mixing
    layers. Combustion and Flame , 2014.
-    [42] R. Daou, P. Pearce, and J. Daou. Flame balls in non-uniform
    mixtures: existence and finite activation energy effects. Submitted
    for publication .
-    Buckmaster and Jackson [2000] J. Buckmaster and T.L. Jackson. Holes
    in flames, flame isolas, and flame edges. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 28(2):1957–1964, 2000.
-    Lu and Ghosal [2004] Z. Lu and S. Ghosal. Flame holes and flame
    disks on the surface of a diffusion flame. Journal of Fluid
    Mechanics , 513:287–307, 2004.
-    Williams [1985] F.A. Williams. Combustion Theory: the fundamental
    physics of chemicaly reacting systems . Benjamin/Cummings Publ. Co.,
    Menlo Park, Ca., Second edition, 1985.
-    Law [2006] C.K. Law. Combustion Physics . Cambridge University
    Press, 2006.
-    Spencer [2004] A.J.M. Spencer. Continuum Mechanics . Courier Dover
    Publications, 2004.
-    Batchelor [2000] G.K. Batchelor. An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics
    . Cambridge University Press, 2000.
-    Borgnakke and Sonntag [2012] C. Borgnakke and R.E. Sonntag.
    Fundamentals of Thermodynamics . Wiley New York, Eighth edition,
    2012.
-    Buckmaster and Ludford [1983] J.D. Buckmaster and G.S.S. Ludford.
    Lectures on Mathematical Combustion , volume 73. SIAM, 1983.
-    Rehm and Baum [1978] R.G. Rehm and H.R. Baum. The equations of
    motion for thermally driven, buoyant flows. Journal of Research of
    the National Bureau of Standards , 83(3):297–308, 1978.
-    Majda and Sethian [1985] A. Majda and J. Sethian. The derivation
    and numerical solution of the equations for zero Mach number
    combustion. Combustion Science and Technology , 42(3-4):185–205,
    1985.
-    Paillere et al. [2000] H. Paillere, C. Viozat, A. Kumbaro, and
    I. Toumi. Comparison of low Mach number models for natural
    convection problems. Heat and Mass Transfer , 36(6):567–573, 2000.
-    Linan and Williams [1993] A. Linan and F.A. Williams. Fundamental
    Aspects of Combustion . Oxford University Press, 1993.
-    Kanury [1975] A.M. Kanury. Introduction to Combustion Phenomena:
    For Fire, Incineration, Pollution, and Energy Applications ,
    volume 2. Taylor & Francis, 1975.
-    Fernandez-Pello [2002] A.C. Fernandez-Pello. Micropower generation
    using combustion: issues and approaches. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 29(1):883–899, 2002.
-    Bradley [1992] D. Bradley. How fast can we burn? In Symposium
    (International) on Combustion , volume 24, pages 247–262. Elsevier,
    1992.
-    Damköhler [1940] G. Damköhler. Influence of turbulence on the
    velocity flames in gas mixtures. Z. Elektrochem , 46:601–626, 1940.
-    Clavin and Williams [1979] P. Clavin and F.A. Williams. Theory of
    premixed-flame propagation in large-scale turbulence. Journal of
    Fluid Mechanics , 90(03):589–604, 1979.
-    Kerstein et al. [1988] A.R. Kerstein, W.T. Ashurst, and F.A.
    Williams. Field equation for interface propagation in an unsteady
    homogeneous flow field. Physical Review A , 37(7):2728, 1988.
-    Aldredge [1992] R.C. Aldredge. The propagation of wrinkled premixed
    flames in spatially periodic shear flow. Combustion and Flame ,
    90(2):121–133, 1992.
-    Yakhot [1988] V. Yakhot. Propagation velocity of premixed turbulent
    flames. Combustion Science and Technology , 60(1-3):191–214, 1988.
-    Sivashinsky [1988] G.I. Sivashinsky. Cascade-renormalization theory
    of turbulent flame speed. Combustion Science and Technology ,
    62(1-3):77–96, 1988.
-    Taylor [1953] G. Taylor. Dispersion of soluble matter in solvent
    flowing slowly through a tube. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
    London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences ,
    219(1137):186–203, 1953.
-    Brenner and Edwards [1993] H. Brenner and D.A. Edwards.
    Macrotransport Processes . Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993.
-    Oltean et al. [2004] C. Oltean, C. Felder, M. Panfilov, and M.A.
    Buès. Transport with a very low density contrast in Hele–Shaw cell
    and porous medium: evolution of the mixing zone. Transport in Porous
    Media , 55(3):339–360, 2004.
-    Felder et al. [2004] C. Felder, C. Oltean, M. Panfilov, and
    M. Buès. Dispersion de Taylor généralisée à un fluide à propriétés
    physiques variables. Comptes Rendus Mecanique , 332(3):223–229,
    2004.
-    Dentz et al. [2006] M. Dentz, D.M. Tartakovsky, E. Abarca,
    A. Guadagnini, X. Sanchez-Vila, and J. Carrera. Variable-density
    flow in porous media. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 561(1):209–235,
    2006.
-    Leconte et al. [2008] M. Leconte, N. Jarrige, J. Martin,
    N. Rakotomalala, D. Salin, and L. Talon. Taylor’s regime of an
    autocatalytic reaction front in a pulsative periodic flow. Physics
    of Fluids , 20:057102, 2008.
-    Daou and Matalon [2001] J. Daou and M. Matalon. Flame propagation
    in poiseuille flow under adiabatic conditions. Combustion and Flame
    , 124(3):337–349, 2001.
-    Fan et al. [2007] A. Fan, A. Minaev, S. Kumar, W. Liui, and
    K. Maruta. Experimental study on flame pattern formation and
    combustion completeness in a radial microchannel. Journal of
    Micromechanics and Microengineering , 17(12):2398, 2007.
-    Sitzki et al. [2001] L. Sitzki, K. Borer, E. Schuster, P.D. Ronney,
    and S. Wussow. Combustion in microscale heat-recirculating burners.
    In The Third Asia-Pacific Conference on Combustion , volume 6, pages
    11–14. Seoul, Korea, 2001.
-    Ahn et al. [2005] J. Ahn, C. Eastwood, L. Sitzki, and P.D. Ronney.
    Gas-phase and catalytic combustion in heat-recirculating burners.
    Proceedings of the Combustion Institute , 30(2):2463–2472, 2005.
-    Deuflhard [1974] P. Deuflhard. A modified Newton method for the
    solution of ill-conditioned systems of nonlinear equations with
    application to multiple shooting. Numerische Mathematik ,
    22(4):289–315, 1974.
-    Shampine et al. [2000] L.F. Shampine, J. Kierzenka, and M.W.
    Reichelt. Solving boundary value problems for ordinary differential
    equations in MATLAB with BVP4C. Technical Report, The MathWorks ,
    2000.
-    Al-Malki [2009] F. Al-Malki. Influence of flow on the propagation
    of premixed and partially premixed flames . PhD thesis, University
    of Manchester, 2009.
-    Abdel-Gayed et al. [1987] R.G. Abdel-Gayed, D. Bradley, and
    M. Lawes. Turbulent burning velocities: a general correlation in
    terms of straining rates. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
    London. A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences , 414(1847):389–413,
    1987.
-    Bray [1990] K.N.C. Bray. Studies of the turbulent burning velocity.
    Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical
    and Physical Sciences , 431(1882):315–335, 1990.
-    Anand and Pope [1987] M.S. Anand and S.B. Pope. Calculations of
    premixed turbulent flames by pdf methods. Combustion and Flame ,
    67(2):127–142, 1987.
-    Sivashinsky [1990] G.I. Sivashinsky. Cascade model for turbulent
    flame propagation. In Dissipative Structures in Transport Processes
    and Combustion , pages 30–39. Springer, 1990.
-    Gouldin [1987] F.C. Gouldin. An application of fractals to modeling
    premixed turbulent flames. Combustion and Flame , 68(3):249–266,
    1987.
-    Kagan and Sivashinsky [2003] L. Kagan and G. Sivashinsky. The
    transition from deflagration to detonation in thin channels.
    Combustion and Flame , 134(4):389–397, 2003.
-    Marra and Continillo [1996] F.S. Marra and G. Continillo. Numerical
    study of premixed laminar flame propagation in a closed tube with a
    full Navier–Stokes approach. In Symposium (International) on
    Combustion , volume 26, pages 907–913. Elsevier, 1996.
-    Bénard [1900] H. Bénard. Les tourbillons cellulaires dans une nappe
    liquide. Rev. Gen. Sci. Pures Appl , 11(1309):1261–1271, 1900.
-    Rayleigh [1916] L. Rayleigh. On convection currents in a horizontal
    layer of fluid, when the higher temperature is on the under side.
    Phil. Mag. , 32(192):529–546, 1916.
-    Chandrasekhar [1961] S. Chandrasekhar. Hydrodynamic and
    Hydromagnetic Instability . Dover publications, 1961.
-    Getling [1998] A.V. Getling. Rayleigh–Bénard convection: structures
    and dynamics . World Scientific Publishing Company Incorporated,
    1998.
-    Bodenschatz et al. [2000] E. Bodenschatz, W. Pesch, and G. Ahlers.
    Recent developments in Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Annu. Rev. Fluid
    Mech. , 32(1):709–778, 2000.
-    Ahlers et al. [2009] G. Ahlers, S. Grossmann, and D. Lohse. Heat
    transfer and large scale dynamics in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard
    convection. Reviews of Modern Physics , 81(2):503, 2009.
-    Lohse and Xia [2010] D. Lohse and K.Q. Xia. Small-scale properties
    of turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Annual Review of Fluid
    Mechanics , 42:335–364, 2010.
-    Matalon [2009] M. Matalon. Flame dynamics. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 32(1):57–82, 2009.
-    Bychkov et al. [2007] V. Bychkov, M. Modestov, V. Akkerman, and
    L.E. Eriksson. The Rayleigh–Taylor instability in inertial fusion,
    astrophysical plasma and flames. Plasma Physics and Controlled
    Fusion , 49(12B):B513, 2007.
-    Kirkbey and Schmitz [1966] L.L. Kirkbey and R.A. Schmitz. An
    analytical study of the stability of a laminar diffusion flame.
    Combustion and Flame , 10(3):205–220, 1966.
-    Cheatham and Matalon [1996a] S. Cheatham and M. Matalon. Heat loss
    and Lewis number effects on the onset of oscillations in diffusion
    flames. In Symposium (International) on Combustion , volume 26,
    pages 1063–1070. Elsevier, 1996a.
-    Cheatham and Matalon [1996b] S. Cheatham and M. Matalon. Near-limit
    oscillations of spherical diffusion flames. AIAA Journal ,
    34(7):1403–1409, 1996b.
-    Kim et al. [1996] J.S. Kim, F.A. Williams, and P.D. Ronney.
    Diffusional-thermal instability of diffusion flames. Journal of
    Fluid Mechanics , 327(1):273–301, 1996.
-    Kim [1997] J.S. Kim. Linear analysis of diffusional-thermal
    instability in diffusion flames with Lewis numbers close to unity.
    Combustion Theory and Modelling , 1(1):13–40, 1997.
-    Cheatham and Matalon [2000] S. Cheatham and M. Matalon. A general
    asymptotic theory of diffusion flames with application to cellular
    instability. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 414:105–144, 2000.
-    Kukuck and Matalon [2001] S. Kukuck and M. Matalon. The onset of
    oscillations in diffusion flames. Combustion Theory and Modelling ,
    5(2):217–240, 2001.
-    Vance et al. [2001] R. Vance, M. Miklavcic, and I.S. Wichman. On
    the stability of one-dimensional diffusion flames established
    between plane, parallel, porous walls. Combustion Theory and
    Modelling , 5(2):147–161, 2001.
-    Miklavčič et al. [2005] M. Miklavčič, A.B. Moore, and I.S. Wichman.
    Oscillations and island evolution in radiating diffusion flames.
    Combustion Theory and Modelling , 9(3):403–416, 2005.
-    Metzener and Matalon [2006] P. Metzener and M. Matalon.
    Diffusive-thermal instabilities of diffusion flames: onset of cells
    and oscillations. Combustion Theory and Modelling , 10(4):701–725,
    2006.
-    Matalon and Metzener [2010] M. Matalon and P. Metzener. The effect
    of thermal expansion on diffusion flame instabilities. Journal of
    Fluid Mechanics , 647(1):453–472, 2010.
-    Buckmaster and Peters [1988] J. Buckmaster and N. Peters. The
    infinite candle and its stability–A paradigm for flickering
    diffusion flames. Symposium (International) on Combustion ,
    21(1):1829–1836, 1988.
-    Arai et al. [1999] M. Arai, H. Sato, and K. Amagai. Gravity effects
    on stability and flickering motion of diffusion flames. Combustion
    and Flame , 118(1):293–300, 1999.
-    Jiang and Luo [2000] X. Jiang and K.H. Luo. Combustion-induced
    buoyancy effects of an axisymmetric reactive plume. Proceedings of
    the Combustion Institute , 28(2):1989–1995, 2000.
-    Wu and Chen [2003] K.K. Wu and C.H. Chen. A numerical analysis of
    ignition to steady downward flame spread over a thin solid fuel.
    Combustion Science and Technology , 175(5):933–964, 2003.
-    Boussinesq [1903] J. Boussinesq. Theorie Analytique de la Chaleur .
    Gauthie-Villars, Paris, 1903.
-    Sohn et al. [1999] C.H. Sohn, S.H. Chung, and J.S. Kim.
    Instability-induced extinction of diffusion flames established in
    the stagnant mixing layer. Combustion and Flame , 117(1):404–412,
    1999.
-    Daou and Al-Malki [2010] J. Daou and F. Al-Malki. Triple-flame
    propagation in a parallel flow: an analytical study. Combustion
    Theory and Modelling , 14(2):177–202, 2010.
-    Fröhlich et al. [1992] J. Fröhlich, P. Laure, and R. Peyret. Large
    departures from Boussinesq approximation in the Rayleigh–Bénard
    problem. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics , 4:1355, 1992.
-    Liñán [1974] A. Liñán. The asymptotic structure of counterflow
    diffusion flames for large activation energies. Acta Astronautica ,
    1(7):1007–1039, 1974.
-    Buckmaster et al. [1983] J. Buckmaster, A. Nachman, and
    S. Taliaferro. The fast-time instability of diffusion flames.
    Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 9(3):408–424, 1983.
-    Sivashinsky [1977] G.I. Sivashinsky. Nonlinear analysis of
    hydrodynamic instability in laminar flames–I. Derivation of basic
    equations. Acta Astronautica , 4(11):1177–1206, 1977.
-    Gelfgat [1999] A.Y. Gelfgat. Different modes of Rayleigh–Bénard
    instability in two-and three-dimensional rectangular enclosures.
    Journal of Computational Physics , 156(2):300–324, 1999.
-    Bormann [2001] A.S. Bormann. The onset of convection in the
    Rayleigh–Bénard problem for compressible fluids. Continuum Mechanics
    and Thermodynamics , 13(1):9–23, 2001.
-    Buckmaster and Matalon [1989] J. Buckmaster and M. Matalon.
    Anomalous Lewis number effects in tribrachial flames. In Symposium
    (International) on Combustion , volume 22, pages 1527–1535.
    Elsevier, 1989.
-    Daou and Linán [1998] J. Daou and A. Linán. The role of unequal
    diffusivities in ignition and extinction fronts in strained mixing
    layers. Combustion Theory and Modelling , 2(4):449–477, 1998.
-    Daou et al. [2004] R. Daou, J. Daou, and J. Dold. The effect of
    heat loss on flame edges in a non-premixed counterflow within a
    thermo-diffusive model. Combustion Theory and Modelling ,
    8(4):683–699, 2004.
-    Daou et al. [2002b] R. Daou, J. Daou, and J. Dold. Effect of
    volumetric heat loss on triple-flame propagation. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 29(2):1559–1564, 2002b.
-    Cha and Ronney [2006] M.S. Cha and P.D. Ronney. Propagation rates
    of nonpremixed edge flames. Combustion and Flame , 146(1):312–328,
    2006.
-    Ali and Daou [2007] S. Ali and J. Daou. Effect of the reversibility
    of the chemical reaction on triple flames. Proceedings of the
    Combustion Institute , 31(1):919–927, 2007.
-    Daou [2009] J. Daou. Asymptotic analysis of flame propagation in
    weakly-strained mixing layers under a reversible chemical reaction.
    Combustion Theory and Modelling , 13(1):189–213, 2009.
-    Im and Chen [1999] H.G. Im and J.H. Chen. Structure and propagation
    of triple flames in partially premixed hydrogen–air mixtures.
    Combustion and flame , 119(4):436–454, 1999.
-    Bejan and Tien [1978] A. Bejan and C.L. Tien. Fully developed
    natural counterflow in a long horizontal pipe with different end
    temperatures. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer ,
    21(6):701–708, 1978.
-    Zeldovich et al. [1985] Y.B. Zeldovich, G.I. Barenblatt, V.B.
    Librovich, and G.M. Makhviladze. Mathematical Theory of Combustion
    and Explosions . Consultants Bureau, New York, NY, 1985.
-    Deshaies and Joulin [1984] B. Deshaies and G. Joulin. On the
    initiation of a spherical flame kernel. Combustion Science and
    Technology , 37(3-4):99–116, 1984.
-    Joulin [1985] G. Joulin. Point-source initiation of lean spherical
    flames of light reactants: an asymptotic theory. Combustion Science
    and Technology , 43(1-2):99–113, 1985.
-    Champion et al. [1986] M. Champion, B. Deshaies, G. Joulin, and
    K. Kinoshita. Spherical flame initiation: Theory versus experiments
    for lean propane–air mixtures. Combustion and Flame , 65(3):319–337,
    1986.
-    Tse et al. [2000] S.D. Tse, L. He, and C.K. Law. A computational
    study of the transition from localized ignition to flame ball in
    lean hydrogen/air mixtures. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute
    , 28(2):1917–1924, 2000.
-    He [2000] L. He. Critical conditions for spherical flame initiation
    in mixtures with high Lewis numbers. Combustion Theory and Modelling
    , 4(2):159–172, 2000.
-    Chen and Ju [2007] Z. Chen and Y. Ju. Theoretical analysis of the
    evolution from ignition kernel to flame ball and planar flame.
    Combustion Theory and Modelling , 11(3):427–453, 2007.
-    Chen et al. [2011] Z. Chen, M.P. Burke, and Y. Ju. On the critical
    flame radius and minimum ignition energy for spherical flame
    initiation. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute ,
    33(1):1219–1226, 2011.
-    Mastorakos [2009] E. Mastorakos. Ignition of turbulent non-premixed
    flames. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science , 35(1):57–97,
    2009.
-    Ray et al. [2001] J. Ray, H.N. Najm, and R.B. McCoy. Ignition front
    structure in a methane air jet. In Proceedings of the 2nd Joint
    Meeting of the US Sections of the Combustion Institute, Oakland, CA
    , number 150, 2001.
-    Chakraborty et al. [2007] N. Chakraborty, E. Mastorakos, and R.S.
    Cant. Effects of turbulence on spark ignition in inhomogeneous
    mixtures: a direct numerical simulation (DNS) study. Combustion
    Science and Technology , 179(1-2):293–317, 2007.
-    Chakraborty and Mastorakos [2008] N. Chakraborty and E. Mastorakos.
    Direct numerical simulations of localised forced ignition in
    turbulent mixing layers: the effects of mixture fraction and its
    gradient. Flow, Turbulence and Combustion , 80(2):155–186, 2008.
-    Chakraborty et al. [2010] N. Chakraborty, H. Hesse, and
    E. Mastorakos. Effects of fuel Lewis number on localised forced
    ignition of turbulent mixing layers. Flow, Turbulence and Combustion
    , 84(1):125–166, 2010.
-    Patel and Chakraborty [2014] D. Patel and N. Chakraborty. Localised
    forced ignition of globally stoichiometric stratified mixtures: A
    numerical investigation. Combustion Theory and Modelling ,
    (ahead-of-print):1–25, 2014.
-    Daou and Linán [1999] J. Daou and A. Linán. Ignition and extinction
    fronts in counterflowing premixed reactive gases. Combustion and
    Flame , 118(3):479–488, 1999.
-    Short et al. [2001] M. Short, J. Buckmaster, and S. Kochevets.
    Edge-flames and sublimit hydrogen combustion. Combustion and Flame ,
    125(1):893–905, 2001.
-    Thatcher et al. [2002] R.W. Thatcher, A.A. Omon-Arancibia, and J.W.
    Dold. Oscillatory flame edge propagation, isolated flame tubes and
    stability in a non-premixed counterflow. Combustion Theory and
    Modelling , 6(3):487–502, 2002.
-    Foster [1969] T.D. Foster. The effect of initial conditions and
    lateral boundaries on convection. Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,
    37(01):81–94, 1969.

## Appendix A Premixed flames in a cylindrical channel: asymptotic
analysis in the limit @xmath

In this section we derive the results provided in § 2.4.2 , namely the
one-dimensional boundary problem satisfied by a premixed flame
propagating against a prescribed Poiseuille inflow in a narrow
cylindrical channel. As was done in § 2.3 in the case of a rectangular
channel, we consider the steady form of equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.6 ) with
@xmath , so that only the temperature equation needs to be considered,
since @xmath . We consider the cylindrical coordinate system @xmath ,
with fluid velocity @xmath . In the limit @xmath , we introduce a
rescaled coordinate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the governing equations ( 2.2 )-( 2.5 ) can be written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the density @xmath is given by ( 2.6 ) and the reaction term
@xmath is given by ( 2.11 ). These equations are subject to the
cylindrical form of boundary conditions ( 2.7 )-( 2.10 ), which can be
written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in § 2.3 , we now introduce expansions for @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the leading order approximation to the effective flame
speed @xmath defined in ( 2.13 ), which in this case is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( A.10 ) into equations ( A.2 )-( A.5 ), to leading order
we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath      (A.14)
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( A.14 ) and ( A.15 ) can be integrated with respect to @xmath
to give @xmath and @xmath , after considering the boundary conditions (
A.6 )-( A.7 ) on @xmath , so that @xmath from ( 2.6 ).
Now we look for a separable solution for @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( A.16 ) into equation ( A.13 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. Equation ( A.17 ) can be integrated twice
with respect to @xmath , using the boundary conditions ( A.6 ) and ( A.7
), to yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been absorbed into @xmath . Integrating equation ( A.12
) with respect to @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

after using boundary conditions ( A.6 )-( A.7 ) on @xmath . Equation (
A.19 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the fact that @xmath from equation ( 2.6 ) and boundary condition
( A.8 ). Thus @xmath , so that, from ( A.18 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( A.12 ) can then integrated with respect to @xmath , using (
A.20 ) and condition ( A.6 ), to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, at @xmath in equation ( A.5 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, after using ( A.20 ) and condition ( A.6 ), can be integrated
twice with respect to @xmath to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we look to @xmath in equation ( A.2 ) to find

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.23)
  -- -- -- --------

Equation ( A.23 ) can be integrated first with respect to @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath , utilising the boundary conditions ( A.6 )-( A.7 ) on
@xmath , and then with respect to @xmath to give

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.24)
  -- -- -- --------

To evaluate @xmath , we use boundary conditions ( A.8 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, at @xmath of equation ( A.5 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Integrating ( A.26 ) with respect to @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath , using the boundary conditions ( A.6 )-( A.7 ) on @xmath and
substituting ( A.20 ), ( A.21 ), ( A.22 ), ( A.24 ) and ( A.25 ) leads
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The problem ( A.28 )-( A.29 ) is the required one-dimensional boundary
value problem, with an effective diffusion coefficient, as given in §
2.4.2 .

## Appendix B Premixed flames in a narrow channel: constant density
solution for @xmath, @xmath

In this section we provide an asymptotic result used in § 3.3 . We
consider the constant density form of the infinite activation energy
governing equations ( 3.4 )-( 3.13 ). For an imposed Poiseuille flow of
amplitude @xmath , this is achieved by considering equation ( 3.7 ) with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 3.9 )-( 3.13 ), equation ( B.1 ) is subject to boundary
conditions and jump conditions given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The asymptotic limit considered in this section is @xmath , with @xmath
. This limit is equivalent to @xmath , with @xmath . The aim is to find
an asymptotic formula for the effective propagation speed @xmath , which
is defined in ( 2.13 ). The method is similar to the one used in [ 70 ]
.

We begin by introducing the stretched variable

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that ( B.1 )-( B.4 ) become, using the definition ( 2.13 ) for @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
     @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Letting @xmath and expanding variables in succesive powers of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that to leading order in equation ( B.6 ), the solution is the
planar flame solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, at @xmath in ( B.6 ), we have, using ( B.11 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, in this case ( B.8 )-( B.9 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

so equation ( B.12 ) can be integrated from @xmath to @xmath to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, applying condition ( B.7 ) at @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, equation ( B.15 ) leads to @xmath , so we must consider the
boundary layer near @xmath in order to find the next order solution to
the effective propagation speed @xmath . In the boundary layer the
necessary scalings are found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we expand the effective propagation speed, using ( B.11 ) and ( B.14
), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, to @xmath in equation ( B.6 ) we find, after integrating from
@xmath to @xmath and applying the boundary/jump conditions ( B.8 )-( B.9
),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( B.18 ) is a Ricatti equation; the problem ( B.18 )-( B.19 )
has been solved in [ 70 ] to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (note that here the flow amplitude is denoted @xmath ,
whereas @xmath is used in [ 70 ] ). Then, using ( B.17 ) and ( B.20 )
with the fact that @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath with @xmath , which is equivalent to the limit
@xmath with @xmath . This is the result discussed in § 3.3 .
