This thesis synthesizes probability and entropic inference with Quantum
Mechanics and quantum measurement [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] . It is
shown that the standard and quantum relative entropies are tools
designed for the purpose of updating probability distributions and
density matrices, respectively [ 1 ] . The derivation of the standard
and quantum relative entropy are completed in tandem following the same
inferential principles and design criteria. This provides the first
design derivation of the quantum relative entropy while also reducing
the number of required design criteria to two.

The result of Caticha and Giffin [ 7 , 8 ] and Giffin’s thesis [ 9 ] is
invaluable; it shows that the standard (relative) maximum entropy method
is a “universal method of inference” – it is able to process information
simultaneously that neither a Bayesian nor a standard maximum entropy
method can process alone while being able to reproduce the results of
both. An analogous conclusion is reached in this thesis, the quantum
maximum entropy method derived in [ 1 ] is the “universal method of
density matrix inference”. This was accomplished by deriving, from the
quantum maximum entropy method, a Quantum Bayes Rule [ 2 ] and
generalizations that cannot be obtained from a Quantum Bayes or a
quantum (von Neumann) maximum entropy method [ 10 ] alone while being
able to reproduce the results of both. The expanded results of [ 2 ]
more-or-less follow the main results of [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] in structure, but
instead use density matrices rather than probability distributions. As
the quantum maximum entropy method only uses the standard quantum
mechanical formalism, the quantum maximum entropy method derived here
may be appended to the standard quantum mechanical formalism and remove
collapse as a required postulate, in agreement with [ 11 , 12 ] .

The second part of this thesis revolves around the foundational theory
of Quantum Mechanics called Entropic Dynamics [ 13 ] . Entropic Dynamics
uses the standard maximum entropy method and information geometry to
reformulate the Schrödinger Equation and Quantum Mechanics as a theory
of inference. We derive a density matrix formalism of Quantum Mechanics
using the standard maximum entropy method in Entropic Dynamics, and
thus, the quantum maximum entropy method [ 1 ] may be adopted by
Entropic Dynamics wholesale. This implies that indeed the standard
maximum entropy method is the “universal method of inference” and that
the quantum maximum entropy method holds the more specialized title of
the “universal method of density matrix inference” as it does not
provide an intrinsic mechanism for the unitary evolution of pure states.

Entropic Dynamics is different than most interpretations of Quantum
Mechanics because, rather than appending an interpretation to Quantum
Mechanics, it states its interpretation, “that particles have definite
yet unknown positions and that entropic probability updating works”, and
only then does it derive Quantum Mechanics from these assumptions. This
radical shift in interpretation allows one to solve the quantum
measurement problem [ 14 ] (which was extended to included von Neumann
and weak measurements in [ 3 ] ) and address quantum no-go theorems [ 4
] . Crucial to understanding why these apparent paradoxes pose no issue
in Entropic Dynamics is understanding the foundation of inference that
Entropic Dynamics is built upon. In particular, when it comes to
measurement in Entropic Dynamics, we are able to divvy-up variables
(observables, ect.) into two classes: they are the ontic beables [ 15 ]
, which are the positions of particles, and the epistemic inferables [ 3
] that in principle are inferred from detections of position and are
therefore not predisposed to be part of the ontology. The fact that
observables other than position are inferables in Entropic Dynamics, and
that the positions of particles are the ontic beables , allows the
Entropic Dynamics formulation of Quantum Mechanics to not be ruled out
by the following pertinent no-go theorems [ 4 ] : no @xmath -epistemic [
16 ] , Bell-Kochen-Specker [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] , and Bell’s inequality [ 20
] . Entropic Dynamics is found to be viable theory of Quantum Mechanics.
