# Part I Integrable field theories with twist function

### Chapter 2 Lax formalism and twist function

This chapter is a self-contained review about classical integrable
hamiltonian field theories. The goal is to introduce the class of
non-ultralocal integrable field theories with twist function, through
the key notion of Lax matrix. We consider a two-dimensional Minkowski
space-time, with time coordinate @xmath and space coordinate @xmath ,
which can be taken on the real line @xmath or on the circle @xmath . We
are interested in classical field theories on this space-time, given as
a set of dynamical fields @xmath , depending on the coordinates @xmath ,
together with partial differential equations describing the time
evolution of these fields. If @xmath is taken in @xmath , we suppose
that the fields @xmath decrease sufficiently fast when @xmath goes to
@xmath . If @xmath is taken on the circle @xmath , we suppose that the
fields @xmath satisfy periodic boundary conditions @xmath .

Such a theory is said to be integrable if it admits an infinite number
of conserved charges, in involution in the hamiltonian sense. We will
discuss the hamiltonian framework and the involution properties in
section 2.2 . We first focus on a condition of existence of an infinite
number of conserved charges through the Lax formalism.

#### 2.1 Lax matrices and monodromies

Let us consider a pair of matrices @xmath and @xmath , depending on the
fields @xmath of the model and on a complex auxiliary parameter @xmath
called the spectral parameter. More precisely, we will consider that
@xmath and @xmath are valued in some finite dimensional Lie algebra
@xmath with Lie bracket @xmath (see the Appendix A for conventions and
definitions on Lie algebras). We say that @xmath forms a Lax pair of the
model if the equations of motion of the fields @xmath can be rewritten
as the Lax equation [ 15 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this equation can be reformulated more geometrically as the
zero curvature equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the two-dimensional @xmath -connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a connected Lie group with Lie algebra @xmath (for example
the adjoint group of @xmath ). We define the transfer matrices of the
connection @xmath between the points @xmath and @xmath as the
path-ordered exponential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

valued in the group @xmath . We refer to the Appendix A.5 for the
definition and properties of path-ordered exponentials. In particular,
it is proven in this appendix that the Lax equation ( 2.1.1 ) implies
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath . We will now distinguish the cases where @xmath is taken
on the real line or on the circle.

###### Real line coordinate.

Let us suppose that @xmath is taken on the real line @xmath . We define
the monodromy matrix @xmath as the transfer matrix from @xmath to @xmath
, i.e. as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we suppose that the field @xmath decreases sufficiently fast at
@xmath , we get from equation ( 2.1.2 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, a consequence of the Lax equation ( 2.1.1 ) is that the whole
monodromy matrix is conserved. Note that this equation is true for any
value of the spectral parameter @xmath . Thus, varying @xmath , we get
an infinite number of conserved charges. This was the reason for the
introduction of the spectral parameter dependence in the Lax pair @xmath
: as @xmath is a finite dimensional manifold, a monodromy matrix without
a dependence on an arbitrary auxiliary parameter @xmath would produce
only a finite number of conserved quantities.

###### Circle coordinate.

Let us now suppose that the coordinate @xmath is on the circle @xmath .
We then define the monodromy matrix as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming periodic boundary conditions @xmath , the equation ( 2.1.2 )
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In contrast with the case of a coordinate on the real line, the
monodromy matrix @xmath is then not conserved. However, as the time
evolution of @xmath is given by a commutator, one have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any function @xmath which is invariant under conjugacy. Thus, the
quantity @xmath is conserved along the time evolution of the model. Here
also, this equation of conservation is true for any value of @xmath ,
hence the existence of an infinite number of conserved quantities.

We now come back to the general case, with @xmath either on the real
line or on the circle. In both cases, the quantities @xmath , for @xmath
a conjugacy invariant function on @xmath , are conserved (for @xmath ,
the whole monodromy @xmath is conserved, hence so is any function of
@xmath ). A generic way of constructing such invariant functions @xmath
on @xmath is to consider traces of powers in a matricial representation
@xmath of @xmath . Indeed, the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , is invariant under conjugacy transformation @xmath .
Moreover, if @xmath is semi-simple (which will almost always be the case
in the following chapters) and if we fix a representation @xmath of
@xmath , it is known that the functions @xmath generate all invariant
functions on @xmath . We can then consider the conserved charges

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us finish this section by discussing light-cone coordinates. For
relativistic field theories, it can be useful to work with the
light-cone coordinates @xmath instead of the usual space-time
coordinates @xmath . The derivatives with respect to @xmath are then
given by @xmath . Introducing the light-cone components

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of the Lax pair @xmath , the Lax equation ( 2.1.1 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For relativistic field theories, it will be often simpler to find a Lax
pair in light-cone coordinates. However, to construct conserved
quantities, one then has to come back to the space-time Lax pair @xmath
(more precisely, one needs the Lax matrix @xmath , i.e. the spatial
component of the Lax pair).

#### 2.2 Hamiltonian integrability and non-ultralocal Poisson brackets

As explained above, we say that a model is integrable if it possesses an
infinite number of conserved quantities in involution (in the
hamiltonian sense). In the previous section, we have seen how one can
construct an infinite number of conserved charges using Lax pairs and
monodromy matrices. It is then natural to ask under which conditions
these quantities are in involution (as in this case we have a proof of
the integrability of the model). To discuss this, we first need to
discuss the hamiltonian formulation of classical field theories.

###### Hamiltonian field theories.

A hamiltonian field theory is given by a phase space @xmath , a Poisson
bracket @xmath and a Hamiltonian @xmath . The phase space @xmath
describes the possible space configurations of the dynamical fields of
the model. As we are in the hamiltonian formalism, we consider the
fields as depending on the space coordinate @xmath (the time @xmath is
no longer a coordinate of the field but is considered as a hamiltonian
flow, as explained below). The phase space @xmath is a Poisson manifold,
meaning that the space @xmath of functionals on @xmath is equipped with
a Poisson bracket

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Poisson bracket is a skew-symmetric bilinear derivation satisfying
the Jacobi identity:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The dynamic of the model on @xmath is encoded in a functional @xmath ,
called the Hamiltonian. More precisely, for any functional @xmath (we
restrict here to functionals which do not depend explicitly on the time
@xmath ), its time evolution is given by the hamiltonian flow of @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We say that two functionals @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are in
involution if their Poisson bracket vanishes, i.e. if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, by equation ( 2.2.1 ), @xmath is in involution with the
Hamiltonian @xmath if and only if @xmath is conserved, i.e. if @xmath .

Let us also introduce here the momentum @xmath of the theory. It is also
a functional in @xmath , whose Hamiltonian flow generates the derivative
with respect to the space coordinate @xmath , i.e. such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix.

We will now use the definitions and results of Section 2.1 . In
particular, we suppose that we have a Lax pair @xmath satisfying the Lax
equation ( 2.1.1 ), which can be rewritten in the hamiltonian formalism
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can then construct the monodromy matrix @xmath associated with this
Lax pair and obtain an infinity of conserved charges @xmath , with
@xmath invariant functions on @xmath .

As we are interested in integrable models, it is natural to ask under
which condition these conserved charges are in involution. They are
defined from the monodromy matrix @xmath , which itself is defined from
the Lax matrix @xmath . Thus, the Poisson brackets of these charges
depend on the Poisson brackets between the components of the Lax matrix.

To discuss Poisson brackets of Lie algebra-valued functionals in a
compact way, we will use tensorial notations. For @xmath a functional
valued in @xmath , the universal enveloping algebra of @xmath , we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which belong to @xmath , i.e. are @xmath -valued functionals.

Let @xmath be a basis of the Lie algebra @xmath and @xmath be @xmath
-valued functionals. We decompose @xmath and @xmath in this basis as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used an implicit summation convention on repeated indices. The
coefficients @xmath and @xmath are then scalar-valued functionals in
@xmath . Let us define the Poisson bracket

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

valued in @xmath . One checks that it is independent of the choice of
basis @xmath of @xmath . In particular, one can consider

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which encodes all Poisson brackets between the components of the Lax
matrix.

###### Ultralocal Sklyanin bracket.

As explained above, we are looking for conditions on the Poisson bracket
( 2.2.3 ) for the conserved charges @xmath and @xmath to be in
involution for all spectral parameters @xmath and all invariant
functions @xmath and @xmath . A first sufficient condition for this has
been found by Sklyanin in [ 24 ] (see also [ 126 ] and [ 21 ] ). It
requires the bracket ( 2.2.3 ) to be of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Dirac @xmath -distribution and @xmath is a matrix in
@xmath depending on the spectral parameters @xmath . The skew-symmetry
of the Poisson bracket ( 2.2.4 ) requires this matrix to be
skew-symmetric, in the sense that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Poisson bracket ( 2.2.4 ) is said to be ultralocal, as it contains
only a Dirac @xmath -distribution and not its derivatives. As we shall
see in chapter 3 , this is not enough to describe the hamiltonian
integrability of various models, for which there exists a Lax matrix
whose Poisson bracket also contains derivatives of @xmath -distribution.

###### Non-ultralocal Maillet bracket.

A generalisation of the ultralocal Sklyanin bracket ( 2.2.4 ) has been
presented by Maillet in [ 25 , 26 ] . It is still a sufficient condition
on the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix for the conserved charges
extracted from the monodromy to be in involution. However, this
condition allows for this Poisson bracket to contain a derivative @xmath
of the Dirac distribution. It takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.6)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where here also @xmath is a @xmath -valued function of two spectral
parameters @xmath and @xmath . This bracket is called Maillet bracket ,
or non-ultralocal bracket (due to the presence of the @xmath term), and
will play a major role in this thesis.

Let us note that here, we supposed that @xmath was not dynamical, i.e.
that it did not depend on @xmath trough a dependence on the fields of
the model. The original articles [ 25 , 26 ] of Maillet also included
the case of dynamical @xmath matrices. However, as we will not need this
generalisation in this thesis, we will restrain to the case of
non-dynamical @xmath for simplicity.

It is worth noticing that the skew-symmetry of the Poisson bracket (
2.2.6 ) is automatically satisfied, without requiring any further
condition on the matrix @xmath . If one considers the case of a
skew-symmetric @xmath , i.e. which satisfies equation ( 2.2.5 ), the
Maillet bracket ( 2.2.6 ) reduces to the Sklyanin bracket ( 2.2.4 ). In
general, the matrix @xmath of a Maillet bracket can possess a
skew-symmetric part @xmath and a symmetric part @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bracket ( 2.2.6 ) then takes the following form (this is in fact the
original form proposed in the article [ 25 ] ):

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.7)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

somtimes called a @xmath -system. The non-ultralocality of the bracket,
i.e. the term proportional to @xmath , is then controlled by the
symmetric part @xmath of @xmath .

#### 2.3 Yang-Baxter equation, @xmath-matrices and twist function

###### Classical Yang-Baxter equation.

As we have seen in the previous sections, a sufficient condition to have
an integrable field theory is the existence of a Lax matrix @xmath
satisfying a non-ultralocal Poisson bracket ( 2.2.6 ), controlled by a
@xmath -valued matrix @xmath . A natural question to ask at this point
is whether this matrix can be anything or if there are some constraints
on it, coming from the properties that a Poisson bracket must satisfy.
As we have seen, the skew-symmetry of the bracket ( 2.2.6 ) is
automatically verified, without requiring any additional constraint on
@xmath . However, this bracket must also satisfy the Jacobi identity,
i.e. we must have

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 (2.3.1)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is to be understood as an identity in @xmath . Using the
expression ( 2.2.6 ), one can check that this is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, a sufficient condition for the Jacobi identity to be verified is
the so-called Classical Yang-Baxter Equation (CYBE) :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The matrices that satisfy this equation are called @xmath -matrices .
Although it is not a necessary condition to have a Jacoby identity, we
shall restrict ourselves from now on to matrices @xmath which satisfy
this stronger condition. Indeed, the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ) is much more easy to
manipulate than the general condition ( 2.3.2 ), as it depends only on
@xmath and not on the Lax matrix @xmath anymore. Moreover, the CYBE is
an algebraic, non-dynamical, equation in @xmath , which only depends on
the Lie bracket over @xmath . As we shall see in the next paragraph,
this allows general schemes of constructions of solutions of the CYBE.
For more details on the algebraic interpretations of the CYBE, we refer
to the appendix C .

###### Standard @xmath-matrices.

In this paragraph, we present some particular solutions of the CYBE
called the standard @xmath -matrices. Let us suppose that @xmath is a
semi-simple Lie algebra (see appendix A.2 for definitions and details).
In particular, it possesses a non-degenerate invariant bilinear form
@xmath . Let us consider the so-called split Casimir of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is independent of the choice of basis @xmath of @xmath . It is
symmetric ( @xmath ) and satisfies the following identity (see Appendix
A.2.4 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, this implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using this identity in @xmath , together with the circle lemma

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a solution of the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ). We refer the reader to the appendix
C for a more algebraic interpretation of this solution of the CYBE,
related to the non-twisted loop algebra @xmath . We call it the standard
(non-twisted) @xmath -matrix on @xmath . Let us note that, as the
quadratic Casimir is symmetric, the standard non-twisted @xmath -matrix
@xmath is skew-symmetric.

Suppose now that we are given an automorphism @xmath of @xmath , of
finite order @xmath (see the appendix A.4 for more details on these
automorphisms). It is a standard result that it preserves the Killing
form @xmath . As a consequence, the quadratic Casimir satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath act respectively on the first and second tensor
factor of @xmath . Let us chose a primitive @xmath root of unity @xmath
. We then define the so-called standard twisted @xmath -matrix on @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the invariance ( 2.3.7 ) of the Casimir under @xmath and the fact
that @xmath is an automorphism of @xmath , one checks that @xmath is a
solution of the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ). We refer to appendix C for a more
algebraic interpretation of this solution in terms of the twisted loop
algebra @xmath . Let us note that, contrarily to the non-twisted @xmath
-matrix, the twisted standard @xmath -matrix is not skew-symmetric.

Both the twisted and non-twisted standard @xmath -matrices are singular
at @xmath . Moreover, the asymptotic behaviour of the twisted matrix
around this singularity is the one of the non-twisted one (divided by
@xmath ), as we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , the eigenvalues of @xmath are of the form @xmath where, by
convention, we take @xmath . We denote by @xmath the corresponding
eigenspace and by @xmath the projection on @xmath in the direct sum
@xmath (see the appendix A.4 for more details about these eigenspaces).
Defining @xmath , we can rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Twist function.

We end this section by a quick but crucial remark [ 127 , 128 , 129 ] .
Let us fix a solution @xmath of the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ). Typically, in this
thesis, we will choose @xmath to be a non-twisted or twisted standard
@xmath -matrix on @xmath , as described in the previous paragraph. It is
easy to check that for any function @xmath from @xmath to itself, the
matrix @xmath is also a solution of the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ). Indeed, the
left-hand side of the CYBE for @xmath is simply the one for @xmath
multiplied by @xmath , so the CYBE for @xmath implies the one for @xmath
. This function, that is often supposed to be a rational function of the
spectral parameter, is called the twist function [ 129 ] . We refer the
reader to the appendix C for the loop algebra interpretation of the
corresponding @xmath -matrix.

#### 2.4 Integrable models with twist function

We define an integrable model with twist function to be a Hamiltonian
field theory such that:

-   its equations of motion admit a Lax pair @xmath , valued in @xmath
    and depending rationally on the spectral parameter ;

-   the Lax matrix @xmath satisfies a non-ultralocal Maillet bracket of
    the form ( 2.2.6 ) ;

-   the @xmath -matrix underlying the Maillet bracket is of the form

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.4.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with @xmath a standard @xmath -matrix on @xmath and @xmath a
    rational function, the twist function ;

-   if the standard matrix @xmath is twisted by an automorphism @xmath ,
    the Lax matrix and the twist function satisfy some equivariance
    properties , described below ;

-   the Lax matrix and the automorphism @xmath satisfy some reality
    conditions , described below.

###### Equivariance properties.

As explained above, if the standard matrix @xmath is twisted by an
automorphism @xmath of order @xmath , we require some additional
equivariance condition on @xmath and @xmath . In this case, we speak of
a cyclotomic model .

As the order of @xmath is @xmath , it defines an action of the cyclic
group @xmath on @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath can be seen as acting
on the complex numbers @xmath via multiplication by @xmath . We then
remark that the first tensor factor of the matrix @xmath is equivariant
under these two actions, in the sense that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will suppose that the Lax matrix @xmath possesses a similar
equivariance property, namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, using the invariance ( 2.3.7 ) of the Casimir under @xmath ,
one gets, on the second tensor factor,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The compatibility of these properties with the Poisson bracket ( 2.2.6 )
imposes that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which we deduce that @xmath is invariant under the action of @xmath
. Thus, there exists a rational function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us note that the equivariance properties ( 2.4.2 ) and ( 2.4.4 ) of
@xmath , together with the one of the twist function ( 2.4.5 ), implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the matrix @xmath is equivariant both in the first and the second
tensor factors.

###### Reality condition.

In non-ultralocal models with twist function, we suppose that the Lax
matrix depends rationally on the spectral parameter @xmath , which is a
complex number. Thus, the Lie algebra @xmath in which the Lax matrix is
valued is a complex Lie algebra. However, many field theories are
described by real valued fields: we keep track of this in the Lax matrix
through reality conditions.

Let @xmath be a real form of the complex Lie algebra @xmath (see the
Appendix A.3 for definitions and conventions on real forms). It can be
seen as the algebra of fixed points under an anti-automorphism
involution @xmath of @xmath . We will suppose that the Lax matrix
satisfies the following reality condition :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the complex conjugate of the spectral parameter @xmath .

If the model is cyclotomic, i.e. the standard matrix @xmath is twisted
by an automorphism @xmath , we will assume that @xmath satisfies the
following property:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that we call the dihedrality condition . The quadratic Casimir satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining this equation with the dihedrality condition ( 2.4.8 ), we get
the following reality conditions on the standard @xmath -matrix:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The compatibility of the Poisson bracket ( 2.2.6 ) with the reality
conditions ( 2.4.7 ) and ( 2.4.9 ) requires that the twist function is a
rational function with real coefficients, i.e. that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Combining the two conditions ( 2.4.9 ) and ( 2.4.10 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### Dihedrality.

Let us end this section by explaining the name of the dihedrality
condition ( 2.4.8 ). We consider the abstract group @xmath defined by
the following presentation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

i.e. the group generated by two abstract generators @xmath and @xmath
satisfying the relations above. It is a classical result from group
theory that @xmath is then of order @xmath and is isomorphic to the
dihedral group @xmath , defined as the group of symmetries of the
regular polygon with @xmath edges ( @xmath then represents the rotation
of angle @xmath and @xmath the symmetry with respect to an axis of the
polygon).

Let @xmath be a primitive @xmath -root of unity. There is a natural
action of the dihedral group @xmath on the complex plan as the
multiplication by @xmath and the complex conjugation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the same way, there is an action of @xmath on the Lie algebra @xmath
, defined from the automorphism @xmath of order @xmath and the
antilinear involutive automorphism @xmath introduced above:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath and @xmath satisfy the dihedrality condition ( 2.4.8 ). The
cyclotomic property ( 2.4.3 ) and the reality condition ( 2.4.7 )
imposed on the Lax matrix @xmath can be understood as the equivariance
of @xmath under the action of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### Chapter 3 Examples of models with twist function: integrable
@xmath-models

In the previous chapter, we introduced the class of integrable models
with twist function. In the present one, we discuss various examples of
such models. All the examples considered here are integrable @xmath
-models but there exist other theories with twist function, such as the
Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation or affine Toda field theories, that we
shall not discuss here (see [ 84 ] ).

The first three sections of this chapter are reviews about @xmath
-models which are known to possess a twist function. The first section
discusses the general framework of integrable @xmath -models. The second
section concerns the Principal Chiral Model (PCM), which is the simplest
example of integrable @xmath -models, and the @xmath -coset models. We
review here their Lax formulation and the Poisson bracket of their Lax
matrix, exhibiting the structure of a non-ultralocal model with twist
function.

The third section concerns integrable deformations of the PCM and the
@xmath -coset models. Indeed, it has been discovered in the past decades
that these models admit continuous deformations (controlled by real
parameters) which still admit a Lax pair. Moreover, the hamiltonian
analysis of these models has been conducted and it has been found that
the Poisson bracket of their Lax matrix is also governed by a twist
function. More precisely, it has been observed that the effect of the
deformation is to deform the poles of the twist function of the model.
In the third section, we review different results on this subject that
exist in the literature and present an overall view of the panorama of
integrable deformed @xmath -models and their twist function.

The fourth and final section is about a particular two-parameter
deformation of the PCM, the so-called Bi-Yang-Baxter model. This model
was introduced by Klimčik in [ 34 ] , who also proved in [ 39 ] that its
equations of motion can be recast as a Lax equation, thus proving the
existence of an infinite number of conserved charges for this model.
However, the hamiltonian analysis of the Bi-Yang-Baxter model was never
carried out. My first PhD project was the study of the Poisson bracket
of the Lax matrix of the Bi-Yang-Baxter model. In Section 3.4 , after
recalling the construction of the model and of its Lax pair, I present
the results I found in [ 1 ] concerning the hamiltonian integrability of
the Bi-Yang-Baxter model. In particular, we shall see that the
Bi-Yang-Baxter model also enters the class of models with twist
function.

#### 3.1 Generalities about integrable @xmath-models

##### 3.1.1 Lie group valued field and currents

Before going into the details of the different models, let us discuss
some general aspects regarding integrable @xmath -models. A @xmath
-model (not necessarily integrable) is a two-dimensional field theory
with dynamical fields @xmath , where @xmath is the two-dimensional
Minkowski space-time with coordinates @xmath , called the worldsheet,
and @xmath is a Riemannian manifold, which we call the target space. We
are interested in some of these models, which have the additional
property of being integrable. These share the property that their target
space is a real Lie group @xmath or one of its cosets, i.e. the quotient
@xmath of @xmath by a particular subgroup @xmath . We shall suppose here
that @xmath is a connected semi-simple Lie group. We will denote @xmath
the complexification of @xmath , which is then a complex semi-simple Lie
group (see Appendix A.3 ).

As we will see in more details in this chapter, we shall not describe
the coset models with fields directly valued in @xmath . Instead, we
shall consider an equivalent formulation with a field valued in @xmath ,
together with a gauge symmetry in @xmath , which eliminates the
additional degrees of freedom. As a result, all the models we shall
consider are defined by a field @xmath , valued in the Lie group @xmath
. We shall use extensively the so-called left currents

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are @xmath -valued fields, with @xmath the Lie algebra of @xmath .
These are called left currents as they are invariant under the left
multiplication

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath by a constant element @xmath of @xmath . There are also right
currents

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

invariant under the right multiplication @xmath . They are related to
the left currents by a conjugacy transformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The left and right currents are flat, i.e. they satisfy the zero
curvature equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

called the Maurer-Cartan equation . Finally let us also introduce the
light-cone currents:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In light-cone coordinates, the Maurer-Cartan equation reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 3.1.2 Hamiltonian formulation

###### Conjugate momenta and phase space.

The @xmath -models are naturally defined as Lagrangian field theories
with an action @xmath depending on the field @xmath . As we are
interested in the integrability properties of @xmath -models, we will
need to consider them in the Hamiltonian formalism. We thus pass from
the field @xmath valued in @xmath and depending on @xmath to fields
depending only on the space coordinate @xmath and valued in the
cotangent bundle @xmath . These fields form the phase space of the model
and contain the @xmath -valued coordinate-field @xmath , together with
some conjugate momentum fields.

Let us be more explicit about that. We fix some local coordinates @xmath
( @xmath ) of @xmath , where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath (more
precisely, the coordinates @xmath could be defined only on an open
subset of @xmath ). Locally, one can describe the field @xmath as @xmath
real-valued fields @xmath . The Lagrangian density of the model can then
be written as a function @xmath of the fields @xmath ’s and their
space-time derivatives. In the Hamiltonian formalism, these coordinate
fields are paired with conjugate momenta @xmath , obtained from the
Lagrangian density @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The fields @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s then describe the whole phase space
of the model and satisfy the canonical Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Kronecker symbol and @xmath is the Dirac @xmath
-distribution.

We now want a coordinate-free description of this phase-space. The
coordinate fields @xmath are equivalent to the @xmath -valued field
@xmath . Thus, there is left to find a way to encode the conjugate
momenta @xmath in a coordinate-free way. Let @xmath denote the
derivative with respect to the local coordinate @xmath : @xmath then
belongs to the Lie algebra @xmath . Let us fix a basis @xmath of @xmath
and define @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The matrix @xmath is then invertible. We shall write @xmath its inverse.
It verifies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the summation on repeated indices is implied. We then define the
@xmath -valued field

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Killing form of @xmath in the basis @xmath , dual to
@xmath . One can then check that this field is invariant under a change
of the coordinates @xmath on @xmath or of basis @xmath of @xmath .

Thus, the phase-space of the model is parametrised by the @xmath -valued
field @xmath and the @xmath -valued field @xmath . Together, they form a
field valued in the cotangent bundle @xmath . One can check that the
canonical brackets ( 3.1.5 ) can be rewritten in terms of the fields
@xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.7c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the quadratic Casimir of @xmath (see Appendix A ).

###### Left and right multiplication.

Let us investigate what is the Hamiltonian flow generated by the
integral of the field @xmath . Let us define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the integral is either on the real line @xmath or on the circle
@xmath , depending on the space-time of the theory. This is a @xmath
-valued quantity, which can be seen as @xmath -valued via the duality
between @xmath and @xmath induced by the Killing form @xmath . Moreover,
we deduce from the Poisson bracket ( 3.1.7c ) that it satisfies the
Kostant-Kirillov bracket (see Appendix B.2 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, it can be chosen as the moment map of an infinitesimal action of
@xmath (see Appendix B.4 ). For @xmath infinitesimal, the corresponding
action on an observable @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the completeness relation ( A.2.7 ), one finds that the action
@xmath on the phase space parametrised by the fields @xmath and @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the action of @xmath on @xmath is the infinitesimal transformation
induced by the right multiplication @xmath by constant elements @xmath
of @xmath . One can also describe the left multiplication action by
considering @xmath instead of @xmath . Indeed, the canonical bracket can
be also written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.9b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.9c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The moment map

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

generates the infinitesimal left multiplication on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can remark that @xmath and @xmath are respectively invariant under
the left and right actions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Momentum and Hamiltonian.

Let us consider the current @xmath (when working in Hamiltonian
formalism, we shall drop the indices @xmath as we dropped out the time
dependence and kept only the space dependence). We will use the
following Poisson brackets, which are a consequence of ( 3.1.7 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.11c)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

Using these Poisson brackets, we find that the total momentum of the
theory is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed, one checks that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To conclude this subsection, let us say a few words about the
Hamiltonian of the system. If we choose a set of coordinate fields
@xmath , as we have done above, the Hamiltonian @xmath is related to the
Lagragian density @xmath by the Legendre transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the conjugate momenta. These momenta are encoded in a
coordinate-free way in the current @xmath defined as ( 3.1.6 ). One can
then rewrite the Hamiltonian also in a coordinate-free way as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.2 Undeformed integrable @xmath-models

##### 3.2.1 The Principal Chiral Model

###### Action and equations of motion.

The Principal Chiral Model (PCM) is the simplest example of an
integrable @xmath -model. Its target space is a real Lie group @xmath ,
which we assume to be connected and semi-simple, equipped with the
Killing metric. It is defined by the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a global constant factor and @xmath is the Killing form
on @xmath . This can be reexpressed in terms of the left or right
currents @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the expression with the right currents @xmath follows from
equation ( 3.1.1 ) and the invariance of @xmath under conjugacy
transformation.

It will be useful to express the action of the PCM using light-cone
coordinates @xmath and the light-cone currents @xmath . One then finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Varying this action with respect to @xmath , one finds that the
equations of motion of the PCM can be written as the conservation
equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equation of conservation of @xmath is equivalent to the one of
@xmath , using the equation ( 3.1.1 ).

###### Global symmetries.

As we have just observed, the equations of motion of the PCM take the
form of the conservation equations of the @xmath -valued currents @xmath
. Thus, the quantities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are conserved (the global factor @xmath is here for future convenience).
By the Noether theorem, these conserved charges are associated with
global symmetries of the model.

Let us recall that the right and left currents are respectively
invariant under the right multiplication @xmath and the left
multiplication @xmath of @xmath by a constant element @xmath of @xmath .
As the Lagrangian density of the PCM can be entirely written in terms of
either one of these currents, it is clear that these transformations are
global symmetries of the PCM. Applying the Noether theorem, one finds
that the conserved quantities associated with these symmetries are the
ones of equation ( 3.2.4 ). It is worth noticing that the charge
associated with the right multiplication is the integral of the left
current and vice-versa.

###### Lax equation.

Let us now investigate the integrability properties of the PCM,
following the ideas of Chapter 2 . In particular, let us start by
exhibiting the Lax representation of the equations of motion of the PCM,
using a general scheme developped by Zakharov and Mikhailov [ 130 ]
(some first results were also found by Pohlmeyer in [ 131 ] ). The
latter relies on the existence of a conserved and flat current ( i.e.
satisfying a conservation equation and a zero curvature equation). In
the case of the PCM, we have seen that the equations of motion ( 3.2.3 )
take the form of the conservation equations of the currents @xmath and
@xmath . Moreover, according to the Maurer-Cartan equation ( 3.1.2 ),
these currents are flat. Let us then define the following light-cone Lax
pair

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

depending on the spectral parameter @xmath (one could also have
considered a Lax matrix associated with right currents, but we shall
focus here on this particular choice). One then has

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The constant term in the bracket exactly vanishes according to the
(light-cone) Maurer-Cartan equation ( 3.1.2 ). It is worth noticing that
this equation is true off-shell, i.e. without using the equation of
motion of the model. The above equation then reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we see that the equations of motion ( 3.2.3 ) of the PCM are
equivalent to the (light-cone) Lax equation ( 2.1.4 ). This proves the
existence of a Lax pair representation of the PCM. Moreover, we see that
this procedure for constructing a Lax pair generalises to every model
which possesses a flat and conserved current.

Let us end this paragraph by exhibiting the Lax pair @xmath
corresponding to the space-time coordinates @xmath . Inverting the
relation ( 2.1.3 ) and using the expression ( 3.2.5 ) of @xmath , one
finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Hamiltonian analysis.

We aim to show that the PCM belongs to the class of non-ultralocal
models with twist function: thus, we want to compute the Poisson bracket
of the Lax matrix with itself. For that, we first need to pass from the
Lagrangian to the Hamiltonian formalism. The description of the phase
space of the PCM, which is common to all integrable @xmath -models, was
presented in the subsection 3.1.2 . It is encoded in the @xmath -valued
field @xmath and the @xmath -valued current @xmath , satisfying the
canonical brackets ( 3.1.7 ). Choosing a set of coordinates @xmath and
computing the corresponding conjugate momenta @xmath , we compute the
expression of the field @xmath , as defined in ( 3.1.6 ). For the PCM,
one simply finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As expected, one finds that @xmath is independent of the choice of
coordinates @xmath . We note that the right moment map ( 3.1.8 ) can
then be reexpressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equal to the Noether charge ( 3.2.4 ) associated with the right
multiplication symmetry of the PCM. This is natural, as the moment map
@xmath generates the infinitesimal right multiplication, as seen in the
subsection 3.1.2 . In the same way, the left multiplication moment map
@xmath coincides with the second Noether charge in equation ( 3.2.4 ).

Using the equation ( 3.1.12 ) together with the expression ( 3.2.7 ) of
@xmath , we express the Hamiltonian of the PCM in terms of @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consistency check, one can compute that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that we recover the Lagrangian equation of motion ( 3.2.3 ).

###### Maillet bracket and twist function.

Finally, let us compute the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix of the PCM
and show that it is governed by a twist function, as done by Maillet in
[ 127 ] . We start by re-expressing the Lax matrix ( 3.2.6 ) in terms of
the currents @xmath and @xmath , whose Poisson bracket we know. One
simply finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now have all the ingredients to compute the Poisson bracket of the
Lax matrix with itself, starting from the above expression and the
brackets ( 3.1.7 ) and ( 3.1.11 ). After a few computations, involving
also the circle lemma ( 2.3.5 ), one finds that the Lax matrix satisfies
a non-ultralocal Maillet bracket ( 2.2.6 ). The corresponding @xmath
-matrix is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the non-twisted standard @xmath -matrix on @xmath and
the twist function is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As announced, this proves that the PCM is a non-ultralocal model with
twist function. According to the definition of such a model given in
Section 2.4 , we also have to verify the reality condition ( 2.4.7 ): it
is obvious from Equation ( 3.2.8 ), as @xmath and @xmath belongs to
@xmath and thus are invariant under the anti-involution @xmath (note
that we do not have to verify the equivariance conditions of Section 2.4
, as the standard @xmath -matrix is non-twisted).

Although it is not clear yet why we are interested in this, let us study
the analytical properties of the twist function @xmath . More precisely,
let us look at the poles and the zeros of the 1-form @xmath . It is
clear that it possesses two simple zeros at @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, it possesses a double pole at @xmath . Under the inversion of
parameter @xmath , this 1-form transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This has a double pole in @xmath , so the 1-form @xmath has a double
pole at infinity. As a conclusion, the twist function of the PCM has
double poles at zero and infinity and simple zeros at @xmath and @xmath
, as represented in Figure 3.1 . Let us note also that the two zeros
@xmath of the twist function are also poles of the Lax matrix @xmath (we
shall use this property later).

##### 3.2.2 @xmath-coset @xmath-models

###### @xmath-grading.

We shall now review the @xmath -coset @xmath -models and their
integrable structure. They are @xmath -models with target space @xmath ,
where @xmath is a connected semi-simple Lie group and @xmath is a
particular subgroup of @xmath . More precisely, we suppose that @xmath
is such that the corresponding subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is equal to
the @xmath -grade @xmath of a @xmath -grading of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to Corollary A.4.4 , such gradings are in one-to-one
correspondence with automorphisms @xmath of order @xmath satisfying the
dihedrality condition ( 2.4.8 ). We will use the notations introduced in
Section 2.3 for the construction of the standard @xmath -matrix twisted
by @xmath (we refer the reader to the Appendix A.4 for more details
about finite order automorphisms of Lie algebras). In particular, @xmath
is a primitive @xmath -root of unity and @xmath ( @xmath ) is the
eigenspace of @xmath of eigenvalue @xmath . For @xmath , we define
@xmath the projection of @xmath on @xmath in the decomposition @xmath .

For simplicity, we shall only detail here the case @xmath and just
summarise at the end of the subsection how the results on the
integrability of the @xmath -coset model generalises to @xmath -cosets
for arbitrary @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath is an involution ( i.e.
@xmath ), @xmath and the eigenspaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case, the Lie algebra @xmath of the subgroup @xmath is
identified with the subalgebra @xmath of elements of the real form
@xmath stabilised by @xmath . In this case @xmath , the coset space
@xmath is called a symmetric-space.

###### Action and equations of motion.

As explained briefly in Subsection 3.1.1 , we will describe the @xmath
-model on @xmath as a model on a @xmath -valued field @xmath together
with a gauge symmetry in @xmath to eliminate the redundant degrees of
freedom. More explicitly, the symmetric-space @xmath -model on @xmath is
given by the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can reexpress this action in terms of left currents @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the same way, one can also use the light-cone left currents @xmath
and the light-cone coordinates @xmath :

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

Let us consider the local right multiplication

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

by a field @xmath valued in @xmath . Under this transformation, the
left-current transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction, @xmath is valued in @xmath so @xmath belongs to @xmath
. Moreover, according to the grading relations ( 3.2.10 ), the conjugacy
transformation by @xmath preserves the graded subspaces @xmath and
@xmath . Thus, we deduce that the graded components of @xmath transform
simply as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular, as the Killing form @xmath is invariant under conjugacy
transformations, we see that the action ( 3.2.11 ) is invariant under
the local transformation ( 3.2.12 ). Thus, the model possesses a gauge
symmetry under the right multiplication by elements of @xmath . The
physical degrees of freedom of the model are then in the quotient @xmath
. One can then recover the usual @xmath -model on the symmetric-space
@xmath by gauge fixing the theory.

Let us end this paragraph by expressing the equations of motion of the
model, obtained by varying the field @xmath in the action ( 3.2.11 ).
They read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the covariant derivative

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consistency check, we can verify that this equation of motion is
invariant under the gauge transformation ( 3.2.12 ). According to
equation ( 3.2.13 ), the currents @xmath transform covariantly under
this transformation and the currents @xmath transform as gauge fields
(which justifies the name of covariant derivative for @xmath ). Thus,
the left-hand side of the equation of motion ( 3.2.14 ) is covariant
under the gauge transformation, hence the gauge symmetry at the level of
the equations of motion.

###### Global left symmetry.

In addition to the right gauge symmetry described above, the @xmath
-coset model possesses a global left symmetry. Indeed, the action (
3.2.11 ) is expressed only in terms of the left-invariant currents
@xmath . Thus, the action is invariant under the left multiplication
@xmath by a constant element @xmath of the group @xmath . By the Noether
theorem, this global symmetry is associated with the following equation
of conservation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to the equation of motion ( 3.2.14 ). Thus, the
charge

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is conserved, i.e. does not depend on @xmath .

###### Lax equation.

Let us show that the equations of motion of the @xmath -coset @xmath
-model can be recast as a Lax equation ( 2.1.4 ) (in light-cone
coordinates), as proved originally by Eichenherr and Forger in [ 132 ]
(first results on particular examples were found by Pohlmeyer in [ 131 ]
). As in the case of the PCM (subsection 3.2.1 ), we will need the
flatness of the left-current @xmath , i.e. the Maurer-Cartan equation (
3.1.4 ). As the @xmath -coset model is expressed in terms of the graded
components @xmath and @xmath , let us decompose the Maurer-Cartan
equation along this grading. Using the grading relation ( 3.2.10 ), one
finds the two following equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

We define the light-cone Lax pair

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

depending on the spectral parameter @xmath . One has

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first two lines vanish off-shell (without the equations of motion)
due to the Maurer-Cartan equations ( 3.2.15 ). Thus, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equation of motion ( 3.2.14 ) of the @xmath -coset is then
equivalent to the Lax equation ( 2.1.4 ), as expected. To end this
paragraph, let us give the corresponding Lax pair @xmath in space-time
coordinates:

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

Using the fact that @xmath and @xmath , we can note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the Lax matrix @xmath satisfies the equivariance condition ( 2.4.3
) (as @xmath for @xmath ).

###### Hamiltonian analysis.

Let us discuss the Hamiltonian formulation of the @xmath -coset model.
The phase space of the model is described in Subsection 3.1.2 . It
contains the @xmath -valued field @xmath and the @xmath -valued field
@xmath . Choosing coordinate fields @xmath on @xmath , one can compute
the corresponding conjugate momenta @xmath and deduce the Lagrangian
expression ( 3.1.6 ) of @xmath . One finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the notation @xmath instead of @xmath will be justified in what
follows. A direct consequence of this expression is that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can seem surprising at first, as @xmath is for example incompatible
with the Poisson bracket ( 3.1.7b ). This is a consequence of the gauge
symmetry of the @xmath -coset model. Indeed, according to Dirac theory [
133 ] , when passing from a Lagrangian system with gauge symmetry to the
Hamiltonian formalism, one encounters constraints on the phase space.
These are relations between the coordinates @xmath and the conjugate
momentum @xmath . In the case of the @xmath -coset model, these
relations are encoded in the fact that @xmath vanishes.

We shall use here the Dirac terminology and say that an equation is weak
when it is true only with the constraint (we then use the notation
@xmath instead of @xmath ). At the contrary, we will say that an
equation is strong when it is true without imposing the constraint (we
shall then keep the usual equality sign @xmath for those). The full
treatment of the @xmath -coset model as a constrained Hamiltonian system
would require the application of the Dirac procedure. We shall not enter
into too much details here and will just refer to the textbooks [ 133 ,
134 ] when we have to use results on constrained systems.

Let us finish this discussion about the constraint by a quick
consistency check. For constraints coming from a gauge symmetry, it is a
standard result that the Hamiltonian flow of this constraint generates
the corresponding gauge transformation. Let us check this fact here. For
@xmath an infinitesimal field valued in @xmath , one can check from the
Poisson bracket ( 3.1.7b ) that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the infinitesimal version of the gauge transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we recover that the constraint @xmath generates the gauge symmetry
of the model, as expected.

Let us discuss the Hamiltonian of the model, using the formula ( 3.1.12
) obtained in the general discussion. As we are considering a
constrained system, we have the freedom of adding to the Hamiltonian of
equation ( 3.1.12 ) any term proportional to the constraint. Doing the
explicit computation for the case of the @xmath -model, one finds

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.21)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is an arbitrary @xmath -valued field, called the
Lagrange multiplier. According to equation ( 3.2.20 ), the Hamiltonian
flow generated by the term containing @xmath is purely a gauge term and
thus does not change the physics of the model.

###### Maillet bracket and twist function.

Let us now determine the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix with itself
and show that the @xmath -coset model possesses a twist function [ 135 ,
128 ] . We first need to reexpress the Lax matrix ( 3.2.18a ) in terms
of the Hamiltonian fields @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath is a
constraint, one has the freedom to add to the Lax matrix a term
proportional to @xmath . Using the expression ( 3.2.19 ) of @xmath , one
then gets

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of the spectral parameter.
Starting from the Poisson brackets ( 3.1.7 ) and ( 3.1.11 ), we compute
the bracket of the Lax matrix ( 3.2.22 ) with itself. We find that it
takes the form of a non-ultralocal Maillet bracket, strongly ( i.e.
without using the constraint @xmath ), if we choose the function @xmath
to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case, the @xmath -matrix governing the Maillet bracket takes the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the partial quadratic Casimirs. We recognize here the
twisted standard @xmath -matrix ( 2.3.9 ), for @xmath . The twist
function takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With the function @xmath chosen as in ( 3.2.23 ), the Lax matrix then
becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This Lax matrix satisfies the equivariance condition ( 2.4.3 ) and the
reality condition ( 2.4.7 ). Moreover, the twist function also satisfies
the equivariance property ( 2.4.5 ) and the reality condition ( 2.4.10
), as expected from the consistency of the Maillet bracket. This proves
that the @xmath -coset @xmath -model belongs to the class of
non-ultralocal models with twist function. Following the nomenclature of
Section 2.4 , we say that it is a cyclotomic model of order @xmath , as
it is associated with the standard @xmath -matrix on @xmath twisted by
the involution @xmath .

As for the PCM, let us study the analytical properties of the twist
function and more precisely, the poles and zeros of the 1-form @xmath .
One sees that it has two double poles at @xmath and @xmath and two
simple zeros at @xmath and infinity. These poles and zeros are shown in
figure 3.2 .

###### @xmath-cosets.

We close this subsection by discussing briefly general @xmath -coset
@xmath -models, for arbitrary @xmath (we will use the notations
introduced at the beginning of this subsection, with @xmath an
automorphism of order @xmath ). These models were introduced by Young in
[ 136 ] , together with their Lax pair representation (see also [ 137 ]
and [ 138 ] ). The Hamiltonian analysis of these models and the
computation of the Poisson bracket of their Lax matrix was done by Ke,
Li, Wang and Yue in [ 139 ] . In particular, they showed that the @xmath
-coset models are non-ultralocal models with twist function, cyclotomic
of order @xmath . The Lax matrix of these models reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that in this equation, and in general, we consider the exponents
@xmath only modulo @xmath , so that @xmath for example. All @xmath
-coset models possess a gauge symmetry under the action of the subgroup
@xmath of @xmath . As in the case of the @xmath -coset presented above,
the field @xmath is the constraint associated with this gauge symmetry.
It is clear that equation ( 3.2.26 ) reduces to the Lax matrix ( 3.2.25
) of the @xmath -coset model for @xmath (and for the choice of the
global factor @xmath ). Note that the Lax matrix ( 3.2.26 ) satisfies
the equivariance condition ( 2.4.3 ) for the automorphism @xmath of
order @xmath introduced above.

The Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix ( 3.2.26 ) takes the form of a
Maillet non-ultralocal bracket ( 2.2.6 ). The associated @xmath -matrix
is given by a twist function, as in ( 2.4.1 ). More precisely, the
matrix @xmath is the standard @xmath -matrix on @xmath twisted by the
automorphism @xmath of order @xmath and the twist function is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As for the Lax matrix, the twist function ( 3.2.27 ) reduces to the one
( 3.2.24 ) of the @xmath -coset model when @xmath (and @xmath ). As
expected, this twist function satisfies the equivariance condition (
2.4.5 ). The 1-form @xmath has two zeros in @xmath and infinity and
@xmath double poles, located at each @xmath -root of the unity @xmath .

Let us say a few words about supercoset models. Instead of a Lie
algebra, one can consider a super-Lie algebra, equipped with a @xmath
-grading (for a super-Lie algebra, we only consider even gradings, as
the definition of a super-Lie algebra already contains a @xmath
-grading). The construction mentioned above for @xmath -coset then
generalises and one can write a @xmath -supercoset @xmath -model (this
was also considered by Young in [ 136 ] ). The Hamiltonian integrable
structure of these models (Lax matrix, Maillet bracket, twist function)
is the same as the one of the @xmath -coset models described above, when
replacing Lie algebras by super-Lie algebras (this was also shown in [
139 ] ).

A slightly different construction allows to consider the Green-Schwarz
superstring on @xmath : in particular, one has to take into account the
worldsheet diffeomorphism gauge symmetry of the model, as well as the
@xmath -symmetry (the latter comes from the fact that the Green-Schwarz
model, contrarily to the supercoset model mentioned above, has no
kinetic terms involving fermions). The action of this model was worked
out by Metsaev and Tseytlin in [ 10 ] . Its interpretation as a @xmath
-supercoset model may be seen from [ 140 ] (see also the review [ 69 ]
). This model was extensively studied in the context of the AdS/CFT
correspondence, as its holographic dual is the @xmath super-Yang-Mills
theory in four dimensions (see for example [ 14 ] ). It was shown to
admit a Lax pair by Bena, Polchinski and Roiban in [ 11 ] . Its
hamiltonian integrability and its Maillet structure were discovered by
Magro in [ 12 ] . The underlying algebraic structure was understood in [
13 , 129 ] and the twist function determined in [ 129 ] . This twist
function coincides with the one of a @xmath -coset model, given by (
3.2.27 ) with @xmath .

#### 3.3 Deformed integrable @xmath-models

In the past decades, several integrable deformations of the PCM and of
the @xmath -coset @xmath -models were discovered. These are models which
depend on one or more deformation parameters, such that they reduce to
the undeformed model when these parameters are equal to zero and such
that they still admit a Lax pair formulation. Moreover, for all models
for which the hamiltonian analysis of the Lax matrix has been carried
out, it was found that they also belong to the class of models with
twist function, as the undeformed one. Interestingly, as we shall see,
the effect of the deformations is to deform the poles of the twist
function.

We will not detail the construction and the analysis of all these models
here. In the first subsection, we will develop the first known example
of such a deformed model, the so-called Yang-Baxter model, which is a
one-parameter deformation of the PCM that we will often use as an
example in this thesis. In the second subsection, we will review briefly
the whole panorama of deformations of the PCM, focusing in particular on
their twist functions. Finally, in the third section, we shall discuss
the deformations of @xmath -coset models.

##### 3.3.1 The Yang-Baxter model

###### Action.

The Yang-Baxter model is a one-parameter integrable deformation of the
PCM, introduced by Klimčik in [ 33 ] . We will use the notation of the
subsection 3.2.1 on the PCM. We will suppose moreover that we are given
a linear map @xmath , stabilising the real form @xmath and
skew-symmetric with respect to the Killing form @xmath , which satisfies
the so-called modified Classical Yang-Baxter Equation (mCYBE):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath (split case) or @xmath (non-split case). Although this
equation is called the modified CYBE, it should not be confused with the
CYBE ( 2.3.3 ) (note in particular that there is no dependence on some
spectral parameter in the above equation). The link between these
equations and their algebraic interpretation are explained in Appendix C
. In most examples and applications, we will consider the so-called
standard (split or non-split) matrix @xmath , as described in Appendix C
, although the results of the present subsection hold for any solution
of the mCYBE.

The Yang-Baxter model is then defined by the following action, depending
on the @xmath -valued field @xmath , a real parameter @xmath and a
global factor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the second equality is obtained using the skew-symmetry of @xmath
with respect to @xmath . Note here that we use the notation @xmath for
the deformation parameter, following the conventions of [ 35 ] ,
although this parameter is often denoted @xmath in the literature.
Comparing this equation to equation ( 3.2.2 ), it is clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, this action defines a one-parameter deformation of the PCM.

Let us discuss briefly the invertibility of the operators @xmath , which
is necessary for the good definition of the action ( 3.3.2 ). This
invertibility is always ensured for @xmath close to @xmath . In the case
of a standard matrix @xmath , the eigenvalue of @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath for the split case and @xmath and @xmath for the non-split one.
Thus, @xmath is invertible for any value of @xmath in the non-split case
and invertible for @xmath for the split case.

The above action is expressed in terms of the right currents @xmath .
Using the invariance of @xmath under conjugacy transformation and the
relation ( 3.1.1 ) between the right currents and the left ones, one can
re-express this action as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Later in this subsection, when discussing the Hamiltonian formalism of
the model, we will need the expression of the action in terms of
space-time coordinates @xmath instead of light-cone ones. This is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

###### (Preserved and broken) Symmetries.

As already observed, the Yang-Baxter action ( 3.3.2 ) is expressed only
in terms of the right currents @xmath . As these currents are invariant
under the right multiplication @xmath by a constant element of @xmath ,
it is clear that the Yang-Baxter model is invariant under this
transformation, as the PCM is (we will come back on this fact later).

As explained in Subsection 3.2.1 , the PCM is also invariant under the
left multiplication @xmath . This left symmetry is broken by the
Yang-Baxter deformation. Indeed, under the transformation @xmath , the
action ( 3.3.2 ) transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath does not commute with @xmath , this is different from @xmath
when @xmath . We shall discuss again this breaking of symmetry in
Chapter 5 .

Let us now come back to the right symmetry, which is not broken by the
Yang-Baxter deformation. By the Noether theorem, it is associated with
the conservation equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of a @xmath -valued current @xmath . One finds that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This conservation equation is one way to write the whole set of
equations of motion of the Yang-Baxter model. A conserved current is
only defined up to a global constant factor: here, we introduced the
factor @xmath for future convenience. We note that in the non-split case
@xmath , this factor is equal to @xmath and thus is non-zero for any
value of @xmath . In the split case @xmath , we see that this factor is
not zero, except for the values @xmath : as discussed above, these
correspond also to the values where the the operator @xmath is
non-invertible, so we shall exclude them for the present discussion. One
easily checks that the current @xmath reduces to the left-current @xmath
in the undeformed case @xmath .

As we have just seen, the Yang-Baxter deformation of the PCM preserves
the right symmetry of the model but breaks the left symmetry. One could
have also introduced a Yang-Baxter deformation which preserves the left
symmetry and breaks the right one, by simply replacing the right current
@xmath by the left current @xmath in the action ( 3.3.2 ). This model is
equivalent to the one studied here and all the computations we present
also apply to it by exchanging “left and right objects”. Thus, we shall
focus only on the model defined by ( 3.3.2 ).

###### Lax equation.

Let us discuss the Lax representation of the equations of motion of the
Yang-Baxter model, as first introduced by Klimčik in [ 34 ] . Recall
that in the undeformed (PCM) case, we constructed a Lax pair following
the scheme of Zakharov and Mikhailov, based on the existence of a
conserved and flat current. In the case of the Yang-Baxter model, we
already found a conserved current @xmath , associated with the global
right symmetry. It is thus natural to wonder whether @xmath is flat,
i.e. whether we have or not

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the undeformed case, this flatness condition reduces to the
Maurer-Cartan equation ( 3.1.4 ) of @xmath . Thus, we should expect to
also use the Maurer-Cartan equation in the deformed case. To compute the
derivatives @xmath , one needs to take into account the fact that the
operators @xmath in the definition ( 3.3.6 ) of @xmath also depend on
the field @xmath . In general, for a @xmath -dependent field @xmath and
an infinitesimal variation @xmath of @xmath , one finds that the induced
variation of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This allows to compute the derivatives @xmath and @xmath . Combining
these with the Maurer-Cartan equation of @xmath and the conservation
equation ( 3.3.5 ) of @xmath , one checks that the flatness equation (
3.3.7 ) indeed holds. In the derivation of this equation, one has to use
extensively the mCYBE equation ( 3.3.1 ) (or more precisely the fact
that @xmath also satisfies the mCYBE). Thus, it is the fact that @xmath
is a solution of the mCYBE that ensures the flatness of @xmath and hence
the integrability of the model. Note also that the zero curvature
equation ( 3.3.7 ) is not invariant under the multiplication of @xmath
by a global constant factor: this is the origin of the factor @xmath
that we introduced in the definition ( 3.3.6 ) of @xmath (another factor
would spoil the flatness of @xmath ).

Following Zakharov and Mikhailov, the Lax pair of the Yang-Baxter model
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . Although it is not equal to the Lax pair found
in the original paper [ 34 ] of Klimčik, it is related to it by a formal
gauge transformation by @xmath . It is clear that this Lax pair reduces
to the one ( 3.2.6 ) we considered for the PCM in the undeformed limit:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Hamiltonian analysis.

Let us discuss the Hamitlonian formalism of the Yang-Baxter model. The
phase-space of the model is described by the @xmath -valued field @xmath
and the @xmath -valued field @xmath , as explained in Subsection 3.1.2 .
Choosing local coordinates @xmath on @xmath , one can compute the
corresponding conjugate momenta @xmath from the action ( 3.3.4 ) and
deduce the Lagrangian expression of @xmath . One then finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which reduces to @xmath in the undeformed limit, as expected from (
3.2.7 ). From the action ( 3.3.4 ) and the equation ( 3.1.12 ), we
compute the Hamiltonian of the Yang-Baxter model and find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath as usual. Using the relation ( 3.3.9 ) between @xmath and
@xmath , we can express the current @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then note that the Hamiltonian ( 3.3.10 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Maillet non-ultralocal bracket.

Using the Hamiltonian expression ( 3.3.11 ) of the current @xmath , we
rewrite the Lax matrix ( 3.3.8 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now want the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix with itself, as
computed by Delduc, Magro and Vicedo in [ 35 ] . This necessitates the
computation of some intermediate Poisson brackets involving the field
@xmath . We will not enter into more details here, as some similar
computations will be presented in the section 3.4 on the Bi-Yang-Baxter
model. In the end, using the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ) (or more precisely the
mCYBE for @xmath ), one finds that the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix
takes a Maillet non-ultralocal form ( 2.2.6 ).

More precisely, the @xmath -matrix underlying this Maillet bracket is
given by the standard non-twisted @xmath -matrix on @xmath and the twist
function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is clear that this twist function reduces to the one ( 3.2.9 ) of the
PCM in the undeformed limit @xmath . Let us now study the analytical
properties of the 1-form @xmath , summarised on Figure 3.3 . As for the
PCM, it possesses two simple zeros at @xmath and @xmath . It also
possesses a double pole at infinity and two simple poles at @xmath (
i.e. at @xmath for a split matrix @xmath and at @xmath for a non-split
one). This is in contrast with the PCM case, for which there was a
double pole at infinity and a double pole at @xmath . The effect of the
Yang-Baxter deformation is thus to split the double pole at @xmath into
two simple poles at @xmath , without deforming the zeros. We shall see
that this is a common feature of all integrable deformations of @xmath
-models.

###### Lax matrix at the pole of the twist function.

As we have seen above, the twist function of the Yang-Baxter model
possesses two simple poles at @xmath . We shall come back on the
interpretation of these poles later, in the second part of this thesis.
At this stage, let us just make the following observation, which will be
useful for Chapter 5 .

It is a classical result that a Lax pair of a model is not defined
uniquely. In particular, one always has a freedom of performing a formal
gauge transformation on the Lax pair @xmath by a @xmath -valued field
@xmath (this comes from the fact that the Lax equation is a zero
curvature equation):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Lax equation ( 2.1.1 ) for the pair @xmath is then equivalent to the
one for the Lax pair @xmath . For the Yang-Baxter model, we can then
consider the Lax pair @xmath , obtained by a gauge transformation with
@xmath .

We will be interested in the evaluation of this new Lax matrix @xmath at
the poles of the twist function. Starting from the expression ( 3.3.12
), we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with (see Appendix C for more informations about the operators @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equation ( 3.3.15 ) will be the starting point for the studies of
Poisson-Lie symmetries of the Yang-Baxter model in Chapter 5 . To
conclude this paragraph, let us also note that the factor @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### 3.3.2 Deformations of the PCM

In the previous subsection, we presented in details the Yang-Baxter
model, which is a particular example of an integrable deformation of the
PCM. In this subsection, we will review briefly the whole landscape of
these deformations.

As we have seen in the previous subsection, the Yang-Baxter model
consists in breaking the left symmetry of the PCM, while preserving the
right one. In [ 34 ] , Klimčik proposed a deformation of the Yang-Baxter
model itself, depending on another parameter @xmath , which also breaks
the right symmetry while keeping the existence of a Lax pair. This model
is called the Bi-Yang-Baxter model. We shall not discuss it further
here: it will be the subject of the following section, as part of the
presentation of my PhD works.

Another possibility to deform the PCM is to add [ 50 ] to its action a
so-called Wess-Zumino term (multiplied by a constant parameter @xmath ).
We will not explain here how this term is constructed and refer to [ 50
, 48 , 49 ] for more details on this matter. It was shown in [ 51 ] (see
also [ 141 ] ) that this model admits a Lax pair for any value of @xmath
. Its twist function has been studied in [ 52 ] and proved to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the undeformed limit @xmath goes to @xmath , one recovers the twist
function ( 3.2.9 ) of the PCM (for the global factor @xmath ). An
interesting remark is that, as for the Yang-Baxter case, the deformation
modifies the poles of the 1-form @xmath , without modifying its zeros.
More precisely, the deformation moved the double pole at @xmath of the
PCM to a double pole at @xmath . The double pole at infinity and the two
simple zeros at @xmath of the PCM are not affected by this deformation.

Some deformations of the PCM can be combined together to form
multi-parameter deformations. In fact, it was shown recently by Delduc,
Hoare, Kameyama and Magro [ 53 ] that there exists a three-parameter
integrable deformation of the PCM combining the left and right
deformations @xmath and @xmath of the Bi-Yang-Baxter model (see above)
and the addition of a Wess-Zumino term (with factor @xmath ). More
precisely, they have constructed such a model which admits a Lax pair
representation. The Hamiltonian integrability of this model, however,
has not been studied yet although it is expected that it enters the
class of models with a twist function. Although this might not be a
simple thing to prove, this three-parameter deformation is expected to
be the maximal way of deforming the twist function of the PCM.

As the twist function of the three-parameter deformation of the PCM has
not been computed yet, we will restrict ourselves to its two-parameter
limits. One of them is the Bi-Yang-Baxter model mentioned above. The
other one is a combination of the Yang-Baxter deformation (with
parameter @xmath ) and of the addition of a Wess-Zumino term (with
parameter @xmath ). It was first proposed in [ 29 ] and further studied
in [ 142 , 143 ] for the group @xmath . The model for a general group
was constructed and shown to be integrable by Delduc, Magro and Vicedo
in [ 52 ] . Its twist function takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the subscript dPCM stands for deformed PCM and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this model was considered in the litterature only for a
Yang-Baxter deformation associated with a non-split solution @xmath of
the mCYBE ( i.e. @xmath in ( 3.3.1 )). One easily checks that @xmath for
@xmath , so that the twist function ( 3.3.18 ) coincides with ( 3.3.17 )
in this limit. In the same way, @xmath for @xmath , so ( 3.3.18 )
reduces to the twist function ( 3.3.13 ) of the Yang-Baxter model (for
@xmath and an appropriate choice of @xmath ) in this case.

The integrable structure of the general deformed PCM shares some
similarities with the one of the PCM. In particular, its Lax matrix
takes the “model-independent” form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -valued fields. The deformation is
contained in the (model-dependent) expression of @xmath and @xmath in
terms of the fields @xmath and @xmath . In particular, according to
Subsection 3.2.1 , one has @xmath and @xmath in the undeformed case
@xmath . In the same way, in the Yang-Baxter case @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath coincide with the currents @xmath and @xmath of
Subsection 3.3.1 .

The expression of the currents @xmath and @xmath for the general case
@xmath is more involved: it is easier to express them in terms of @xmath
and another field @xmath instead of @xmath . The relation between @xmath
and @xmath is difficult to state explicitly due to some non-locality
issues coming with Wess-Zumino terms. We shall not enter into this
matter here as we will not need the explicit definition of @xmath and
@xmath in this PhD (see [ 52 ] for details).

The form of the Lax matrix ( 3.3.19 ), specific to a Zakharov-Mikhailov
scheme, reflects the existence for all these models of a flat and
conserved current. This current is associated by the Noether theorem
with the right multiplication symmetry of the model, which is conserved
both by the Yang-Baxter deformation and the addition of the Wess-Zumino
term.

Another common feature shared by the two-parameter dPCM and its (less
deformed) limits is the expression of the Hamiltonian and total momentum
of the model. They are given in terms of the fields @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

with @xmath a global factor depending on @xmath and @xmath via the
relation @xmath . Interestingly, one can always rewrite the above
expressions as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall use this fact in Chapter 4 .

There exists another type of integrable deformation of the PCM, called
the @xmath -deformation [ 45 ] . It consists more of a deformation of
the non-abelian T-dual of the PCM, which is a model equivalent to the
PCM. We shall not present here the results on this model. The twist
function of this model turns out to be of the same form than the one of
a split Yang-Baxter deformation [ 46 , 144 ] . This is due to a deeper
relation between the Yang-Baxter model and the @xmath -deformation [ 144
, 145 , 146 ] , involving a Poisson-Lie duality [ 147 , 148 , 149 , 33 ]
.

##### 3.3.3 Deformations of @xmath-coset models

We shall now discuss the integrable deformations of the @xmath -coset
@xmath -model. We will use the notations of Subsection 3.2.2 , in which
we described the undeformed theory. There are two types of deformations
of the @xmath -coset model: the Yang-Baxter deformation and @xmath
-deformation. As for the PCM, the two give a similar integrable
structure and in particular a twist function of the same form. We shall
focus on the Yang-Baxter deformation and refer to [ 46 ] for the @xmath
-deformation.

The deformed model we are going to study here is part of a general
scheme of integrable deformations called Yang-Baxter type deformations [
144 ] , or @xmath -deformation, which applies to a certain class of
models with twist function. In particular, the @xmath -deformation of
the PCM is the Yang-Baxter model, that we studied in Subsection 3.3.1 .
In this subsection, we shall skip most technical details and insist on
the common features shared by this model and the Yang-Baxter one. They
actually are common features of general Yang-Baxter type deformations
and will be the starting key points for the chapter 5 of this thesis.
Moreover, in this subsection, we will present a common formalism
describing the integrable structure of both the undeformed @xmath -coset
and its @xmath -deformation, as we did for the PCM and its deformations
in the previous subsection.

###### Action and symmetries.

The @xmath -coset @xmath -deformation has been constructed by Delduc,
Magro and Vicedo in [ 35 ] . As for the Yang-Baxter model, it is based
on a skew-symmetric solution @xmath of the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ). Its action
is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , as in the PCM case, and @xmath is the projection on the
eigenspace @xmath of @xmath . Note the similarity between this action
and the one of the Yang-Baxter model, written as ( 3.3.3 ).

We expect a deformation of the @xmath -coset model to possess the same
degrees of freedom as the undeformed model. Thus, we expect the gauge
symmetry ( 3.2.12 ) of the undeformed model to also leave invariant the
action ( 3.3.22 ). This can be easily verified using the expression (
3.2.13 ) of the transformation of @xmath under a gauge transformation
and the fact that @xmath transforms as @xmath . Thus, the @xmath
-deformation preserves the right gauge symmetry of the @xmath -coset
model.

Recall that the undeformed model also possesses a global left symmetry
(see Subsection 3.2.2 ). Due to the presence of the operator @xmath in
the action ( 3.3.22 ), this symmetry is broken by the @xmath
-deformation. This is similar to what happens for the Yang-Baxter model,
i.e. the @xmath -deformation of the PCM, which preserves the right
symmetry of the PCM but breaks the left one. This symmetry breaking is
one of the common feature shared by the Yang-Baxter type deformations.

###### Lax matrix.

It was found in [ 35 ] that the model ( 3.3.22 ) admits a Lax pair. In
particular, the Lax matrix can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -valued fields. Similarly to the
deformations of the PCM in Subsection 3.3.2 , this structure is common
to the deformed and undeformed @xmath -models. The deformation is purely
contained in the dependence of @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath . According to equation ( 3.2.25 ), we have in the undeformed
limit @xmath that @xmath and @xmath . We refer to [ 35 ] for the
expressions of @xmath and @xmath in the deformed case. In both the
undeformed and the deformed models, the field @xmath is the constraint
associated with the gauge symmetry ( 3.2.12 ). Finally, let us note that
the Lax matrix satisfies the equivariance and reality conditions ( 2.4.3
) and ( 2.4.7 ).

###### Twist function.

The computation of the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix is also carried
out in [ 35 ] . It takes the form of a Maillet non-ultralocal bracket.
The @xmath -matrix of the latter is given by the standard matrix @xmath
, twisted by the automorphism @xmath , and the twist function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This twist function clearly reduces to the one ( 3.2.24 ) of the
undeformed @xmath -coset model when @xmath . Note that it also satisfies
the equivariance and reality conditions ( 2.4.5 ) and ( 2.4.10 ).

The 1-form @xmath possesses two simple zeros at @xmath and infinity, as
for the undeformed @xmath -coset model. However, the two double poles
@xmath and @xmath of the undeformed model have been split into simple
poles @xmath and @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a split matrix @xmath ( @xmath ), these poles are situated on the
real axis. For a non-split @xmath ( @xmath ), they belong to the unit
circle of the complex plane. We can rewrite them as @xmath , with the
angle @xmath defined by @xmath , as represented in Figure 3.4 .

We observe that the two poles @xmath and @xmath of the undeformed model
split in a symmetric way under the reflection with respect to the
origin. This is forced by the equivariance property ( 2.4.5 ) of the
twist function, which in this case implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed, for every pole @xmath , there must then also be a pole at @xmath
. In some sense (which will be made clearer in the second part of this
thesis), one can consider these two poles as a unique set of poles
related by the transformation @xmath . Thus, we see that the effect of
the @xmath -deformation is to split a (set of) double pole(s) into two
(sets of) simple poles. This is similar to the case of the Yang-Baxter
model and is one of the common feature of the Yang-Baxter type
deformations.

We end this paragraph by a last observation. Performing the gauge
transformation of the Lax matrix ( 3.3.19 ) by @xmath and evaluating it
at @xmath , one finds

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.25)
  -- -- -- ----------

and @xmath . This is to be compared with equation ( 3.3.15 ), derived
for the Yang-Baxter model. This is the main common feature of
Yang-Baxter type models, that we shall use extensively in Chapter 5 .

###### Deformed @xmath-coset models.

Let us end this section by discussing the deformations of @xmath -coset
@xmath -models. It is expected that the @xmath -coset models admit an
integrable deformation of Yang-Baxter type. The effect of this
deformation would be to break the left symmetry of the model and to
split the double poles of the twist function ( 3.2.27 ) into simple
poles. However, this deformed model has never been constructed
explicitly. This construction would be an interesting project, to
complete the study of the whole landscape of deformations of @xmath
-models. We expect the Lax matrix of this deformed model to be of the
form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath some @xmath -valued field depending on @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

It is worth mentioning that there exists a Yang-Baxter type deformation
of the Green-Schwarz superstring on @xmath , which was discovered by
Delduc, Magro and Vicedo in [ 37 , 38 ] . Its Lax matrix is of the form
( 3.3.26 ) for @xmath . The undeformed model possesses the same twist
function as the @xmath -coset @xmath -model, i.e. equation ( 3.2.27 )
with @xmath . The deformation modifies this twist function as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are constants depending on the deformation
parameter @xmath , satisfying @xmath and @xmath when @xmath (thus, for
@xmath , we recover the twist function ( 3.2.27 ) for @xmath ). This
twist function has 8 simple poles at @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath .
Thus, the effect of the deformation is to split the double poles @xmath
into pairs of simple poles, as expected for a Yang-Baxter type
deformation. The deformation of the Green-Schwarz model also exhibits
other properties of Yang-Baxter type deformations: the left symmetry of
the model is broken by the deformation and the Lax matrix of the model
satisfies the relation ( 3.3.25 ) for the simple poles @xmath (see [ 38
] ).

#### 3.4 Bi-Yang-Baxter model

In this section, I will present some results I obtained during my PhD
about the Bi-Yang-Baxter model. These results are part of the
publication [ 1 ] : here, I will summarize the main ideas of [ 1 ] (and
a few subsequent results) without entering into too much technical
details. We refer to the original article for those details. Note that
some conventions and notations (in particular the sign of the Lax matrix
@xmath ) are different in the core text of this thesis and in the
article [ 1 ] . In the present section, we will keep the conventions
that we used in the previous chapter and sections and will transpose the
results of [ 1 ] in those.

The Bi-Yang-Baxter model (BYBM) is a double deformation of the PCM,
introduced by Klimčik in [ 34 ] , which depends on two deformation
parameters @xmath and @xmath . The limits @xmath and @xmath respectively
correspond to the right and left Yang-Baxter model, i.e. the
one-parameter deformations of the PCM which break respectively the right
and left symmetries of the model. The BYBM is then a combination of
these two Yang-Baxter deformations, which breaks both the left and the
right symmetries.

The BYBM was shown to possess a Lax pair representation by Klimčik in [
39 ] , hence proving the existence of an infinite number of conserved
charges. However, the Hamiltonian integrability of the model, i.e. the
fact that these conserved charges are in involution one with another,
was not proved. This was the subject of my first PhD project, which
resulted in the article [ 1 ] . We showed that the BYBM enters the class
of non-ultralocal models with twist function, thus proving its
Hamiltonian integrability. More precisely, as we shall see, we have
shown this for a reformulation of the BYBM as a @xmath -coset model on
@xmath . We shall start by introducing and studying this formulation and
will end the section by discussing the more usual formulation as a
deformation of the PCM.

##### 3.4.1 The Bi-Yang-Baxter model in Lagrangian formulation

###### Action and symmetries.

We shall use the notations of the previous chapter and sections. In
particular, we consider a real Lie group @xmath with Lie algebra @xmath
. Let @xmath and @xmath be two skew-symmetric solutions of the mCYBE (
3.3.1 ) on @xmath (we shall restrict here to the case of the non-split
mCYBE, i.e. with @xmath ). We define the Bi-Yang-Baxter model (BYBM) by
the following action, for a field @xmath valued in the double group
@xmath [ 150 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real parameters, the currents @xmath and
@xmath are the left currents of @xmath and @xmath , as introduced in
Subsection 3.1.1 and finally, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us notice here that @xmath and @xmath are also skew-symmetric
solutions of the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ).

Let us consider the subgroup @xmath of @xmath composed by elements of
the form @xmath , @xmath . It acts on @xmath by the right multiplication

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One easily checks that the action ( 3.4.1 ) is invariant under the
transformation ( 3.4.2 ), for @xmath an arbitrary field valued in @xmath
. Thus, the action ( 3.4.1 ) possesses a gauge symmetry under the right
action of @xmath .

Let us also consider the action on @xmath of the right multiplication by
constant elements @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One checks that the action ( 3.4.1 ) is invariant under this
transformation if and only if @xmath . We shall come back on this remark
later.

###### Gauge fixing and deformed “PCM” formulation.

As we observed above, the action ( 3.4.1 ) possesses a gauge symmetry
under the right multiplication by @xmath . The real degrees of freedom
of this model then belong to the quotient @xmath . One can identify this
quotient with the group @xmath , by observing that each orbit contains a
unique element of the form @xmath . Thus, one should be able to
reformulate the model in terms of a @xmath -valued field. This is done
at the level of the action by performing a gauge transformation ( 3.4.2
) with @xmath . Doing so, one finds a new action on the gauge-invariant
field @xmath , which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the original action proposed by Klimčik in [ 34 ] . In this
formulation, it is clear that the BYBM is a two-parameter deformation of
the PCM ( 3.2.2 ).

Let us note that the action ( 3.4.3 ) of @xmath acts on the field @xmath
by the following combination of the left and right multiplications

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, both the left and right multiplication are not symmetries
of the action ( 3.4.4 ) if @xmath and @xmath are non zero. When @xmath ,
these symmetries are restored, as the model then reduces to the
undeformed PCM model.

It is clear in this gauge-fixed formulation that the BYBM ( 3.4.4 )
reduces to the Yang-Baxter model ( 3.3.3 ) when @xmath (with a change
from @xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath ). In this case, the
global right symmetry @xmath is restored and the left symmetry @xmath
stays broken. In the same way, the limit @xmath is also the Yang-Baxter
model, but with the left symmetry preserved and the right symmetry
broken. The BYBM is thus a combination of both the left and the right
Yang-Baxter deformations. According to Subsection 3.3.1 , the
one-parameter limits @xmath and @xmath are thus both integrable models
with twist function.

###### @xmath-coset Yang-Baxter limit.

As we shall see now, there exist two other one-parameter limits of the
model which also admit a twist function. They arise naturally from the
non-gauge fixed formulation ( 3.4.1 ), once we identify it with a
deformation of a @xmath -coset @xmath -model.

Let us consider the double group @xmath . It is equipped with an
involutive automorphism @xmath defined as the exchange of the two @xmath
factors in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us note here that the subgroup @xmath of @xmath -fixed-points is
equal to @xmath : thus, we can identify the coset @xmath with the @xmath
-coset @xmath . The automorphism @xmath induces an involutive
automorphism of the Lie algebra @xmath , that we shall still denote
@xmath . We will use the notations of Subsection 3.2.2 and Appendix A.4
for finite order automorphisms. In particular, the eigenspaces of @xmath
are

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The projectors @xmath of the decomposition @xmath are then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will encode the two fields @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath -valued
field @xmath . Note that the grade (1) part of the left current @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Killing form on the double algebra @xmath is given by @xmath , where
@xmath is the Killing form on @xmath . Let us define @xmath . It is a
skew-symmetric solution of the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ) on @xmath . In the limit
@xmath , we can rewrite the action ( 3.4.1 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the Yang-Baxter type deformation of the @xmath -coset @xmath
-model on @xmath , as described in Subsection 3.3.3 . Thus, the
one-parameter limit @xmath is also an integrable model with twist
function.

In the same way, we check that the limit @xmath is also a Yang-Baxter
type deformation of the @xmath -coset @xmath -model on @xmath , but with
the solution @xmath of the mCYBE on @xmath . Thus, this is also a
one-parameter limit which admits a twist function. Moreover, let us note
that the twist function of the limit @xmath is the same as the one of
the limit @xmath , as the twist function of a Yang-Baxter type
deformation does not depend on the choice of the matrix @xmath .

##### 3.4.2 Lax pair of the BYBM

In this section, we shall show that the BYBM equations of motion can be
recast into a Lax equation. This was first done by Klimčik in [ 39 ] ,
using the gauge-fixed action ( 3.4.4 ). Here, we shall start from the
non-gauge-fixed one ( 3.4.1 ) and follow a construction close to the one
for the Lax pair of the @xmath -coset model (see Subsection 3.2.2 ). We
will explain the main step of this construction and refer to our article
[ 1 ] for more details.

###### Equations of motion.

Varying the action ( 3.4.1 ) with respect to the field @xmath , one
finds the following equations of motion:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we introduced

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and a “gauge field”

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We note that the equation of motion is invariant under the redefinition
@xmath of @xmath , where @xmath is a constant. Varying the field @xmath
in the action ( 3.4.1 ), one finds some other equations of motion. Using
the freedom in the definition of the gauge field @xmath mentioned above,
one checks that this equation of motion is equivalent to the one ( 3.4.5
) on @xmath . This redundancy in the equations of motion is due to the
gauge symmetry ( 3.4.2 ) of the model.

###### Search for a Lax pair.

The equation of motion ( 3.4.5 ) takes the form of a covariant
conservation equation, for the current @xmath , with the covariant
derivative @xmath . This was also the form of the equations of motion of
the @xmath -coset @xmath -model in Subsection 3.2.2 . We shall use the
results about the Lax representation of the @xmath -coset model as a
guide for the search of a Lax pair for the BYBM. In particular,
following equation ( 3.2.16 ), one could try to define the Lax pair
@xmath .

However, let us note that the covariant conservation equation on @xmath
is also verified by the current @xmath , for any constant @xmath .
Moreover, recall that the “gauge-field” @xmath can be redefined by
adding to it a term proportional to @xmath . For now on, we shall then
consider the most general gauge-field

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath an arbitrary constant, and define the Lax pair to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Following equation ( 3.2.17 ), we then find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.10)
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term on the right-hand side obviously vanishes on-shell, i.e.
when the equations of motion @xmath are satisfied. Using the fact that
@xmath and @xmath are solutions of the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ), combined with
the Maurer-Cartan equation ( 3.1.4 ) on @xmath (and the one for @xmath
), one finds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, if we choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we see that the last term in equation ( 3.4.10 ) vanishes on shell. In
the same way, using the mCYBE and the Maurer-Cartan equations, one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, for the choice ( 3.4.11 ) and ( 3.4.12 ) of @xmath and @xmath ,
one finds that the vanishing of ( 3.4.10 ) is equivalent to the one of
@xmath . In other words, we found a Lax pair formulation of the
equations of motion of the BYBM.

###### Lax pair in the double algebra.

As explained above, the action ( 3.4.1 ) is interpreted as a deformation
of the @xmath -coset @xmath -model on @xmath . Thus, the Lax pair of the
model should naturally belong to the double algebra @xmath (where @xmath
is the complexification of @xmath ). However, in the previous paragraph,
we constructed a Lax pair @xmath in a single copy of @xmath . We shall
now see how this Lax pair can be “extended” to a Lax pair @xmath valued
in the double algebra @xmath .

It is clear that the Lax equation ( 2.1.4 ) for @xmath is equivalent to
the Lax equations for the two @xmath -valued factors of @xmath . Thus,
we shall choose the left factor to be @xmath . Moreover, as we are
considering a deformation of the @xmath -coset model with involution
@xmath (the exchange automorphism), it is natural to ask the Lax pair
@xmath to satisfy the equivariance relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This fixes the right factor of @xmath to be @xmath . We then define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that the Lax equation for @xmath is satisfied, as it is
satisfied by @xmath .

In the undeformed limit @xmath , we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, in this limit, one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the @xmath -valued field @xmath . Thus, for @xmath , @xmath reduces
to the Lax matrix of the @xmath -coset model on @xmath , as constructed
in equation ( 3.2.16 ).

As we explained in the last paragraph of Subsection 3.4.1 , the
one-parameter limits @xmath coincide with the Yang-Baxter type
deformation of the @xmath -coset on @xmath . One can also check that in
this limit, the Lax pair @xmath reduces to the Lax pair considered in
Subsection 3.3.3 for the deformed @xmath -coset model.

###### Lax matrix.

In this subsection, we have constructed light-cone Lax pairs @xmath and
@xmath for the BYBM, valued respectively in @xmath and @xmath . From
these pairs, one can construct the corresponding Lax matrices

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One then has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### 3.4.3 @xmath-matrices on the double algebra

As explained in the previous subsection, the Lax matrix @xmath of the
BYBM in its non-gauged-fixed formulation is naturally valued in the
double algebra @xmath . As we will prove later, the Hamiltonian
integrability of the BYBM is ensured by the fact that this Lax matrix
satisfies a Maillet non-ultralocal bracket ( 2.2.6 ), with a @xmath
-matrix @xmath valued in @xmath . As the BYBM is a deformation of the
@xmath -coset model on @xmath , one could expect @xmath to be of the
form ( 2.4.1 ), with a twist function @xmath and @xmath the standard
@xmath -matrix on @xmath twisted by the automorphism @xmath . However,
in the case of the BYBM, the matrix @xmath takes a slightly more general
form, that we shall explain here.

###### The standard construction.

Let us recall the main steps of the construction of the standard twisted
@xmath -matrix on @xmath (see the Appendix C for the general theory).
Let us consider the loop algebra @xmath of Laurent series in a complex
parameter @xmath valued in the double algebra @xmath and equipped with
the natural Lie bracket. The exchange automorphism @xmath on @xmath
induces an automorphism @xmath on @xmath defined for all @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the twisted loop algebra, i.e. the subalgebra of @xmath
formed by the fixed points of @xmath . It admits a natural vector space
decomposition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

into subalgebras of positive and strictly negative powers of the loop
parameter @xmath , respectively. Let @xmath and @xmath denote the
projection operators relative to this decomposition. The operator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

defines a solution of the mCYBE on @xmath . Suppose now that we are
given an invariant inner product @xmath on the twisted loop algebra
@xmath . We define the kernel @xmath of the operator @xmath in ( 3.4.16
), with respect to @xmath , as the rational function @xmath of two
complex variables and valued in @xmath , such that for all @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This matrix is then a solution of the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ) (see Appendix C for
more details about this construction). The usual construction for @xmath
-matrices with twist function is based on the inner product

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for any @xmath . It is easy to check that this inner product is
invariant under @xmath and thus induces an inner product on the twisted
loop algebra @xmath , if and only if @xmath is an odd function. This
yields a kernel @xmath of the form ( 2.4.1 ), with twist function @xmath
and @xmath the standard matrix on @xmath twisted by @xmath . The parity
condition on @xmath is then the equivariance condition ( 2.4.5 ).

###### Inner product for the BYBM.

We shall now present a more general construction, which allows for a
non-odd twist function @xmath . As we are considering the double Lie
algebra @xmath , one can define an even more general inner product
invariant under @xmath , by separating explicitly the left and right
part of @xmath . That is, for any @xmath and @xmath in @xmath we define

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.4.18)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Killing form on @xmath . When @xmath is odd, we
recover the twisted inner product ( 3.4.17 ). This construction allows
to consider twist functions without parity constraint. The kernel of
@xmath with respect to the inner product ( 3.4.18 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we defined the partial split Casimirs ( @xmath is the Killing form
of @xmath in the basis @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

If @xmath were an odd function, we would get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the split Casimir of the double algebra @xmath . @xmath
is the standard @xmath -matrix on @xmath twisted by @xmath . We thus
recover the usual notion of @xmath -matrix with twist function @xmath in
this case. The twist function @xmath of the BYBM that we will find is
not an odd function in general, so we will need the matrix ( 3.4.19 ).
However, in the limit @xmath , the twist function @xmath will be odd and
we will recover the usual setting, as expected from the fact that this
limit is simply the @xmath -deformation of the @xmath -coset model on
@xmath .

###### Projection on @xmath.

Let us suppose that the @xmath -valued Lax matrix @xmath ( 3.4.14 )
satisfies a Maillet bracket ( 2.2.6 ) with @xmath -matrix ( 3.4.19 ).
Projecting this Poisson bracket on the left factor of @xmath , one finds
that the Lax matrix @xmath also satisfies a Maillet bracket with the
@xmath -matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the split Casimir of @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath
satisfies the Maillet bracket with @xmath -matrix ( 3.4.20 ), one checks
that the matrix @xmath in the double algebra satisfies the bracket with
@xmath -matrix ( 3.4.19 ). For the rest of this section, we shall then
focus on the Poisson bracket of @xmath and find the corresponding twist
function @xmath .

##### 3.4.4 Hamiltonian analysis and twist function of the BYBM

In Subsection 3.4.2 , we have presented the Lax pair of the BYBM. We
will now compute the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix with itself. For
that, we first need to go from the Lagrangian formulation ( 3.4.1 ) of
the BYBM to its Hamiltonian formulation.

###### Phase space, constraint and Hamiltonian.

The BYBM in its non-gauge-fixed formulation ( 3.4.1 ) is defined on two
@xmath -valued fields @xmath and @xmath . Following Subsection 3.1.2 ,
the phase space of the BYBM is thus parametrised in terms of the @xmath
-valued fields @xmath and @xmath and the @xmath -valued fields @xmath
and @xmath . The Poisson bracket of @xmath and @xmath is then ( 3.1.7 ).
The fields @xmath and @xmath satisfy exactly the same brackets as @xmath
and @xmath . Moreover, the fields @xmath and @xmath have zero Poisson
brackets with the fields @xmath and @xmath .

Starting from the action ( 3.4.1 ), one can compute the conjugate
momenta of the BYBM and deduce the Lagrangian expression of @xmath and
@xmath . One then finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the current @xmath was defined in ( 3.4.6 ) and the use of the
symbol @xmath instead of @xmath will be explained in what follows. We
deduce from equation ( 3.4.21 ) that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is a constraint on the phase space, which is due to the existence
of a gauge symmetry in the model. We refer to the discussion of
constraints in coset models in Subsection 3.2.2 and will use the
notations introduced there in the rest of the section (in particular,
the symbol @xmath holds for weak equations, true only on the constrained
phase space).

In Subsection 3.4.1 , we explained that we can see the BYBM as a
deformation of a @xmath -coset model, with dynamical field @xmath in the
double group @xmath . Thus, one can also parametrise the phase space of
the model with the @xmath -valued field @xmath and a @xmath -valued
field @xmath (equivalent of the field @xmath for @xmath ). One then
finds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus re-express the constraint ( 3.4.22 ) as @xmath (as we would have
in the undeformed limit). Moreover, in the undeformed limit @xmath , we
have @xmath . Thus, we recover @xmath , as we expect from equation (
3.2.19 ).

Let us end this subsection by expressing the Hamiltonian of the BYBM.
Starting from equation ( 3.4.1 ) and performing the Legendre
transformation, we express the Hamiltonian in terms of the current
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier associated with the gauge
constraint @xmath . In terms of the @xmath -valued field currents @xmath
and @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a @xmath -valued Lagrange multiplier. In the undeformed
limit @xmath , one has @xmath and we then recover the Hamiltonian (
3.2.21 ) for the @xmath -coset @xmath .

###### Hamiltonian Lax matrix.

Let us consider the Lax matrix ( 3.4.13 ). Using the expression ( 3.4.21
) of @xmath and @xmath , one can re-express the currents @xmath and
@xmath in terms of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Thus, we can express the Lax matrix @xmath in terms of these fields.

Moreover, because of the constraint ( 3.4.22 ), one can add to the
expression obtained this way a term @xmath , with @xmath an arbitrary
function of the spectral parameter. One could potentially add other
extra terms, for instance proportional to @xmath and @xmath . These
allow to change terms like @xmath or @xmath into @xmath and @xmath . For
reasons of symmetry and simplicity, we will use this freedom to keep
only terms proportional to @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, when dealing
with terms proportional to @xmath or @xmath (without operators @xmath or
@xmath ), we shall always transform those in terms proportional to
@xmath (this can always be done by redefining the function @xmath
introduced above).

Following this prescription, we obtain an expression for the Lax matrix
@xmath which is linear in the set of fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath ’s are non-dynamical functions of the spectral
parameter @xmath . We shall not detail the computation and refer to [ 1
] , Section 2.2.3 for more details. The expressions we obtained for the
coefficients @xmath ’s are

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.24f)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

###### Maillet bracket and twist function.

Starting from the expressions ( 3.4.23 ), we can compute the Poisson
bracket of the Lax matrix @xmath with itself. For that, we need some
intermediary Poisson brackets, between the different fields @xmath . The
brackets between @xmath and @xmath are all zero. The brackets of @xmath
and @xmath are given by ( 3.1.7c ) and ( 3.1.11 ) and @xmath and @xmath
satisfy similar ones.

The brackets involving the fields @xmath and @xmath can be computed from
the brackets ( 3.1.7 ) and ( 3.1.11 ), using the fact that the action of
any derivation @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.4.25)
  -- -- -- ----------

In particular, let us mention the following bracket

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is derived using equation ( 3.4.25 ) and the mCYBE ( 3.3.1 ) on
@xmath (with @xmath ).

We will not show the details of the computation of the Poisson bracket
of the Lax matrix ( 3.4.23 ) with itself here. The key steps can be
found in the Sections 3.2 and 3.3 of [ 1 ] . One then finds that this
Poisson bracket takes the form of a Maillet bracket ( 2.2.6 ) if we
choose the function @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the @xmath -matrix @xmath of this Maillet bracket is of the
form ( 3.4.20 ), with the twist function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### Analysis of the twist function.

Let us first note that we can rewrite ( 3.4.26 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This expression is appropriate to discuss the one-parameter limits
@xmath . Indeed, in this case, we have @xmath so it is clear that the
twist function ( 3.4.27 ) reduces to the one ( 3.3.24 ) of the
Yang-Baxter deformation of a @xmath -coset model (with @xmath , as
here).

Let us now study the analytical properties of the 1-form @xmath . It
possesses two simple zeros at @xmath and infinity, similarly to the
undeformed model. The double poles @xmath and @xmath of the undeformed
model have been splited into two pairs @xmath and @xmath of simple poles
by the Bi-Yang-Baxter deformation. The expressions of these poles in
terms of the parameters @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.28a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.28b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

These poles belong to the unit circle. They can be written in a
trigonometric form @xmath and @xmath , with the angles @xmath and @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The zeros and poles of the 1-form @xmath are represented in Figure 3.5 .

In the one-parameter limit @xmath , we recover @xmath . The poles of the
twist function are then as in Figure 3.4 . In particular, in this limit
we recover the symmetry of the poles with respect to the symmetry @xmath
, as the twist function reduces to the odd one in ( 3.3.24 ). The
Bi-Yang-Baxter deformation allows to split the double poles @xmath with
different angles, by breaking the equivariance relation @xmath . In the
gauged-fixed formulation ( 3.4.4 ), this is related to the fact that
@xmath and @xmath control the breaking of respectively the left and the
right symmetry of the PCM. We shall explain this in Chapter 5 .

###### Yang-Baxter type deformations.

As we just observed, the Bi-Yang-Baxter deformation has for effect to
split the double poles @xmath into pairs of simple poles and to break
the left and right symmetries of the undeformed model. In the previous
Section 3.3 , we have observed that these effects were some of the
features shared by the Yang-Baxter type deformations. Let us consider
the gauge transformation of the Lax matrix @xmath by the @xmath -valued
field @xmath and evaluate it at the poles @xmath of the twist function.
One then finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . Similarly, one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is to be compared with the expressions ( 3.3.15 ) and ( 3.3.25 ).
It is also one of the characteristic feature of Yang-Baxter type
deformations and will allow us to apply the results of Chapter 5 to the
BYBM.

##### 3.4.5 Gauge-fixing and Lax matrix

As explained in Subsection 3.4.1 , the gauge-fixed BYBM is given by the
action ( 3.4.4 ) and is obtained by performing a gauge transformation (
3.4.2 ) with @xmath . We shall use the results for the non-gauge-fixed
model to describe the Lax matrix of the gauge-fixed one and the
corresponding Maillet bracket.

###### Lax pair and gauge transformation.

We first need to understand how a gauge transformation ( 3.4.2 ) acts on
the Lax pair ( 3.4.9 ) of the non-gauge-fixed model. From equation (
3.4.6 ), one finds that the currents @xmath transform covariantly under
the gauge transformation ( 3.4.2 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the same way, using the expression ( 3.4.7 ) and ( 3.4.8 ) of @xmath
and @xmath , one shows that they transform as gauge fields:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We note in passing that these two properties ensure the invariance of
the equation of motion ( 3.4.5 ) under the gauge transformation, as
expected.

A consequence of these transformation properties is that the Lax pair (
3.4.9 ) of the non-gauged-fixed BYBM transforms under a gauge
transformation as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the action of a gauge transformation ( 3.4.2 ) on the Lax pair
coincides with the formal gauge transformation by @xmath , as defined in
equation ( 3.3.14 ).

As a consequence, one performs the gauge-fixing of the model at the
level of the Lax pair by considering the formal gauge transformation by
@xmath . Moreover, we shall consider the following change of spectral
parameter:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then define the gauge-fixed Lax pair of the BYBM as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This gauge-fixed Lax pair can be expressed in terms of the
gauge-invariant field @xmath introduced in Subsection 3.4.1 . Using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.33b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

The Lax pair ( 3.4.32 ) is the one found by Klimčik in [ 39 ] , up to a
change of spectral parameter. It is to be compared with the one ( 3.2.5
) of the PCM. In particular, due to the presence of the field @xmath ,
this Lax pair is not of Zakharov-Mikhailov type. This is natural as the
Bi-Yang-Baxter deformation breaks both left and right symmetries of the
PCM: indeed, one then cannot find a flat and conserved current to
construct a Zakharov-Mikhailov Lax pair, as we did for the PCM and the
Yang-Baxter model.

Let us finish by discussing the one-parameter limit @xmath . Recall from
Subsection 3.4.1 , equation ( 3.4.4 ), that this limit corresponds to
the Yang-Baxter model ( 3.3.3 ) (where the deformation parameter @xmath
is replaced by @xmath ). In this case, one finds @xmath , so in
particular, the field @xmath in ( 3.4.33b ) vanishes. We are then left
with a Lax pair of Zakharov-Mikhailov type. Moreover, the current @xmath
in ( 3.4.33a ) then coincides with the current @xmath given for the
Yang-Baxter model in ( 3.3.6 ) (with @xmath and @xmath replaced by
@xmath ). Thus, the gauge-fixed Lax pair of the BYBM reduces to the one
of the Yang-Baxter model in the limit @xmath .

One can also take the limit @xmath . In this case, one finds the
Yang-Baxter model obtained by breaking the right symmetry instead of the
left. As explained in Subsection 3.3.1 , this model is equivalent to the
one deformed on the left by considering @xmath instead of @xmath , so we
shall not discuss it further here.

###### Maillet bracket and gauge transformation.

As we have explained above, one performs the gauge-fixing of the BYBM on
the Lax pair by considering a formal gauge transformation by @xmath .
This can also be done on the Hamiltonian Lax matrix ( 3.4.23 ) and one
can then express the result in terms of the gauge-invariant fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the gauge constraint @xmath . One then finds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note here that the spectral parameter @xmath is the same as in the
non-gauge-fixed Lax matrix ( 3.4.23 ). One can also perform the change
of spectral parameter ( 3.4.31 ) and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This coincides with the Lax matrix one would obtain starting from the
Lax pair ( 3.4.32 ), and expressing the corresponding Lax matrix in
terms of the phase space fields ( @xmath and @xmath ) of the gauge-fixed
model. One could then compute the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix with
itself using the canonical Poisson brackets in terms of @xmath and
@xmath . Here, we shall use a different method to obtain this result.

In the Hamiltonian formalism, one performs the gauge fixing at the level
of the Poisson bracket using the Dirac bracket [ 133 ] . The quantities
@xmath and @xmath being gauge-invariant, their Dirac bracket coincides
with their non-gauged-fixed bracket. Thus, one can compute the Poisson
bracket of the gauge-fixed Lax matrix @xmath simply by computing the one
of the non-gauged-fixed matrix @xmath .

For that, we shall use a general result on the transformation of Maillet
brackets under a formal gauge transformation of the Lax matrix. We will
not recall this general result here and refer to our article [ 1 ] for
details. Let us summarise the outcome of this procedure: starting form
the Maillet bracket of @xmath with the @xmath -matrix ( 3.4.20 ), one
finds that the gauge transformed matrix @xmath also satisfies a Maillet
bracket with @xmath -matrix

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the kernel of the operator @xmath (the last equality is a consequence
of the skew-symmetry of @xmath ).

As a consequence, the Lax matrix @xmath also satisfies a Maillet
non-ultralocal bracket. The corresponding @xmath -matrix is simply
obtained from ( 3.4.34 ) by the change of spectral parameter ( 3.4.31 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One then finds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.37b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The gauge-fixed BYBM does not exactly enter the class of models with
twist function, as the matrix @xmath is not a standard @xmath -matrix on
@xmath . However, it shares some similar structures with these models.
In particular, the matrix @xmath satisfies the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ) and the
asymptotic condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as the standard matrix @xmath . This will allow us to apply the results
of Chapter 4 to the gauge-fixed BYBM. With a slight abuse of notation,
we will call @xmath the twist function of the gauge-fixed BYBM. We note
the following relation between @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us consider the one-parameter limit @xmath , which coincides with
the Yang-Baxter model. In this case, we find @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Thus, we see that the matrix @xmath reduces to the standard
matrix on @xmath and @xmath reduces to the twist function ( 3.3.13 ) of
the Yang-Baxter model, with @xmath and @xmath replaced by @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Poles and zeros of the twist function.

Finally, let us study the analytical properties of the 1-form @xmath .
It possesses two simple zeros at @xmath and @xmath , as for the
undeformed PCM or the Yang-Baxter model. Recall that the Yang-Baxter
deformation had for effect to split the double pole at @xmath of the PCM
into two simples poles on the imaginary axis, without modifying the
double pole at infinity. In the case of the BYBM, both the double poles
at @xmath and infinity are split into pairs of simple poles, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

They belong to the imaginary axis as one can show that the @xmath ’s are
all positive numbers. Note that in the one-parameter limit @xmath , we
get @xmath : we thus see that in this limit, the two poles @xmath
recombine as a double pole at infinity, as expected from the Yang-Baxter
model case. Note that these poles are related to the ones of @xmath by
the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As for the Yang-Baxter model, it is useful to evaluate the Lax matrix or
its gauge transformation by @xmath at the poles of the twist function.
Indeed, one then finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.39b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

We shall use these relations in Chapter 5 .

One can also extract informations on the model from the zeros @xmath and
@xmath of the twist function @xmath . Indeed, one can reconstruct the
Hamiltonian @xmath and total momentum @xmath of the gauge-fixed model
from the Lax matrix:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the same equation was already satisfied by the other
deformations of the PCM, as seen in equation ( 3.3.21 ). We will use
this fact in Chapter 4 .

### Chapter 4 Local charges in involution and integrable hierarchies

This chapter is based on the article [ 3 ] , that I wrote during my PhD
with M. Magro and B. Vicedo. The content of this chapter is the same as
the one of [ 3 ] and is made to be read independently.

In Chapter 2 , we introduced the general Lax formalism for integrable
fields theories. This formalism ensures the existence for these theories
of an infinite number of conserved charges in involution, which are
constructed from the monodromy matrix of the theory. In particular,
these charges are said to be non-local. Before going further, let us
briefly recall what we mean by local and non-local quantities.

We consider a Hamiltonian field theory which describes the time
evolution of some fundamental fields @xmath ’s, depending on the spatial
coordinate @xmath . A quantity @xmath is said to be a local field of the
theory if it is a function of the evaluation of the @xmath ’s and their
derivatives at a unique point @xmath of space. For example, @xmath and
@xmath are local fields but @xmath or @xmath are not. A local charge is
the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of a local field @xmath on the whole space (the real line @xmath or the
circle @xmath ). The field @xmath is then called the density of the
charge. In particular, we always consider here local field theories, for
which the Hamiltonian is a local charge, ensuring that the time
evolution of the @xmath ’s is encoded in local partial differential
equations.

The charges extracted from the monodromy matrix are non-local, in the
sense that they cannot be written as integrals of some local fields
(more precisely, the monodromy matrix is expressed as a series of nested
integrals). This makes the computation and the manipulation of these
charges quite involved. Let us illustrate that on an example. Let @xmath
be a conserved charge extracted from the monodromy and consider its
Hamiltonian flow @xmath on the phase space of the model: it is an
interesting object for the study of the model as it commutes with the
time flow @xmath (because the charge @xmath is conserved). However, as
@xmath is non-local, this flow @xmath does not take the form of partial
differential equations on the fields @xmath ’s and is thus quite
difficult to study.

It is thus interesting to find conserved charges in involution which are
local (another motivation for that will be explained in the second part
of this thesis). For integrable @xmath -models (see Chapter 3 ), an
infinity of such charges were found in two particular examples. They
were constructed for the Principal Chiral Model by Evans, Hassan, MacKay
and Mountain in [ 85 ] and for the @xmath -coset @xmath -model by Evans
and Moutain in [ 86 ] . For completeness, let us also mention the papers
[ 151 ] by Evans, Hassan, MacKay and Mountain and [ 152 ] by Evans and
Young for super-symmetric generalisations of the above-mentioned
publications.

However, the existence of such charges for other integrable @xmath
-models, such as deformed models or @xmath -coset models for @xmath ,
was not proved. In [ 3 ] , I have shown, together with my collaborators,
that all integrable @xmath -models, including integrable deformations,
possess an infinite number of local conserved charges in involution. One
of the main characteristic of our approach in [ 3 ] is that we do not
treat each model individually: at the contrary, we develop a general
construction which applies to the whole family of integrable @xmath
-models at once. This construction relies on the common mathematical
structure shared by these models: the existence of a twist function (see
Chapters 2 and 3 ). As such, it applies to all models with a twist
function, provided the latter possesses what we call a regular zero (see
the precise definition below).

Given the length of this chapter, and to avoid going directly into
technicalities, we start by a summary of the results presented in more
details in the subsequent sections.

#### 4.1 Summary

The purpose of the present chapter is to provide another application of
the general formalism of Maillet brackets with twist function (see
Chapter 2 ). Specifically, we will describe how, in this general
framework, infinite towers of local charges can be associated with
certain zeros of the twist function, all of which are in pairwise
involution. Following the same spirit as recalled above, the starting
point of our approach was to reinterpret the construction of local
charges in the principal chiral model due to Evans, Hassan, MacKay and
Mountain [ 85 ] in the present language of twist functions. In fact,
this construction had soon been generalised to include also the
(supersymmetric) principal chiral model with a Wess-Zumino term in [ 151
] , symmetric space @xmath -models in [ 86 ] as well as supersymmetric
coset @xmath -models in [ 152 ] . Each of these generalisations can be
regarded as further evidence that such a construction should hold for
any integrable field theory with twist function, while at the same time
providing indications on how to do so. In this section, we will briefly
summarise the main results of the chapter.

Let us first note that in all of the integrable @xmath -models with
twist function described above, every zero of @xmath is such that @xmath
is regular there. In a general integrable field theory with twist
function @xmath we shall say that any zero of @xmath with this property
is regular . We denote by @xmath the set of regular zeros of @xmath in
@xmath . We shall further distinguish between two types of zeros:
cyclotomic ones and non-cyclotomic ones. This notion depends on the
order @xmath of the automorphism @xmath appearing in the @xmath -matrix
of the system (see Chapter 2 ). In a model with @xmath , every point is
by definition non-cyclotomic, whereas in a model with @xmath , every
point is non-cyclotomic except for the origin and infinity. As explained
in subsection 4.2.2 , throughout our analysis the point at infinity will
be treated in much the same way as the origin by using an inversion of
the spectral parameter.

With every @xmath , or every @xmath if infinity is also a regular zero,
we will associate a subset of integers @xmath and a corresponding tower
of local charges @xmath labelled by @xmath . The first main property of
these charges which we will establish is that any two such charges
@xmath and @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are in involution.
Moreover, if infinity is a regular zero and either @xmath or @xmath is
taken to be the point at infinity, the corresponding local charges will
only Poisson commute up to a certain field @xmath which will coincide
with the coset constraint in @xmath -coset @xmath -models. Following the
standard terminology from the theory of constrained Hamiltonian systems,
we will refer to equalities as being weak when they hold only after
setting this particular field to zero, see subsection 4.5.1 .
Furthermore, we show that in every example of integrable @xmath -model
considered, the Hamiltonian can be expressed as a particular linear
combination of the collection of quadratic local charges @xmath for
@xmath and the momentum of the model. It then follows that all of the
local charges are conserved.

Let us briefly outline the construction of the local charges by
considering first the case when @xmath is non-cyclotomic. If the Lie
algebra @xmath is of type B, C or D then the density of the local charge
@xmath is obtained simply by evaluating

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

at the regular zero @xmath . When @xmath is of type A, on the other
hand, the density of the local charge @xmath is given instead by a
certain polynomial in the above expressions, determined as in [ 85 ]
with the help of a generating function. In either case, @xmath is given
here by the set of exponents of the affine Kac-Moody algebra @xmath
associated with @xmath , shifted by one (we do not treat the case of the
Pfaffian in type D). In the example of the principal chiral model on a
real Lie group @xmath (see Subsection 4.7.1 ) treated in [ 85 ] , the
twist function has simple zeros at @xmath and the evaluation of @xmath
at @xmath produces the light-cone currents @xmath of the theory (see
Subsection 3.1.1 ). We recover in this way the higher spin local charges
in involution of the principal chiral model constructed in [ 85 ] .

When the regular zero @xmath is cyclotomic, i.e. @xmath , it may happen,
as a result of the equivariance properties of both the Lax matrix and
twist function, that the evaluation of ( 4.1.1 ) at the point @xmath
vanishes identically. More precisely, the first non-vanishing term in
the power series expansion of ( 4.1.1 ) around @xmath is of order @xmath
for some @xmath . If the Lie algebra @xmath is of type B, C or D, or
also of type A with an inner automorphism @xmath , then we define the
density of the local charge @xmath as the coefficient of this leading
term. The case when @xmath is of type A and the automorphism @xmath is
not inner is treated in a similar fashion to the case of a
non-cyclotomic point in type A, with the densities of the local charges
@xmath being obtained by means of a generating function. In each case it
turns out that we need to restrict attention to indices @xmath such that
@xmath . As a result, and in contrast to the case of a non-cyclotomic
regular zero, some exponents of the affine Kac-Moody algebra @xmath are
‘dropped’ in the construction of the subset @xmath , specifically those
such that @xmath . In the case of a symmetric space @xmath -model, for
which @xmath so that only charges for which @xmath are kept, we recover
in this way the local charges found in [ 86 ] .

The collection of local charges @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in involution
generates an infinite set of Poisson commuting Hamiltonian flows @xmath
on the phase space of the model. With every such flow we then associate
a corresponding @xmath -valued connection @xmath for some @xmath -valued
matrix @xmath depending on the spectral parameter @xmath . The second
main property of the local charges @xmath , @xmath , @xmath which we
establish is that the connection @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath
commutes with the connection @xmath . In this sense, the local charges
generate a hierarchy of integrable equations . We use this result to
deduce that the local charges @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are in involution
with the non-local charges extracted from the monodromy of @xmath .
Moreover, we go on to show that when @xmath is of type B, C or D, any
two such connections @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
also commute with one another. Finally, we have also checked these
results in the case of type A for low values of @xmath and @xmath and on
this basis we conjecture it to hold in general. If infinity is a regular
zero then the majority of these results still hold in the weak sense
when we consider also the local charges associated with infinity.

This chapter is organised as follows. The general framework which we
employ throughout the chapter is introduced in Section 4.2 . In
particular, we introduce the notion of a regular zero in the complex
plane which plays a central role in our analysis. In subsection 4.2.2 ,
we define the notion of a regular zero at infinity and relate it to that
of a regular zero at the origin by inversion of the spectral parameter.
Finally, we establish some general results in subsection 4.2.3 . Section
4.3 is devoted to the procedure for extracting local charges in
involution in the case of a non-cyclotomic regular zero. In particular,
we present in subsection 4.3.4 an explicit construction of the currents
@xmath for type A algebras using generating functions in the spirit of [
85 ] . Section 4.4 deals with charges at cyclotomic zeros. We explain
how the equivariance properties of the various objects affect the
construction of local conserved charges in involution. Here the Lie
algebras of type B, C and D can still be treated uniformly but in type A
we need to consider separately the cases when the automorphism @xmath is
inner or not. The generating function for Lie algebras of type A with
non-inner automorphism is presented in subsection 4.4.6 . A list of
properties of these local charges is collated in section 4.5 , including
the fact that the local charges extracted from different regular zeros
Poisson commute (weakly when the point at infinity is involved).
Moreover, we show that all the local charges commute with the field
@xmath which will play the role of the constraint in @xmath -coset
@xmath -models, therefore showing that they are gauge invariant. We also
discuss the reality conditions of all the local charges. The Hamiltonian
flows of the local charges @xmath are studied in detail in section 4.6 .
The main result that any two of the @xmath -valued connections @xmath
and @xmath satisfy a zero curvature equation is established in
subsection 4.6.3 . Finally, in section 4.7 we apply all these results to
the whole family of integrable @xmath -models described in Chapter 3 .
Some technical appendices, specific to the present chapter, are given
here as sections 4.A and 4.B .

#### 4.2 Framework and general results

##### 4.2.1 Framework: regular zeros of a model with twist function

In this chapter, we consider an integrable model with twist function, as
described in Section 2.4 . We will use the notations of this section and
more generally of Chapter 2 . In particular, let us consider the twist
function @xmath and the Lax matrix @xmath of the model, which are
rational functions of the spectral parameter @xmath . Let @xmath be a
zero of the twist function, so that @xmath . We will say that this zero
is regular if @xmath is holomorphic at @xmath .

Let us suppose that the model we are considering is cyclotomic with
respect to an automorphism @xmath of order @xmath (note that a
non-cyclotomic model can be considered as a cyclotomic one with @xmath
and @xmath ). As in the Section 2.4 , we consider the action of the
cyclic group @xmath on the complex plane @xmath by the multiplication by
@xmath , a @xmath -root of unit. The Lax matrix and the twist function
then satisfy the equivariance properties ( 2.4.3 ) and ( 2.4.5 ). Due to
these properties, if @xmath is a regular zero, all points of the orbit
@xmath are also regular zeros. Let us pick (arbitrarily) one of them. We
then form a set @xmath of regular zeros of @xmath such that for every
pair of distinct points @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , the orbits @xmath
and @xmath are disjoint.

As explained in subsection 4.2.2 , we will also be interested in the
case where the differential form @xmath has a zero at infinity, i.e.
where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has a zero at @xmath . We will also see that the appropriate notion of a
regular zero at infinity corresponds to requiring that @xmath be
holomorphic at @xmath .

As an example, let us determine the regular zeros of the PCM. Its Lax
matrix and twist function are respectively given by ( 3.2.8 ) and (
3.2.9 ). As mentioned in Subsection 3.2.1 , the twist function admits
two simple zeros, at @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the Lax matrix has
simple poles at @xmath , i.e. at these zeros. Thus, the product @xmath
is regular at @xmath , which are then regular zeros. Let us note here
that the evaluation of @xmath at these zeros gives the light-cone
currents @xmath (see Subsection 3.1.1 ).

##### 4.2.2 Infinity and inversion of the spectral parameter

In this chapter we will construct a tower of local charges associated
with each regular zero of the twist function. As mentioned in the
previous subsection, the set of regular zeros can include the point at
infinity, although the sense in which infinity can be a regular zero is
slightly different from the definition of finite regular zeros. In this
subsection, we show how the notion of a regular zero at infinity is
related to that of a regular zero at the origin through inversion of the
spectral parameter, i.e. by the change of parameter @xmath . Under such
a change of spectral parameter we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in equation ( 4.2.1 ). Suppose that infinity is
a zero of the twist function, i.e. that @xmath , and define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will say that infinity is a regular zero if @xmath is regular at
@xmath . In the remainder of this subsection we will assume this to be
the case. We then set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the equivariance properties ( 2.4.3 ) and ( 2.4.5 ) of @xmath and
@xmath , we deduce that @xmath is valued in the grading @xmath . Let us
note here that in the @xmath -coset models, described in Subsection
3.2.2 , this field @xmath coincides with the gauge constraint @xmath .

Starting from the Poisson bracket ( 2.2.6 ) and using the form ( 2.4.1 )
of the @xmath -matrix, we find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using the expression ( 2.3.8 ) of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath and @xmath are regular at 0, taking the limit @xmath in the
above Poisson bracket, we then obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying the same kind of reasoning we also find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us define a new Lax matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the fact that @xmath for any @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this identity and the Poisson brackets ( 2.2.6 ), ( 4.2.5 ) and (
4.2.6 ), we prove that the Poisson bracket of @xmath with itself is also
of the Maillet form, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.7)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following theorem is the main result of this subsection.

###### Theorem 4.2.1.

The Poisson bracket of @xmath with itself reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.9)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies the classical Yang-Baxter equation ( 2.3.3 ).

###### Proof.

Using equation ( 2.3.9 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The theorem follows from the Poisson bracket ( 4.2.7 ) and the identity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is a consequence of equation ( 4.2.10 ). ∎

To interpret Theorem 4.2.1 , let us note that the matrix @xmath is
nothing but the matrix @xmath for the automorphism @xmath . Moreover,
from the equivariance properties ( 2.4.3 ) and ( 2.4.5 ), we find that
the corresponding properties of @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Poisson bracket of @xmath is thus the one of a model with twist
function @xmath , automorphism @xmath and spectral parameter @xmath .
Moreover, the point @xmath is a regular zero of this model. Indeed, we
supposed that @xmath was a zero of @xmath and one can check explicitly
that @xmath is regular at @xmath .

It is worth noting that the procedure just described is involutive, in
the following sense. If @xmath is regular at @xmath , one can check that
@xmath (which corresponds to @xmath ) is a regular zero of the model
with Lax matrix @xmath and, moreover, that the corresponding field
@xmath obtained by evaluating @xmath at @xmath is equal to @xmath .
Re-inverting the spectral parameter @xmath to @xmath , we can thus
construct a “new” Lax matrix @xmath . According to Theorem 4.2.1 , this
Lax matrix should satisfy a Maillet bracket with twist function @xmath
and automorphism @xmath . A direct computation reveals that this Lax
matrix is actually equal to the initial Lax matrix @xmath .

Let us end this subsection by illustrating the inversion of spectral
parameter on the example of @xmath -coset models. As noted above, for
these models the field @xmath coincides with the constraint @xmath .
After performing the change of spectral parameter @xmath , we find a
twist function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the property @xmath is also true for the twist function (
3.2.24 ) of the @xmath -deformed @xmath -model. The new Lax matrix is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing this to the initial Lax matrix ( 3.2.26 ), we see that it
simply corresponds (up to a minus sign on terms involving @xmath ) to
changing every grading @xmath to @xmath , which is equivalent to
considering the automorphism @xmath instead of @xmath .

##### 4.2.3 Poisson brackets of traces of powers of @xmath

In this chapter, we will focus on the case where the Lie algebra @xmath
is simple. More precisely, we will restrict to the classical types A, B,
C and D of the Cartan classification (see Appendix A.2 ), seen in their
defining representations ¹ ¹ 1 Here @xmath is the standard symplectic
structure on @xmath given by @xmath and @xmath denotes the transpose of
@xmath . :

We may therefore take powers of elements of @xmath and traces of these
matrices. In the following sections, we will extract local charges in
involution from the traces of powers of the Lax matrix @xmath . In this
subsection, we will establish general results on the Poisson brackets of
powers of @xmath and their traces.

For simplicity, we will change the definition of the Casimir @xmath for
this chapter, by considering the bilinear form @xmath in the defining
representation @xmath , instead of @xmath in the adjoint representation
(see Appendix A.2.4 ). This only changes the normalisation of the
Casimir, as these two bilinear forms are proportional. Thus it does not
affect the results described here but simplifies greatly the
presentation, as all computations of this chapter are done in the
defining representation. In particular, the completeness relation (
A.2.7 ) has to be changed into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### Lemma 4.2.2.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -valued quantities such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the Poisson brackets of powers of @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, for @xmath , we defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The Poisson bracket being a derivation, we can use the Leibniz rule
yielding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We conclude observing that @xmath and @xmath commute with @xmath and
@xmath and using the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

true for any matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 4.2.3.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -valued quantities such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --
                          
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

###### Proof.

Starting with Lemma 4.2.2 , the corollary follows from the cyclicity of
the trace and the vanishing of traces of commutators. ∎

Let us now apply these results to the Lax matrix @xmath . We work in the
framework described in Chapter 2 . We define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Starting with the Poisson bracket ( 2.2.6 ) and the expression ( 2.4.1 )
of the @xmath -matrix, we apply Corollary 4.2.3 . We find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 4.3 Charges at non-cyclotomic zeros

The purpose of this section is to describe the procedure for extracting
local charges in involution from non-cyclotomic regular zeros of the
twist function @xmath . Let us first explain what we mean here by a
non-cyclotomic point. If @xmath , i.e. if @xmath and there is no
cyclotomic invariance, we define any point as being non-cyclotomic. If
@xmath , a non-cyclotomic point is a point which is not fixed by the
action of the cyclic group @xmath , i.e. which is not the origin or
infinity.

Throughout this section we fix a non-cyclotomic regular zero @xmath . We
will focus here on the case where @xmath is different from infinity. The
case @xmath is treated by the same method, just replacing @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath by @xmath (cf. subsection 4.2.2 ). The fact that
@xmath is a regular zero implies that @xmath and @xmath , defined in
equations ( 4.2.15 ) and ( 4.2.16 ), are both holomorphic at @xmath .
Thus, we can define the current

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us briefly comment on the explicit expression of these currents in
the case of the PCM. As explained in paragraph 4.2.1 , the PCM has two
regular zeros at @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding currents are

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

These currents are the one investigated in [ 85 ] , from which local
charges in involution for the PCM are constructed. In this section, we
will follow the method developed in [ 85 ] , generalising it to any
current ( 4.3.1 ) associated with a non-cyclotomic regular zero @xmath
of the model.

##### 4.3.1 Poisson algebra of the currents

We begin by computing the Poisson bracket of the currents @xmath and
@xmath . Specifically, we would like to evaluate equation ( 4.2.17 ) at
@xmath . Since @xmath is a regular zero, @xmath and @xmath are well
defined. Thus, it remains to determine @xmath . Starting with the
definition ( 4.2.18 ) of @xmath and using @xmath , one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall from equation ( 2.3.8 ) that @xmath is not regular at @xmath , so
that we cannot simply evaluate the above equation at @xmath . However,
as @xmath is a non-cyclotomic point, the matrix @xmath has the following
local behaviour

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is regular at @xmath . Using again @xmath , we then obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the derivative of @xmath with respect to the
spectral parameter @xmath . Thus, one has

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.3.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

Recall the completeness relation ( 4.2.13 ). We cannot directly apply
this identity to equation ( 4.3.3 ) as @xmath does not belong to @xmath
in general (recall that @xmath is defined as the @xmath power of a
matrix in @xmath ).

Following [ 85 ] , we will show in the next subsections how to
circumvent this difficulty. We will treat separately the case where
@xmath is of type B, C or D and the case where @xmath is of type A.

##### 4.3.2 Type B, C and D algebras

Let us first consider the case where @xmath is of type B, C or D, i.e.
where @xmath is an orthogonal or a symplectic algebra (cf. Table 4.1 ).
One can check that, for these algebras, if @xmath belongs to @xmath ,
@xmath also belongs to @xmath if @xmath is odd. Moreover, all matrices
in @xmath are traceless. We then deduce that the currents @xmath are
zero for @xmath odd. Thus, we will only extract local charges from the
traces of even powers of @xmath , i.e. from the currents @xmath .

The Poisson bracket of such currents is given by equation ( 4.3.3 ). The
right hand side contains @xmath , and since @xmath is odd we have @xmath
. Hence, we can apply the completeness relation ( 4.2.13 ), which yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the definition ( 4.2.15 ) of @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the identities @xmath and ( 4.3.4 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Define the local charges

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the integration is over the whole domain of the spatial coordinate
@xmath ( i.e. the real line @xmath or the circle @xmath ). Once
integrated over @xmath , the right hand side of ( 4.3.5 ) is a total
derivative with respect to @xmath . Assuming the periodicity of the
fields if @xmath or that they decrease at infinity if @xmath , we then
conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In conclusion, we have constructed a tower of local charges @xmath in
involution, as integrals of the currents @xmath . These currents are
polynomials in the fields appearing in the Lax matrix @xmath . More
precisely, the current @xmath is a homogeneous polynomial of degree
@xmath .

Up to a global factor, the Poisson bracket ( 4.3.5 ) is the same as the
bracket (4.16) of [ 85 ] . Thus, we can apply the methods developed in [
85 ] . In particular, this allows to construct a more general tower of
local charges @xmath in involution, depending on a free parameter @xmath
. These charges are defined as integrals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of some currents @xmath . These currents are given by homogeneous
polynomials in the @xmath ’s, depending on the free parameter @xmath .
In particular, the first currents @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expression of the current @xmath is determined (up to a global
factor) recursively from equation ( 4.3.5 ) by demanding that the charge
@xmath be in involution with all the charges @xmath ( @xmath )
constructed thus far. It can also be found without recursion with the
help of a generating function, which allows a general proof of the
involution of the charges @xmath : we refer the reader to the subsection
4.3.4 for more details.

Taking @xmath in equation ( 4.3.2 ), we get @xmath . Hence, we recover
the local charges @xmath introduced in equation ( 4.3.6 ) as a special
case of this one-parameter family of local charges. For different
parameters @xmath and @xmath , the towers of charges @xmath and @xmath
do not commute with one another. We thus have to work with a fixed value
of @xmath : in the rest of this chapter, we will mainly focus on the
simplest case @xmath . This choice is justified first by simplicity, but
also because the proof of the existence of an integrable hierarchy
associated to the charges @xmath , presented in section 4.6 , works only
for the case @xmath .

##### 4.3.3 Type A algebras

Let us now consider the case where @xmath is of type A, i.e. where
@xmath for some @xmath (see Table 4.1 ). If @xmath , we have @xmath by
definition, but in general @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Thus, we
consider the currents @xmath for @xmath . The Poisson bracket between
two such currents is given by equation ( 4.3.3 ). Since in general
@xmath does not belong to @xmath , we cannot use the completeness
relation ( 4.2.13 ) to simplify this equation. However, a variant of the
identity ( 4.2.13 ) exists for any matrix @xmath . Indeed, using the
facts that @xmath belongs to @xmath and that @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying this relation to equation ( 4.3.3 ) and using the identities
@xmath and ( 4.3.4 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Integrating both sides over @xmath and @xmath , we see that the right
hand side does not vanish identically as it did in subsection 4.3.2 .
Nevertheless, following the method of [ 85 ] we will be able to
construct new currents @xmath such that the charges

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Poisson commute with one another.

The Poisson bracket ( 4.3.9 ) is to be compared to equation (4.5) of [
85 ] , from which it differs only by an overall factor. We can therefore
directly apply the procedure developed in [ 85 ] to the present case so
as to construct the desired currents @xmath ’s. The expression for the
first @xmath ’s read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These currents are similar to the currents @xmath described in ( 4.3.2 )
for @xmath of type B, C or D. More precisely, the current ( 4.3.3 )
coincide with the currents @xmath , recalling that for type B, C and D,
the @xmath ’s vanish. As for @xmath in type B, C and D, the expression
of the current @xmath for type A is determined (up to a global factor)
recursively from equation ( 4.3.9 ) by demanding that the charge @xmath
be in involution with all the charges @xmath ( @xmath ) constructed thus
far. However, in the present case, one does not have the freedom of a
free parameter @xmath in the definition of @xmath : there is a unique
tower of charges in involution @xmath .

As in the case of type B, C and D algebras, the current @xmath is a
homogeneous polynomial of degree @xmath in the fields appearing in the
Lax matrix @xmath . And as explained in [ 85 ] , the degrees @xmath for
which the current @xmath is non-zero are the exponents of the untwisted
affine Kac-Moody algebra @xmath plus one.

At this stage, we do not have a proof that the recursive algorithm
described above can be applied indefinitely. We shall now recall from [
85 ] how to construct explicitly the current @xmath without a recursive
algorithm, using generating functions.

##### 4.3.4 Generating functions

In the previous subsections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 , we introduced currents
@xmath (for types B, C and D) and @xmath (for type A), constructed
recursively from the currents @xmath (and which depended on a free
parameter @xmath for types B, C and D). In this subsection, we will show
how to construct these currents using generating functions.

We will mainly focus on the case where @xmath is of type A and will
briefly comment on types B, C and D at the end of the subsection. Let us
then suppose that @xmath , so that we can use the notations and results
of subsection 4.3.3 . We introduce

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that @xmath . By expanding the matricial logarithm in ( 4.3.12 ) as a
power series in @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath defined in equation ( 4.2.16 ). We are interested in the
evaluations of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath , which are well defined as
@xmath is a regular zero. Following [ 85 ] , we look for @xmath in the
form of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for some rational number @xmath , where @xmath denotes the coefficient
of @xmath in the power series expansion of @xmath .

The Poisson brackets of the currents @xmath are given by equation (
4.3.9 ). This allows one to compute @xmath and @xmath . As equation (
4.3.9 ) coincides with the equation (4.5) of [ 85 ] up to a global
factor, these Poisson brackets are the same as in [ 85 ] (equations
(4.13) and (4.14)), still up to the global factor. Thus, the procedure
of [ 85 ] applies and we conclude that the Poisson bracket of the local
charges ( 4.3.10 ) defined in terms of the currents ( 4.3.15 ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows that the charges @xmath are in involution if we choose, for
any @xmath , @xmath . The corresponding currents are given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can check that the first currents defined by this generating
function are given by equation ( 4.3.3 ), up to overall global factors.
The current @xmath is the evaluation at @xmath of the more general
current

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which we will need later. The equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

allows one to compute @xmath as a polynomial in the @xmath . More
precisely, @xmath is related to the @xmath ’s in the same way that
@xmath is related to the @xmath ’s.

We end this subsection by saying a few words on Lie algebras @xmath of
type B, C or D. In this case, we saw in subsection 4.3.2 that the local
charges in involution can be taken as integrals of currents @xmath ,
depending on a free parameter @xmath (see equation ( 4.3.2 )). These
currents can be obtained from the @xmath ’s using a generating function,
similar to the one presented above for type A. We will not enter into
details here and will just present the final result, based on reference
[ 85 ] . The current @xmath can be computed as:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.3.20)
  -- -- -- ----------

Starting from the Poisson bracket ( 4.3.5 ), one can show that the
corresponding charges @xmath are in involution, using similar techniques
as above for type A. We refer the interested reader to reference [ 85 ]
for details on the proof. An explicit computation shows that the first
currents @xmath obtained from the above equation are given by equation (
4.3.2 ), up to overall global factors.

##### 4.3.5 Summary

To conclude this section, let us summarise the results that we obtained.
In particular, we will use this as an opportunity to extend the
notations @xmath and @xmath , defined for a type A algebra in the
previous subsections, to other types. This will serve to uniformise the
notation in the rest of the chapter.

When @xmath is of type A, the currents @xmath are given in subsection
4.3.4 through equation ( 4.3.17 ). We also defined a current @xmath
depending on the spectral parameter @xmath in equation ( 4.3.19 ). For a
Lie algebra @xmath of type B, C or D (as treated in subsection 4.3.2 ),
we introduced currents @xmath , depending on a free parameter @xmath .
However, as explained at the end of susbection 4.3.2 , we will only use
the currents @xmath in the rest of this chapter. In order to employ
uniform notations throughout the chapter, we shall define in this case
@xmath and @xmath .

With these conventions, independently of the type of @xmath , the
current @xmath is the evaluation of @xmath at @xmath and the charge
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recall also that we restrict the degrees @xmath of the currents @xmath
to some subset @xmath of @xmath . In fact, independently of the type of
@xmath , @xmath can (almost) be seen as the set of exponents of the
affine algebra @xmath plus one. This was already observed for type A in
subsection 4.3.3 , based on the results of [ 85 ] . For types B, C and
D, we saw in subsection 4.3.2 that @xmath is the set of all even
numbers, which turns out to coincide with the exponents of @xmath plus
one for types B and C [ 85 ] . For type D, there are some exponents
missing in this construction (the rank modulo the Coxeter number), which
are related to the Pfaffian (see [ 85 ] ). Although we do not consider
the Pfaffian here, we expect that it should be possible to construct a
corresponding local charge in the present framework too.

Having introduced these type-independent notations, we can summarise the
results of this section by the following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be a non-cyclotomic regular zero of the model. Then, for any
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , the charges @xmath and @xmath are in
involution, i.e. we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The notations and results summarised above will be generalised to the
case of cyclotomic zeros in the following section. Let us note here that
there will be some subtlety in the definition of the current @xmath for
an algebra of type A in the case when the automorphism @xmath is inner,
compared to the definition given above. We shall discuss this in
subsection 4.4.7 .

#### 4.4 Charges at cyclotomic zeros

In this section, we explain how to construct towers of local charges in
involution attached to cyclotomic regular zeros of the twist function
@xmath . Recall that a cyclotomic point is a point fixed by the action
of the cyclic group @xmath , i.e. the origin or infinity. Suppose we are
considering a model with a regular zero at infinity. As explained in
subsection 4.2.2 , working in the new spectral parameter @xmath and with
the new Lax matrix @xmath amounts to treating, instead, a model with a
regular zero at @xmath and automorphism @xmath . Hence it is sufficient
to describe the extraction of local charges at the origin.

Throughout this section we therefore consider a model with @xmath and a
regular zero at the origin. We thus have @xmath and @xmath regular at 0.
Using the equivariance property ( 2.4.5 ), we see that the smallest
power of @xmath in @xmath is of the form @xmath , for some @xmath . In
terms of the function @xmath , defined in equation ( 2.4.6 ), this
implies that @xmath . We will mostly need the fact that @xmath , i.e.
that @xmath , and more precisely the asymptotic property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that in the previous section we extracted local charges by
evaluating the traces of powers of @xmath at the regular zeros. In the
case of a cyclotomic point, this method is not sufficient to extract all
charges, as such traces can vanish. To understand how to construct the
whole algebra of local charges, we will first need to establish
equivariance properties of @xmath .

##### 4.4.1 Equivariance properties

Recall the equivariance properties ( 2.4.5 ) and ( 2.4.3 ) of @xmath and
@xmath . In this subsection, we look for a similar relation for @xmath .
In general, @xmath does not belong to the Lie algebra @xmath since it is
defined as the power of an element of @xmath seen in the fundamental
representation. Thus, one cannot consider directly the action of @xmath
on @xmath .

We refer here to the discussion of appendix 4.A . We will restrict to
the case where @xmath is not one of the special automorphisms of @xmath
. In this case, we can extend @xmath to a linear endomorphism on the
space @xmath of all matrices acting on the fundamental representation,
that we shall still denote @xmath (see details in appendix 4.A ). Note
that this new endomorphism @xmath of @xmath is still of order @xmath .
We will also need the following properties of @xmath . For any @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

for some @xmath in @xmath . Note that @xmath is always 1 except when
@xmath and @xmath has a non-trivial outer part, in which case @xmath is
even. We shall write @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath .

From equations ( 2.4.5 ) and ( 2.4.3 ) and the identity ( 4.4.2a ), we
deduce that @xmath satisfies the equivariance property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Let us consider the power series expansion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking the trace and using equation ( 4.4.2b ), we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, @xmath vanishes except if @xmath , where @xmath is the remainder
of the euclidian division of @xmath by @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, the first term in the power series expansion of @xmath is
@xmath . Note that @xmath is the evaluation of @xmath at @xmath if and
only if @xmath , i.e. if @xmath divides @xmath . Note also, as @xmath ,
that @xmath . Thus, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath was defined in equation ( 2.4.6 ). Finally, let us remark
that equation ( 4.4.6 ) implies that @xmath has the following
equivariance property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 4.4.2 Poisson algebra of the currents

One can extract the Poisson brackets of the currents @xmath and @xmath
as the coefficient of @xmath in the power series expansion of @xmath .
The latter can be computed from equation ( 4.2.17 ). Specifically, using
the identity ( 2.3.9 ) we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath defined in equation ( 2.4.6 ). Taking the limit @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.9)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first term of this Poisson bracket has the same structure as the
Poisson bracket ( 4.3.3 ). The main difference coming from cyclotomy is
thus the second term, which involves the partial Casimir @xmath . We
recall that we have the partial completeness relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for any @xmath .

The second term in ( 4.4.9 ) will therefore involve the projection
@xmath of @xmath onto the grading zero @xmath . To determine these
projections, we can make use of the power series expansion ( 4.4.4 ) and
equation ( 4.4.5 ). In particular, one finds that @xmath is in @xmath if
and only if @xmath also belongs to @xmath . Let us then define @xmath to
be the unique integer between @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath belongs
to @xmath if and only if @xmath . Using equation ( 4.4.5 ) we find
@xmath . So @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .

To simplify the Poisson bracket ( 4.4.9 ), we will need to distinguish
between three cases:

-   @xmath is of type B, C or D,

-   @xmath is of type A and @xmath is inner,

-   @xmath is of type A and @xmath is not inner.

##### 4.4.3 Algebra of type B, C or D

We first consider @xmath to be of type B, C or D. Recall that in this
case @xmath belongs to the Lie algebra so that @xmath is zero and hence
we consider only the currents @xmath . Moreover, we can use the
completeness relations ( 4.2.13 ) and ( 4.4.10 ) in ( 4.4.9 ). We then
find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.11)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

After integration over @xmath , the first term becomes a total
derivative with respect to @xmath by virtue of equation ( 4.3.4 ) and
thus vanishes when integrated over @xmath .

Recall moreover that the Poisson bracket of @xmath with @xmath is
obtained from ( 4.4.11 ) by keeping only the term @xmath in the power
series expansion. We note that the smallest power of @xmath in the
second term of ( 4.4.11 ) is @xmath (cf. equation ( 4.4.1 ) and above).
As we saw in the previous subsection, @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if
@xmath . In the case where @xmath and @xmath are different from @xmath ,
the smallest power of @xmath is then @xmath so the second term of (
4.4.11 ) does not contribute to the Poisson bracket of @xmath with
@xmath , as @xmath .

If @xmath or @xmath is equal to @xmath then there will be a contribution
from this term involving other objects than only the @xmath ’s,
preventing us from constructing charges in involution. Thus, we will
only consider the currents @xmath such that @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the integral of the current @xmath .

We have thus extracted a tower of local charges in involution from the
Lax matrix around the origin. Just as in the non-cyclotomic case, these
charges are integrals of some polynomials of even degrees in the fields
appearing in the Lax matrix. The main difference with the non-cyclotomic
case is the fact that, in general, we do not have a current of any even
degree. More precisely, we ‘dropped’ the currents of degree @xmath , for
all @xmath such that @xmath . Recall from appendix 4.A that in the case
of an algebra of type B, C or D, we have @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath
is the remainder of the euclidian division of @xmath by @xmath , which
means that @xmath if and only if @xmath . In particular, we see that
there is no drop of any degrees if @xmath is even.

##### 4.4.4 Algebra of type A and @xmath inner

Let us now suppose that @xmath is @xmath and @xmath is inner. In this
case, we have the generalised completeness relation ( 4.3.8 ). Moreover,
we also have a similar identity for the partial Casimir @xmath , derived
as follows. Recall that for any @xmath , @xmath belongs to @xmath .
Moreover, we note that the identity is in the grading zero @xmath for
@xmath inner (cf. appendix 4.A ). Using equation ( 4.4.10 ), we then
have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using equations ( 4.3.8 ) and ( 4.4.12 ) in the Poisson bracket ( 4.4.9
), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.13)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Poisson bracket of @xmath with @xmath is obtained by extracting the
coefficient of @xmath in the above equation. To treat the second term on
the right hand side of this equation, we follow the discussion of the
previous subsection 4.4.3 . The smallest power of @xmath appearing in
this term is @xmath and if we restrict to @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath are different from @xmath , this power is strictly
greater than @xmath . The term then does not contribute to the Poisson
bracket @xmath . Let us turn to the third term on the right hand side of
equation ( 4.4.13 ). It can be seen from equation ( 4.4.1 ) that @xmath
. The smallest power of @xmath that can appear in this term is thus
@xmath , which is always greater than @xmath and therefore strictly
greater than @xmath if @xmath and @xmath are different from @xmath .

In conclusion, only the first term of the right hand side of ( 4.4.13 )
contributes to the Poisson bracket @xmath , which then has the same
structure as in the previous subsection. Integrating this bracket over
@xmath and @xmath , we recognise the integral of a total derivative
proportional to @xmath , which then vanishes, assuming appropriate
boundary conditions. Thus, for any @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath are different from @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the integral of the current @xmath . As in the subsection
4.4.3 , we have @xmath and @xmath for @xmath inner. It follows that the
integers @xmath such that @xmath (for which we do not consider the
charge @xmath ) are the ones equal to 1 modulo @xmath .

##### 4.4.5 Algebra of type A and @xmath not inner

Finally, let us treat the case where @xmath and @xmath not inner. In
particular, this implies that @xmath is even and we shall write @xmath
in this subsection. We still have the generalised completeness relation
( 4.3.8 ). As @xmath is not inner, we have @xmath and hence @xmath . We
deduce that in this case, the partial completeness relation ( 4.4.10 )
actually holds for any @xmath . Equation ( 4.4.9 ) then gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.14)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

We follow the method of the previous subsections and look for the power
@xmath of @xmath in the right hand side of this bracket. As explained in
subsection 4.4.3 , the second term does not contribute when we restrict
to @xmath and @xmath different from @xmath .

The first term is treated as in the case of a non-cyclotomic point:
using the identity @xmath and the equation ( 4.3.4 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The powers of @xmath appearing in the power series expansion of the
first term are then of the form @xmath , with @xmath . One has @xmath
and @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is always between @xmath and @xmath if we
suppose @xmath and @xmath different from @xmath . If @xmath , we have
@xmath and the powers @xmath are then all strictly greater than @xmath .
If @xmath then @xmath and the power @xmath is equal to @xmath if and
only if @xmath .

Finally, let us consider the third term on the right hand side of (
4.4.14 ). The powers of @xmath in its power series expansion are of the
form @xmath , with @xmath . Note that @xmath . Thus, @xmath if @xmath
and @xmath if @xmath . We then conclude that the power @xmath is equal
to @xmath if and only if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Combining all the above results, we find a closed expression for the
Poisson bracket of the currents @xmath and @xmath when @xmath and @xmath
are different form @xmath , specifically

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .

As in the case of a non-cyclotomic zero, one can construct charges in
involution by taking integrals of new currents @xmath , constructed as
polynomials of the currents @xmath for @xmath . The method in the
present case is similar: one can construct the currents @xmath
recursively by asking that the corresponding charge @xmath Poisson
commutes with @xmath for all @xmath . One of the main difference with
the non-cyclotomic case is the fact that we do not consider a current
@xmath when @xmath (we say that such a degree @xmath drops from the
construction). The second difference is the presence of the terms @xmath
in the Poisson bracket ( 4.4.5 ) compared to ( 4.3.9 ). Since these
terms depend on the numbers @xmath , the construction of the @xmath ’s
will depend on @xmath . As an illustration, we give here the expression
of the first @xmath ’s for @xmath equal to 2 and 4.

In the case @xmath , we have @xmath hence @xmath for all @xmath . Thus,
there is no drop of any current due to the condition @xmath and the
current @xmath is simply the evaluation of @xmath at @xmath . Moreover,
since @xmath and @xmath are both zero for @xmath , we note that all
@xmath terms in the Poisson bracket ( 4.4.5 ) are equal to 1. The
construction for the @xmath ’s is therefore the same as in the
non-cyclotomic case and their expression is given by ( 4.3.3 ).

Let us now consider the case @xmath . We find @xmath and @xmath and
therefore drop the currents @xmath . Constructing the @xmath ’s
recursively we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.17)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we dropped the currents @xmath and @xmath and more generally all
currents @xmath .

Comparing these currents to the ones constructed in the non-cyclotomic
case ( 4.3.3 ), one can observe a pattern in the cyclotomic procedure.
Here also, the current @xmath is constructed by correcting @xmath with
monomials @xmath such that @xmath . We observe that not all the
monomials in the non-cyclotomic corrections appear among the cyclotomic
ones but the ones that do have the same coefficients (for example @xmath
for the @xmath correction of @xmath ). Moreover, we note that a monomial
@xmath appearing in the non-cyclotomic procedure is also present in the
cyclotomic expression if and only if @xmath .

The above observations are still found to hold for larger values of
@xmath and @xmath (although we do not include the corresponding
expression of @xmath for conciseness). This allows one to find the
currents @xmath without going through the recursive procedure if one
already knows the result for the non-cyclotomic case. A more systematic
approach to constructing higher conserved charges in involution in the
cyclotomic case would be to find a generating function for the @xmath
’s, generalising the results of subsection 4.3.4 . This will be the
subject of the next subsection.

##### 4.4.6 Generating function for type A with @xmath not inner

In subsection 4.3.4 we presented, following [ 85 ] , the generating
function for constructing the currents @xmath in the non-cyclotomic
setting. In particular, we found that the relation between the @xmath ’s
and the @xmath ’s is given by equation ( 4.3.17 ). In the previous
subsection we showed how the currents @xmath could be constructed in the
cyclotomic case from the knowledge of the corresponding result in the
non-cyclotomic case. In particular, starting from the expression of
@xmath as a polynomial of the @xmath ’s, we observed that @xmath can be
constructed in the same way by keeping monomials @xmath with the same
coefficient if and only if @xmath . This procedure for going from the
non-cyclotomic to the cyclotomic setting has a natural interpretation in
terms of equation ( 4.3.17 ). Indeed, the current @xmath constructed
above is equal to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the projection onto the term @xmath ensures that we keep only the
monomials satisfying the condition @xmath .

Recall that @xmath is the first term in the power series expansion of
@xmath . Moreover, the next terms start with a @xmath power of @xmath .
Since @xmath , such terms can be added to the exponent in equation (
4.4.18 ) without changing the left hand side as they cannot contribute
to a @xmath -term. We may therefore also write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of the definitions ( 4.3.12 ) and ( 4.3.13 ) of @xmath and
@xmath and equation ( 4.3.14 ), we can further re-express equation (
4.4.19 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or again

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Starting from equation ( 4.4.14 ), using equation ( 4.4.15 ) and the
identity @xmath , we get

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.4.21)
  -- -- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
                          
     @xmath               (4.4.22a)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.22b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

We want to compute the Poisson brackets between the charges @xmath
defined as integrals of the currents ( 4.4.20 ). To begin with, note
that the Poisson bracket between @xmath and @xmath can be obtained from
equations ( 4.3.14 ) and ( 4.4.21 ). We then find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Up to a global factor and treating the spectral parameter @xmath as an
external parameter, @xmath has the same structure as the right hand side
of equation ( 4.3.9 ), which as we saw already had the same structure as
equation (4.5) of [ 85 ] . This equation (4.5) is used in [ 85 ] to
compute the Poisson brackets of the generating functions (equations
(4.13) to (4.15)). The method developed in [ 85 ] for computing these
Poisson brackets then applies to the terms @xmath in equation ( 4.4.23 )
and gives a similar result, up to the global factor and the dependence
on @xmath that we keep. Specifically, we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.24)
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath was defined in equation ( 4.3.16 ).

The first term on the right hand side of ( 4.4.24 ), proportional to
@xmath , vanishes when @xmath for all @xmath , as expected. It therefore
remains to show that the second term also does not contribute when we
restrict to the @xmath -th power of @xmath . From equation ( 4.4.22b ),
we see that the powers of @xmath appearing in the power series expansion
of @xmath are of the form @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath defined in
subsection 4.4.2 .

The equivariance property ( 4.4.7 ) can be rewritten as @xmath . In
terms of the generating function @xmath , this can be re-expressed as
@xmath . Thus, we also have @xmath . Finally, we deduce that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular, this implies that the powers of @xmath appearing in
@xmath are of the form @xmath with @xmath . In conclusion, the powers of
@xmath in

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are of the form @xmath , with @xmath .

Recall from subsection 4.4.2 that @xmath , and therefore @xmath .
Suppose now that @xmath and @xmath are different from, and so in
particular strictly less than, @xmath . As @xmath is always positive and
congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath , which is strictly less than @xmath ,
it then follows that @xmath . Similarly, we have @xmath and we thus
deduce that @xmath is greater than or equal to @xmath . We deduce that
the term ( 4.4.26 ) cannot contribute to the @xmath power of @xmath , as
required.

In conclusion, we have found that, for any @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath are different from @xmath , one has @xmath , where the
charge @xmath is defined as the integral of the current @xmath given by
( 4.4.20 ). Recall that the current @xmath is constructed as the
coefficient of @xmath in the power series expansion of @xmath .
Similarly, one can rewrite equation ( 4.4.20 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath defined in equation ( 4.3.18 ).

##### 4.4.7 Summary

Let us summarise the results of this section, as we did for
non-cyclotomic zeros in subsection 4.3.5 . In general, we define a
charge @xmath , associated with a current @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the definition of @xmath and @xmath depends on the type of @xmath
and whether @xmath is inner or not.

For @xmath of type B, C or D (see subsection 4.4.3 ) and for @xmath of
type A and @xmath inner (see subsection 4.4.4 ), we simply choose @xmath
, so that @xmath . In this case, we consider @xmath as the remainder of
the euclidian division of @xmath by @xmath . When @xmath is of type A
and @xmath is not inner (the case discussed in subsections 4.4.5 and
4.4.6 ), we choose @xmath as given by equation ( 4.3.19 ). In this case,
@xmath is defined as the remainder of the euclidian division of @xmath
by @xmath .

The equivariance properties ( 4.4.7 ) and ( 4.4.25 ) imply that,
independently of the type of @xmath and of @xmath being inner or not, we
have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath defined as above. It therefore follows that the powers of
@xmath appearing in @xmath are of the form @xmath , with @xmath . In
particular, the current @xmath of equation ( 4.4.28 ) is the coefficient
of the smallest power of @xmath in @xmath .

As in the non-cyclotomic case, we restrict the degree @xmath of the
currents @xmath to some subset @xmath of @xmath . More precisely, @xmath
belongs to @xmath if @xmath is an exponent of the affine algebra @xmath
and @xmath is different from @xmath (with the exception of the exponents
related to the Pfaffian in type D, as in subsection 4.3.5 ). The results
of this section can be summarised as the following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.4.1.

Let @xmath . Then the charges @xmath and @xmath are in involution, i.e.
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a subtlety in the definition of @xmath for @xmath of type A and
@xmath inner. Indeed, in this case the current @xmath is extracted just
from @xmath as recalled above. Yet in section 4.3 , the current @xmath
at a non-cyclotomic point was extracted instead from @xmath which
differs from @xmath . Thus, for this case, we choose the appropriate
definition of @xmath depending on whether the regular zeros of the
considered model are cyclotomic or not.

We end this section by an open question. For a non-cyclotomic regular
zero @xmath and @xmath of type B, C or D, we considered local charges in
involution @xmath built as the integral of the currents @xmath (see
subsection 4.3.2 ). However, based on the results of [ 85 ] , we also
exhibited a more general family of local charges in involution @xmath ,
depending on a free parameter @xmath and whose corresponding currents
@xmath are constructed as polynomials in the @xmath ’s.

In the subsection 4.4.3 of the present section, where we deal with a
cyclotomic regular zero at the origin for @xmath of type B, C or D, the
charges @xmath are also constructed simply as integrals of the currents
@xmath . It is thus natural to ask if there exists in this case a more
general family of charges @xmath , depending on a free parameter @xmath
, as for the non-cyclotomic case. Moreover, for @xmath of type A and
@xmath inner (as treated in subsection 4.4.4 ), the charges @xmath are
also integrals of the currents @xmath (we do not need to construct more
complicated currents to obtain charges in involution). It is thus also
natural to look for a more general family of charges @xmath . This would
be an interesting result, as it would exhibit an important qualitative
difference between the non-cyclotomic case and the cyclotomic one (with
@xmath inner), for @xmath of type A.

We expect these one-parameter families (for @xmath of type B, C and D or
for @xmath of type A with @xmath inner) to exist. More precisely, we
expect them to be given by the first non-zero coefficient in the power
series expansions of a suitable generating function, depending on @xmath
, around the cyclotomic regular zero @xmath . As for the non-cyclotomic
case, we will focus in this chapter on the local charges which do not
depend on a free parameter @xmath (as described at the beginning of this
subsection), for the same reasons as the ones discussed at the end of
subsection 4.3.2 for a non-cyclotomic zero.

#### 4.5 Properties of the local charges

##### 4.5.1 Algebra of local charges in involution

In the previous sections, we constructed a tower of local charges in
involution at every regular zero @xmath . More precisely, we constructed
currents @xmath , with degrees @xmath in some subset @xmath of @xmath ,
such that the charges @xmath defined as the integral of @xmath are in
involution with one another. In this subsection, we study the whole
algebra of local charges in involution, formed by all the @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath . More precisely, we prove that currents @xmath and
@xmath extracted at different regular zeros are in involution. We
establish this result for regular zeros in @xmath , excluding the point
at infinity. If infinity is a regular zero then one can also extract
charges in involution @xmath , using the results of subsection 4.2.2 .
The Poisson brackets of the corresponding currents with the currents at
finite regular zeros involve some subtleties and will be treated
separately at the end of the subsection.

In general, the currents @xmath and @xmath are constructed as
polynomials of the currents @xmath and @xmath . It is therefore
sufficient to prove that the Poisson bracket of @xmath and @xmath is
zero. The currents @xmath and @xmath are extracted from @xmath and
@xmath , whose Poisson bracket is given by equation ( 4.2.17 ). We can
suppose that @xmath is different from @xmath and thus is a
non-cyclotomic point, so that @xmath . Using the fact that @xmath since
@xmath , we can evaluate equation ( 4.2.17 ) at @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will now treat separately the cases @xmath cyclotomic or @xmath
non-cyclotomic.

Suppose that @xmath is non-cyclotomic so that @xmath is simply the
evaluation of @xmath at @xmath . Recall from paragraph 4.2.1 that, by
construction of the set @xmath , as @xmath and @xmath are different
elements of @xmath , the cyclotomic orbits @xmath and @xmath are
disjoint. In particular, this means that @xmath is regular at @xmath .
Indeed, by equation ( 2.3.8 ) the poles of @xmath are the points of the
orbit @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is regular at @xmath and we have @xmath
. Thus, evaluating equation ( 4.5.1 ) at @xmath we find that the
currents @xmath and @xmath are in involution, as expected.

Let us now treat the cyclotomic case where @xmath . In this case, @xmath
is the coefficient of @xmath in the power series expansion of @xmath
(cf. subsection 4.4.1 ). The Poisson bracket of @xmath with @xmath is
then the coefficient of @xmath in equation ( 4.5.1 ). Recall from
section 4.4 that for @xmath , we have @xmath . Yet, in equation ( 4.5.1
), @xmath and @xmath are regular at @xmath and @xmath , hence the
involution of @xmath and @xmath . In conclusion, we have proved

###### Theorem 4.5.1.

Let @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath . Then, if @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining this theorem with the results of previous sections, we
conclude that the local charges @xmath , for all @xmath and @xmath , are
in involution with one another.

We now turn to the case where one of the regular zeros is the point at
infinity. In this case, the current @xmath is extracted from the Lax
matrix @xmath . From the Poisson brackets ( 2.2.6 ) and ( 4.2.5 ), we
get

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 (4.5.2)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the matrix @xmath defined in ( 4.2.8 ).

In the following, we will say that an equation is true weakly , and we
will then use the symbol @xmath instead of @xmath , if the equation
holds when one puts the field @xmath to zero. This denomination and its
interest will be made clear when studying @xmath -coset models, in which
case the field @xmath is interpreted as a gauge constraint. Note, in
particular, that the last term of equation ( 4.5.2 ) vanishes weakly.
Using Corollary 4.2.3 , we may then compute the Poisson brackets of
@xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

weakly, to find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose first that @xmath is non-cyclotomic. We have @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Poisson bracket between @xmath and @xmath is then obtained, weakly,
by extracting the coefficient of @xmath in the equation above. For
@xmath , we have @xmath . Yet @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are regular
at @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath are weakly in involution.

It remains to consider the case where @xmath . In this case, @xmath is
the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath and we restrict to @xmath such that
@xmath . We have to find the coefficient of @xmath in equation ( 4.5.3
). Due to the presence of @xmath or @xmath in the two terms appearing in
@xmath , we see that either the power of @xmath or the power of @xmath
is greater than @xmath and thus cannot contribute to the term @xmath .
In conclusion, we have the following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.5.2.

Suppose that infinity is a regular zero of the model. Let @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining this theorem with the results of previous sections, we see
that the local charges @xmath , for all @xmath and @xmath , are (at
least weakly) in involution with one another.

We thus constructed a large algebra of local charges in involution,
composed of the charges @xmath , with @xmath regular zeros and @xmath .
Since these charges are local, they are also in involution with the
momentum @xmath of the theory, whose Poisson bracket generates the
derivative with respect to the spatial coordinate @xmath . We have not
yet discussed the conservation properties of these charges. For the
models that we will consider as examples in this chapter, we will see in
section 4.7 that the Hamiltonian @xmath of the theory always belongs to
the algebra of local charges described above. It therefore follows that
all these charges are conserved. More precisely, we will see that @xmath
is always a linear combination of the quadratic charges @xmath and the
momentum @xmath .

##### 4.5.2 Gauge invariance

In this subsection, we anticipate the application of the construction
developed in the previous sections to integrable @xmath -models on
@xmath -coset spaces. In those models, infinity is a regular zero and
the corresponding field @xmath (cf. subsection 4.2.2 ) is a gauge
constraint. We prove here that the currents @xmath constructed at
regular zeros @xmath in the previous sections are gauge invariant, in
the sense that they Poisson commute with the constraint @xmath . As the
@xmath ’s are polynomials of the @xmath ’s, it is enough to prove the
following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.5.3.

Suppose that infinity is a regular zero. Let @xmath and @xmath . Then,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us first suppose that @xmath is different from infinity. The current
@xmath is extracted from @xmath . Recall the Poisson bracket between the
Lax matrix @xmath and @xmath , given by equation ( 4.2.5 ). By Corollary
4.2.3 we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , @xmath is simply @xmath . And since @xmath is a regular
zero, @xmath is regular at @xmath and @xmath . Evaluating the above
Poisson bracket at @xmath , we get the involution of @xmath and @xmath .
If @xmath , @xmath is the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath and, since
@xmath , we have @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is regular at @xmath
and @xmath , the @xmath -term in the Poisson bracket above is then zero,
as required.

Finally, let us treat the case @xmath , for which @xmath is given by the
coefficient of @xmath in @xmath . Using the definition of @xmath and the
Poisson brackets ( 4.2.5 ) and ( 4.2.6 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This bracket has the same structure as equation ( 4.2.5 ). Therefore,
the case @xmath is treated exactly in the same way than the case @xmath
, which ends the proof. ∎

##### 4.5.3 Reality conditions

To close this section let us discuss the reality conditions on the
charges @xmath extracted at regular zeros in the previous sections. In
Chapter 3 , we considered integrable @xmath -models with target space
@xmath or a quotient of @xmath , where @xmath is a real Lie group. If
@xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath , then the Lax matrix of the model
is a @xmath -valued field, where @xmath is the complexification of
@xmath . In other words, @xmath is a real form of the complex Lie
algebra @xmath : it is thus characterised by a antilinear involutive
automorphism @xmath (see Appendix A.3 ). The fact that the @xmath
-models we consider are on the real form @xmath (or one of its quotient)
is encoded in the reality conditions ( 2.4.7 ) and ( 2.4.10 ) of the Lax
matrix and of the twist function.

In particular, by equation ( 2.4.10 ), if @xmath is a zero of @xmath ,
its conjugate @xmath is also a zero of @xmath . Combining the reality
conditions ( 2.4.7 ) and ( 2.4.10 ), we also see that if @xmath is a
regular zero (see paragraph 4.2.1 ), @xmath is also a regular zero.
Thus, the regular zeros can be of two types: real ones @xmath and
conjugate pairs @xmath , @xmath in @xmath .

We will use the reality condition ( 2.4.7 ) in a similar way to the way
we used the equivariance property ( 2.4.3 ) in subsection 4.4.1 . In
particular, as we consider powers of the Lax matrix, which are not in
the Lie algebra @xmath in general, we will need to extend “naturally”
the automorphism @xmath to the whole algebra @xmath of matrices acting
on the defining representation of @xmath . This was done for the
automorphism @xmath in subsection 4.4.1 and appendix 4.A . One can apply
similar ideas to @xmath , using the classification of real forms of the
classical Lie algebras A, B, C and D. We do not present the details here
and just summarise the results.

There exists an extension of @xmath on the whole algebra of matrices
@xmath , which coincides with @xmath when restricted to the Lie algebra
@xmath , and that we shall still denote @xmath . This extension is still
an involutive semi-linear map of @xmath to itself. However, it is not in
general an algebra homomorphism. The main properties of the extension
@xmath that we will need are the following. There exists @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

for any @xmath . For every real form @xmath of a classical algebra
@xmath we have @xmath , except for the real forms @xmath of @xmath (with
@xmath ), for which @xmath . Using the properties ( 4.5.4 ) with the
reality conditions ( 2.4.7 ) and ( 2.4.10 ), one finds that @xmath and
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider a regular zero @xmath . Suppose first that @xmath is complex:
its conjugate @xmath is then also a regular zero. According to the
previous sections, we can extract two towers of (possibly complex)
currents @xmath and @xmath by evaluating @xmath at @xmath or @xmath
(note that @xmath cannot be a cyclotomic point as it is complex).
However, according to equation ( 4.5.5 ), these currents are not
independent. Indeed, they are related by the reality condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, considering linear combination of @xmath and @xmath , we extract
from each pair @xmath , @xmath of complex regular zeros two towers of
real charges in involution: @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is a real and non-cyclotomic regular zero.
Equation ( 4.5.5 ) then imposes the reality condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the current @xmath is either real or pure imaginary. In each case,
we can extract only one tower of real local charges. Consider now the
case where @xmath is the origin and thus a cyclotomic real point. The
current @xmath is then the coefficient of @xmath in the power series
expansion of @xmath . Yet, this coefficient is also the one of @xmath in
the power series expansion of @xmath . The reality condition ( 4.5.5 )
then implies that equation ( 4.5.6 ) also holds for @xmath .

Finally, let us discuss the case where @xmath is infinity, which we
consider as a real point. From the reality conditions ( 2.4.7 ) and (
2.4.10 ), we find that the field @xmath defined in subsection 4.2.2 is
real, in the sense that @xmath . We then obtain reality conditions on
the Lax matrix @xmath and the twist function @xmath similar to equations
( 2.4.7 ) and ( 2.4.10 ). As a result we can apply the above discussion,
since the point at infinity in the variable @xmath corresponds to the
origin in the variable @xmath , and conclude that equation ( 4.5.6 )
also holds for @xmath .

To summarise this subsection, we have shown that one can extract:

-   one tower of real local charges for each real regular zero @xmath ,

-   two towers of real local charges for each pair @xmath , @xmath of
    complex regular zeros.

In other words, one can extract as many towers of real charges as there
are regular zeros.

#### 4.6 Integrable hierarchies and zero curvature equations

In the previous sections, we constructed a infinite set of local charges
@xmath in involution, with @xmath regular zeros. It induces an infinite
set of commuting Hamiltonian flows, defined by @xmath . In this section,
we show that these flows generate a hierarchy of integrable equations.
More precisely, we associate with each charge @xmath a connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which commutes with the connection @xmath . We show that the connections
@xmath also commute with one another for finite regular zeros @xmath .
The commutativity of these connections takes the form of zero curvature
equations. In particular, we will use the zero curvature equations
involving @xmath and the @xmath ’s to prove that the local charges
@xmath are in involution with the non-local charges extracted from the
monodromy of @xmath .

##### 4.6.1 Zero curvature equations with @xmath

The starting point of this chapter is an integrable system with Lax
matrix @xmath and Hamiltonian @xmath . The dynamical equations of this
system are generated by the Poisson bracket with @xmath . They are
encoded in the form of the zero curvature equation ( 2.2.2 ). In this
subsection, we study the dynamics of the Lax matrix under the
Hamiltonian flows generated by the local charges @xmath constructed in
the previous sections. More precisely, we show that these dynamics also
take the form of a zero curvature equation on @xmath :

###### Theorem 4.6.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath . There exists a matrix @xmath such that we have
the zero curvature equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us apply the second result of Corollary 4.2.3 to the Maillet bracket
( 2.2.6 ). Using the form ( 2.4.1 ) of the @xmath -matrix, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.1)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider first the case where @xmath is a non-cylotomic regular zero.
Evaluating the equation above at @xmath and using @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Suppose now that @xmath is the origin, which is a cyclotomic point, in
which case @xmath is constructed as the coefficient of @xmath in the
power series expansion of @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath , we have @xmath
(see section 4.4 ). The Poisson bracket @xmath is thus the @xmath -term
in equation ( 4.6.1 ). We have @xmath and @xmath , thus the last term of
equation ( 4.6.1 ) cannot contribute to @xmath . Thus, we also have
equation ( 4.6.2 ) for @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will say that @xmath is the Lax matrix associated with the charge
defined as the integral of the current @xmath . Equation ( 4.6.2 )
implies a zero curvature equation for the evolution of @xmath under the
Hamiltonian flow of this charge. In general, the charge @xmath is not
the integral of @xmath but of @xmath (see previous sections). Recall
that @xmath is a polynomial in the @xmath ’s. We construct the Lax
matrix @xmath associated with @xmath by assigning any monomial @xmath in
this polynomial to the matrix

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Using the fact that the Poisson bracket is a derivation, we find from
equation ( 4.6.2 ) that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After integration over @xmath , we get the required zero curvature
equation. ∎

Thus, the Hamiltonian flows of the charges @xmath generate dynamical
equations that can be recast in the form of zero curvature equations. In
conclusion, we have constructed a hierarchy of integrable systems with
Lax matrix @xmath and Hamiltonians @xmath . The zero curvature equations
of Theorem 4.6.1 can be seen as the commutativity of the connections

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . This connection @xmath can be thought of as the connection
associated with the local momentum @xmath of the theory. As already
mentioned, we will see in section 4.7 that for the models we consider,
the Hamiltonian is given by a linear combination @xmath of the quadratic
charges @xmath and the momentum @xmath . Therefore, the matrix @xmath of
equation ( 2.2.2 ) can be constructed as @xmath .

Theorem 4.6.1 only treats the case of finite regular zeros @xmath . Let
us also briefly discuss what happens when @xmath . In this case, @xmath
is extracted from the Lax matrix @xmath . Since this matrix satisfies a
Maillet bracket with twist function @xmath , one can apply the method
developed here. Doing so we find that the dynamics of @xmath under the
Hamiltonian flow of @xmath takes the form of a zero curvature equation.
Moreover, starting with the Poisson bracket ( 4.5.2 ) and working
weakly, we also find a weak curvature equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the matrix @xmath is constructed from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the same way as @xmath was built from @xmath for a finite regular
zero @xmath . In other words, Theorem 4.6.1 also applies for @xmath when
Poisson brackets are considered weakly.

Let us end this subsection by stating a few properties of the Lax matrix
@xmath . Using the equivariance property ( 2.4.2 ), we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Lax matrix @xmath thus satisfies the same equivariance property (
2.4.3 ) as @xmath . Recall that the Lax matrix @xmath is extracted as
the @xmath -term in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider the equivariance properties ( 4.4.3 ) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining it with the fact that @xmath for any matrices @xmath (see
appendix 4.A ), we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the power series expansion of @xmath in @xmath contains
powers of the form @xmath , with @xmath . In particular, @xmath is the
coefficient of the smallest power in this expansion, in the same way as
@xmath is in the expansion of @xmath .

Let us define @xmath from @xmath and @xmath in the same way we
constructed @xmath from @xmath and @xmath . In particular, @xmath is the
evaluation of @xmath at @xmath . From equations ( 4.4.6 ) and ( 4.6.7 ),
we find the following equivariance property

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So @xmath is the coefficient of the first term @xmath in the power
series expansion of @xmath .

##### 4.6.2 Involution with non-local charges

In this subsection, we use the result of the previous one to prove that
the local charges @xmath are in involution with the non-local charges
extracted from the monodromy of the Lax matrix @xmath . This monodromy
is defined as the path-ordered exponential (see Appendix A.5 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the integral is taken on the real line @xmath or the circle @xmath
, depending on the coordinate space of the model. Consider also the
partial transfer matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The properties of these matrices are described in Appendix A.5 . In
particular, their variation under an infinitesimal variation of @xmath
is given by equation ( A.5.2 ).

This formula allows one to compute derivatives of @xmath and in
particular its Poisson bracket with the local charge @xmath , for @xmath
and @xmath . Specifically, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Poisson bracket of @xmath and @xmath is given by Theorem 4.6.1 .
Using this together with the equations ( A.5.1 ) and ( 4.6.9 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the spatial coordinate is taken on the real line (from @xmath to
@xmath ) and the fields are assumed to be decreasing at infinity fast
enough, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. the whole monodromy @xmath is in involution with @xmath . If the
spatial coordinate is taken on the circle (from @xmath to @xmath ) and
the fields are assumed to be periodic, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case, @xmath Poisson commutes with any central function of
@xmath , e.g. the traces @xmath and the determinant @xmath . Thus, we
have

###### Theorem 4.6.2.

The monodromy @xmath (resp. the central functions of @xmath ) is in
involution with the local charges @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , if the
spatial coordinate is taken on the real line (resp. the circle). In
particular, it is conserved.

###### Proof.

It just remains to prove the conservation of the non-local charges. This
follows from the fact that the Hamiltonian @xmath can be expressed as a
linear combination of the quadratic charges @xmath and the momentum
@xmath . ∎

Once again, this theorem applies only for finite regular zeros @xmath .
Following a similar argument to the one given in the previous
subsection, it also holds for the charges @xmath if we consider Poisson
brackets only weakly.

##### 4.6.3 Zero curvature equations between the @xmath’s

In subsection 4.6.1 , we showed that the dynamics of the Lax matrix
@xmath under the Hamiltonian flow of the local charge @xmath takes the
form of a zero curvature equation with a matrix @xmath . We thus
exhibited a hierarchy of integrable equations, corresponding to the
commutativity of the connections @xmath with @xmath . This can be seen
as the compatibility condition of the two auxiliary linear problems
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath a function on the phase space, valued in
the connected and simply connected Lie group with Lie algebra @xmath .
In this subsection, we prove that the connections @xmath and @xmath also
commute with one another (except when @xmath is finite and @xmath ).
This can be seen as the simultaneous compatibility of all auxiliary
linear problems @xmath and it takes the form of zero curvature
equations:

###### Theorem 4.6.3.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We have the zero curvature equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This subsection is entirely devoted to the proof of Theorem 4.6.3 .
After stating some general results, we will treat separately the cases
@xmath and @xmath . Note that for the latter, we only have a complete
proof for an algebra @xmath of type B, C and D. For @xmath of type A, we
verified Theorem 4.6.3 for the first degrees @xmath and @xmath and
conjecture that it holds more generally for any @xmath and @xmath . To
improve the clarity of the subsection, some technical details of the
proof are presented in appendix 4.B .

Here also the theorem concerns the finite regular zeros @xmath and
@xmath . The method presented in this subsection also applies for @xmath
as @xmath also satisfies an @xmath -system with twist function (Theorem
4.2.1 ). However, the theorem does not hold when @xmath is finite and
@xmath , even if Poisson brackets are considered only weakly.

###### Some general results

Let us consider the Poisson bracket ( 4.6.1 ). It can be rewritten

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Starting from this Poisson bracket, we elevate @xmath to
the power @xmath and find, using the fact that the Poisson bracket and
the commutator are derivations, that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.10)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recall the definition ( 4.6.6 ) of @xmath . From the Poisson bracket (
4.6.10 ), using the cyclicity of the trace, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.11)
     @xmath      (4.6.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath defined in equation ( 4.2.18 ). Let us introduce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It contains a term equal to @xmath times

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can show from equations ( 4.6.6 ) and ( 4.6.11 ) that this is equal
to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This terms vanishes as @xmath is a solution of the classical Yang-Baxter
equation ( 2.3.3 ). We are therefore simply left with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The currents @xmath are extracted from @xmath . But in general, the
charges are constructed from currents @xmath which are extracted from
@xmath , where the definition of @xmath depends on @xmath and @xmath
(see subsections 4.3.5 and 4.4.7 ). In particular, we have @xmath for a
non-cyclotomic regular zero @xmath . For the origin, which is
cyclotomic, @xmath is the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath . Let us
define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.14)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the expression of @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath
, we see that @xmath contains several types of terms:

1.  commutators @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s,

2.  @xmath and @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s,

3.  @xmath and @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s,

4.  @xmath and @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in @xmath ’s and
    @xmath ’s.

Moreover, the terms of type 1 and 2 are always ultralocal, i.e.
proportional to @xmath . It can be seen that these terms always combine
into polynomials of @xmath multiplied by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As explained above, this vanishes by virtue of the classical Yang-Baxter
equation. Therefore, @xmath is composed only of terms of type 3 and 4.

###### Zero curvature equation at different regular zeros

Let us now prove Theorem 4.6.3 when @xmath and @xmath are different
regular zeros. Since we are not considering here the point at infinity
(see discussion after Theorem 4.6.3 ), at least one of them is
non-cyclotomic, say @xmath . Recall that @xmath , as @xmath .

Consider first the case where @xmath is also non-cyclotomic. We will
prove the that zero curvature equation of Theorem 4.6.3 holds by showing
that @xmath vanishes. As explained above, it contains two types of
terms. The ones of types 4 contain Poisson brackets between currents
@xmath and @xmath . According to Theorem 4.5.1 , these brackets are all
zeros. As @xmath and @xmath are two distinct elements of @xmath , the
cyclotomic orbits @xmath and @xmath are disjoint and thus @xmath is
regular at @xmath . We then have @xmath , as @xmath . We deduce from
this that @xmath and similarly @xmath , i.e. the terms of type 3 also
vanish. Thus @xmath , as required.

Suppose now that @xmath is the origin and hence a cyclotomic point.
Recall that @xmath and @xmath are the coefficients of @xmath in
respectively @xmath and @xmath . Thus, it is enough to show that there
is no term @xmath in @xmath to prove Theorem 4.6.3 in this case. Recall
that @xmath and @xmath contain powers of @xmath of the form @xmath with
@xmath . As @xmath for @xmath , the powers with @xmath cannot contribute
to the @xmath -term. Following the discussion at the end of paragraph
4.6.3 , the term @xmath of @xmath is thus composed of polynomials in the
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s times Poisson brackets of @xmath with @xmath or
terms of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath such that @xmath . According to Theorem 4.5.1 , the Poisson
brackets of such @xmath with @xmath vanish. Moreover, @xmath is
proportional to @xmath . Yet, @xmath and @xmath , hence @xmath .
Similarly @xmath . Thus, the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath vanishes,
as required. This ends the proof of Theorem 4.6.3 for different regular
zeros @xmath and @xmath .

###### Zero curvature equations at a non-cyclotomic regular zero

Let us now prove Theorem 4.6.3 for @xmath . We start with the case where
@xmath is a non-cyclotomic point. We then want to show that @xmath .

As in section 4.3 , we treat separately the Lie algebras of type B, C
and D and the Lie algebras of type A. Suppose first that @xmath is of
type B, C or D. In this case, the currents @xmath are equal to the
currents @xmath (see subsections 4.3.2 and 4.3.5 ) and the corresponding
Lax matrices @xmath are equal to the matrices @xmath . Thus, @xmath is
simply equal to @xmath (see paragraph 4.6.3 ). According to equation (
4.6.13 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath was defined in equation ( 4.6.12 ). To avoid cluttering the
argument in the present paragraph with too many technicalities, we
postpone the details of the computation of @xmath in appendix 4.B.1 . We
find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the function @xmath satisfies @xmath (cf. appendix 4.B.1 ). It
then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we deduce that @xmath , as required.

Suppose now that @xmath is of type A. In this case, the currents @xmath
are different from the currents @xmath and we therefore have to consider
@xmath rather than simply @xmath . According to the discussion at the
end of paragraph 4.6.3 , it contains polynomials in the @xmath ’s and
@xmath ’s, multiplied by either @xmath or @xmath . This last Poisson
bracket is given by equation ( 4.3.9 ) and is expressed in terms of the
@xmath ’s. As for type B, C and D, we compute the expression of @xmath
in appendix 4.B.1 . We find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some function @xmath such that @xmath .

Hence @xmath can be expressed in terms of the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s,
up to terms involving @xmath . The latter are always of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a constant. Moreover, one can check that for any such term,
there is also a similar one but with an opposite sign and @xmath and
@xmath interchanged. Using the symmetry property @xmath , one can then
conclude that these terms always vanish.

Therefore @xmath can be expressed in terms of the @xmath ’s and @xmath
’s. Using the first explicit expressions ( 4.3.3 ) for the current
@xmath and the corresponding expressions for the matrices @xmath , it
can be check directly that @xmath for the first few degrees @xmath .
Specifically, we have checked this for degrees @xmath and @xmath up to
7. In particular, we observed that we could not have chosen different
coefficients in equation ( 4.3.3 ) for these zero curvature equations to
hold (in the same way that these coefficients were uniquely fixed by
requiring the involution of @xmath and @xmath ). Based on these strong
observations, we conjecture that it holds for any @xmath .

###### Zero curvature equations at a cyclotomic regular zero

Finally, let us prove Theorem 4.6.3 for @xmath , which is a cyclotomic
point. Remember that @xmath and @xmath are extracted as the coefficient
of @xmath in the power series expansion of @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath is the smallest power appearing in these expansions. That is,
Theorem 4.6.3 for @xmath is equivalent to the statement that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us start with the case of a Lie algebra @xmath of type B, C or D,
for which @xmath . According to equation ( 4.6.13 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computation of @xmath is performed in appendix 4.B.2 . The final
result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a function symmetric under the exchange of @xmath and @xmath
. By virtue of this symmetry we find that the terms involving @xmath
disappear in @xmath , while the other terms vanish when integrated over
@xmath , as required.

Consider now @xmath of type A. The construction of the currents @xmath
depends on @xmath being inner or not (see subsections 4.4.4 , 4.4.5 and
4.4.7 ). If @xmath is inner, then the currents @xmath and @xmath are
equal to the currents @xmath and @xmath . In this case, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The expression for @xmath is given by equation ( 4.B.7 ) of appendix
4.B.2 . It has the same structure as in the case of types B, C and D:
the same arguments then apply and we conclude that the integration of
@xmath over @xmath vanishes.

Finally, consider @xmath of type A with @xmath not inner. In this case,
the currents @xmath and @xmath are constructed as polynomials of
respectively @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding structure of @xmath
is discussed at the end of paragraph 4.6.3 . In particular, @xmath is
composed of two types of terms:

-   @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s,

-   @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s.

We want to extract the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath . Recall that the
powers of @xmath appearing in @xmath and @xmath are of the form @xmath ,
with @xmath , and that the coefficients corresponding to @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath . In the two types of terms mentioned above, one can
check that the terms with @xmath will not contribute to the coefficient
of @xmath . More precisely, @xmath is composed of two types of terms:

-   @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s,

-   @xmath , multiplied by polynomials in the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s.

The Poisson brackets @xmath are given by equation ( 4.4.5 ). The
expression for @xmath is worked out in appendix 4.B.2 and reads

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a function invariant under the interchange of @xmath and
@xmath .

The rest of the argument follows closely that given in the
non-cyclotomic case. Specifically, the terms containing @xmath are seen
to vanish by virtue of this symmetry property. We can thus express
@xmath in terms of the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s only. One then can check
explicitly that this expression vanishes when integrated over @xmath ,
as required. We verified this for the first few degrees @xmath and
@xmath (up to 8) and different values of @xmath (from 2 to 6). We
therefore conjecture that this is also true for any @xmath and any
@xmath .

#### 4.7 Applications

In Chapter 3 , we gave a list of integrable @xmath -models which fit in
the framework of models with twist function. In this section, we apply
the methods developed in the previous sections to these particular
examples, analyse the results and compare them to some existing work in
the literature. These models were recently re-interpreted as particular
examples of so-called dihedral affine Gaudin models [ 84 ] . We will
explain in second part of this thesis how the framework of dihedral
affine Gaudin models is particularly suited to apply the methods of the
present chapter.

##### 4.7.1 Principal chiral model and its deformations

Let us start with the simplest integrable @xmath -model, the Principal
Chiral Model (PCM). The study of local charges of the PCM is already
well known and was treated in the reference [ 85 ] : these results were
the principal motivation and guideline for the present chapter. In
particular, one of the aims was to generalise the construction of [ 85 ]
to a wider class of models, among which are the integrable
two-parameters deformations of the PCM (dPCM). We shall discuss the
latter in this subsection.

The integrable structure of the dPCM was discussed in subsection 3.3.2 .
In this case, @xmath so that @xmath . Their Lax matrix and twist
function are given by equations ( 3.3.19 ) and ( 3.3.18 ) respectively.
In the language of this chapter, the regular zeros of these deformed
models are @xmath and @xmath . The evaluation of @xmath at these zeros
gives the fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.7.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which reduce to the light-cone currents @xmath in the undeformed case.

The local charges @xmath constructed in the present chapter are related
to the traces of powers of these fields. In the undeformed case, i.e.
for the PCM, these fields coincide with the fields @xmath used in
reference [ 85 ] to construct the local charges. Thus, the method
presented in this chapter gives back the results of [ 85 ] for the PCM,
as expected. In the deformed case, it generalises these results, while
keeping a similar structure in the construction: in particular, we
obtain two towers of local charges in involution, corresponding to the
two chiralities of the model, and the spin of these charges is still
related to the exponents of the affine Kac-Moody algebra @xmath , as it
was in the PCM case [ 85 ] .

The Hamiltonian and momentum of the deformed PCM are given by equations
( 3.3.20 ). One can check that these are related to the quadratic
charges @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

In particular, the Hamiltonian belongs to the algebra of local charges
in involution so that these charges are conserved (see also the
discussion at the end of subsection 4.5.1 ).

This observation also allows one to recover the temporal component
@xmath of the Lax pair of the model (see the paragraph below equation (
4.6.5 )). More precisely, the equation of motion of the dPCM can be
recast as the Lax equation ( 2.2.2 ), where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This zero curvature equation ( 2.2.2 ) is the first among a whole
hierarchy of integrable equations generated by the local charges @xmath
(cf. subsection 4.6.1 ).

In particular, this result was used in subsection 4.6.2 to show that the
local charges @xmath are in involution with the non-local charges
extracted from the monodromy of the Lax matrix @xmath (see Theorem 4.6.2
). In [ 85 ] , it was shown that the local charges of the undeformed PCM
Poisson commute with the non-local charges generating the classical
Yangian symmetry of the model. In the framework of this chapter, if we
consider the model on the real line @xmath , we expect these non-local
charges to be extracted from the expansion of (a gauge transformation
of) the monodromy around the pole @xmath of the twist function of the
PCM.

For the Yang-Baxter model ( @xmath and @xmath , see paragraph 3.3.1 ),
this Yangian symmetry gets deformed to a quantum affine symmetry [ 42 ]
(see also Chapter 5 of this thesis for the finite part of the deformed
symmetry). In particular, studying the monodromy around the poles @xmath
of the twist function of the Yang-Baxter model, one can extract a @xmath
-deformed affine Poisson-Hopf algebra @xmath . We have therefore proved
that this algebra of non-local charges is in involution with the algebra
of local charges consisting of the @xmath ’s.

As explained in the chapter 3 , the PCM and its deformation are defined
on a real Lie group @xmath , whose Lie algebra @xmath is a real form of
@xmath . This real form is characterised by a semi-linear involutive
automorphism @xmath . The Lax matrix ( 3.3.19 ) of these models
satisfies the reality condition ( 2.4.7 ). Moreover, the twist function
( 3.3.18 ) verifies the reality condition ( 2.4.10 ) and the regular
zeros of the model ( @xmath and @xmath ) are real. Thus, the discussion
of the subsection 4.5.3 applies to these models and the charges @xmath
are real (possibly up to a redefinition of some @xmath by a factor of
@xmath , depending on @xmath ).

##### 4.7.2 Bi-Yang-Baxter model

There exists another two-parameter deformation of the PCM, the
Bi-Yang-Baxter (BYB) @xmath -model [ 34 , 39 ] , which is the subject of
the Section 3.4 of this thesis. Here, we choose to treat the BYB model
in its gauge fixed formulation, as described in Subsection 3.4.5 . As we
saw, this formulation does not fit exactly within the framework of
models with twist function, but we will explain how one can overcome
this difficulty by further relaxing the general assumptions we made.
Even though this generalisation could have been done throughout the
entire chapter, we chose here to work in a more restricting but more
common framework for clarity and simplicity. In this regard, the present
subsection is also used to illustrate, a posteriori , how the methods
and results we found apply under the generalised conditions.

The Lax pair of the gauge-fixed BYB model takes the form ( 3.4.32 ). The
corresponding Lax matrix then reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.7.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some @xmath -valued fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
Hamiltonian analysis of the BYB model was done in Section 3.4 . In
particular, the Poisson bracket of the Lax matrix ( 4.7.3 ) was computed
in Subsection 3.4.5 . It takes the form of a Maillet bracket with twist
function @xmath defined in ( 3.4.36 ) but with the standard @xmath
-matrix @xmath replaced by the matrix @xmath defined in ( 3.4.35 ).

As @xmath is different from @xmath , we cannot directly apply the
results of this chapter. However, going through the details of the
proofs of these results for a non-constrained model with @xmath , we see
that the only properties of the matrix @xmath that we used are the CYBE
(for the zero curvature equations), the fact that @xmath is holomorphic
at pairs @xmath of distinct regular zeros and the asymptotic property (
4.3.2 ) near a regular zero @xmath . The matrix @xmath also satisfies
the CYBE, as explained in Subsection 3.4.5 . Moreover, one easily checks
that it also verifies the holomorphy condition and the asymptotic
property mentioned above. Thus, the results we found in this chapter
also apply to the BYB model.

This is a general observation: we can also treat the models where the
matrix @xmath is replaced by a matrix @xmath satisfying some similar
properties. More precisely, we require that @xmath

-   obeys the CYBE ( 2.3.3 ),

-   is holomorphic at @xmath with @xmath and @xmath different regular
    zeros in @xmath ,

-   verifies the asymptotic property ( 4.3.2 ) around non-cyclotomic
    regular zeros,

-   satisfies the equation ( 4.4.8 ) for @xmath around a cyclotomic
    regular zero, up to a term @xmath (which would not contribute to
    some @xmath power of @xmath in ( 4.4.9 )).

In particular, let us consider a matrix @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.7.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

like the matrix @xmath . Then @xmath is holomorphic for @xmath and
@xmath going to different regular zeros if @xmath is holomorphic at any
regular zero (this is for example the case for the BYB model). This
condition also ensures that the asymptotic property ( 4.3.2 ) is
satisfied by @xmath . In the same way the condition on @xmath is
satisfied by @xmath if @xmath .

Let us note, however, that these conditions do not allow to treat the
case where infinity is a regular zero in the same way that we did in
this chapter (subsections 4.2.2 and 4.4 ). This would require, among
other conditions, that the asymptotic properties ( 4.2.4 ) at infinity
are also satisfied by the matrix @xmath . One can check that a matrix
@xmath of the form ( 4.7.4 ) can never satisfy the second property of
equation ( 4.2.4 ).

As explained above, we can apply the construction of local charges in
involution to the BYB model. These local charges will be very similar to
the ones of the PCM and its deformations, described in the previous
subsection, so we shall not enter into much details here. Let us note
that these charges are related to traces of powers of @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are the fields appearing in the Lax matrix ( 4.7.3 ).
As in the case of the PCM (see previous subsection), the Hamiltonian and
the momentum of the BYB model are related to the quadratic charges
@xmath by the relation

  -- -------- -------- -- --
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

In particular, the local charges constructed above are all conserved.

##### 4.7.3 @xmath-coset models and their deformations

In this subsection, we discuss the construction of local charges in
involution for @xmath -coset models (and the deformations of @xmath
-coset models). These models were described in Subsections 3.2.2 and
3.3.3 . Their twist function and Lax matrix are given by equations (
3.2.27 ) and ( 3.2.26 ) for undeformed @xmath -coset and by ( 3.3.24 )
and ( 3.3.23 ) for the deformed @xmath -coset. Local charges in