## Introduction

In 1915, Einstein proposed his new theory of gravitational interaction,
general relativity. It drastically changed our understanding of space
and time. Although general relativity is now a centenarian theory, it
has passed an impressive list of tests and remains the starting point of
any discussion about gravity.

#### Successes and challenges of modern physics

When general relativity was formulated, it provided a consistent
explanation of the perihelion advance of Mercury. However, the theory
was sorely lacking in other tests, because at that time, measurements
could hardly reach the necessary precision. The first experimental
confirmation of light deflection was made by Eddington in 1919 [
Dyson:1920cwa ] , during a solar eclipse (although the reliability of
his experiment was later questioned). Forty years later, Pound and Rebka
used the unprecedented precision offered by Mössbauer effect to measure
the gravitational redshift of light falling from a twenty-two meter high
tower [ Pound:1960zz ] . This completed the three classical tests
proposed by Einstein for his theory in 1916 [ Einstein:1916vd ] . On top
of this, the discovery of pulsars during the sixties and seventies
provided an indirect check of gravitational wave emission, notably
through the study of the Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar [ Hulse:1974eb ] .
Since 1980, a number of experiments have been set up to check the local
predictions of general relativity, with increasing precision (and
increasing success). Finally, gravitational waves were detected directly
thanks to gravitational interferometers for the first time in 2015 [
Abbott:2016blz ] . This last observation was also fully consistent with
the existence of black holes, about which we will say more in a couple
of paragraphs.

This list of local tests is already impressive, but general relativity
has far more to offer in the framework of cosmology, that is physics at
lengthscales well above the size of a galaxy. In accordance with general
relativity predictions, the Universe was found to be in expansion by
Hubble in 1929 [ Hubble:1929ig ] . Because of this expansion, one
theoretically expects that the Universe was warmer and warmer when going
back in time. Thus, it is only after a given time in the History of
Universe that charged particles combined together to form atoms, thence
allowing light to travel freely. Going back even further in time, one is
also able to predict what the relative abundance of light elements, like
hydrogen or helium, should be nowadays. These two predictions were
verified experimentally; the first one through the observation of the
cosmic microwave background [ Penzias:1965wn ] , the second one through
spectral observation of quasar light notably [ Pettini:2012ph ] .

Let us discuss separately the discovery of the accelerated expansion of
the Universe in 1998 [ Perlmutter:1998np ] , through the survey of type
Ia supernovae. The energy component that drives this acceleration is
designated under the name of dark energy. At this stage, it should be
emphasized that it is not a flaw in the theory. The usual
Einstein-Hilbert action for general relativity reads

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar ¹ ¹ 1 Throughout this thesis, we will
use the notations of Wald [ Wald:1984rg ] , except for the distinction
between Latin and Greek indices; the signature of the metric is @xmath .
Unless specified otherwise, we work in units where the speed of light
@xmath and the reduced Planck constant @xmath are equal to unity. and
@xmath , @xmath being Newton’s constant. A cosmological constant term
@xmath may legitimately be added in the above action. Doing so leads to
a late phase of accelerated expansion, and the value of @xmath should be
specified according to observations. We will explain later why the
specific value of @xmath appears problematic. Note that, when refering
to general relativity, we generically mean the action ( 9 ) supplemented
with a cosmological constant term @xmath , that is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

As just evoked, general relativity accounts for most observations in the
Solar System and over cosmological distances. On the other hand, in a
laboratory, it becomes harder and harder to test gravity as lengthscale
decreases. Most accurate checks of the inverse square law, for instance,
cannot probe distances below a few tenths of micrometers (see e.g., [
Chiaverini:2002cb ] ). Below these scales, physics is described by the
standard model of particle physics. The framework of standard model is
quantum field theory, which combines quantum mechanics and special
relativity in a coherent way. From quantum mechanics, quantum field
theory keeps the Hilbert space structure. From special relativity, it
keeps the invariance under Poincaré group transformations. Then, each
species of particles is described by a fermionic or bosonic field, which
corresponds to an irreducible and unitary representation of the Poincaré
group. The dynamical structure and interactions between the different
species are then specified by a Lagrangian density. In a minimalist
fashion, this Lagrangian density may be written

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the above expression, @xmath denotes collectively the fermionic
fields (that is, quarks, leptons and their associated neutrinos). The
term @xmath stands for the sum of bosonic field strengths squared; these
include the electroweak bosons and the gluons. Additionally, one scalar
field is present in the model: the Higgs boson @xmath , with its
potential parametrized by @xmath and @xmath . Bosons interact with
fermions through the gauge covariant derivative @xmath . Finally, the
non-zero vacuum expectation value of the Higgs boson generates a mass
for fermions (other than neutrinos) through the Yukawa couplings @xmath
, and some bosons acquire a mass through the @xmath term.

The above compact form hides the fact that nineteen parameters must be
provided to fully specify the Lagrangian density. The standard model
does not make any prediction about their precise value, and they must
all be measured experimentally. This is however not a shortcoming. The
standard model as such is consistent, and it provides incredibly precise
predictions, notably concerning the value of the fine-structure constant
[ Mohr:2015ccw ] .

Despite all these successes, the standard model together with general
relativity cannot be the ultimate theory of nature. One can formulate
two types of objections. First, there exist phenomena that do not find
any explanation in the framework of the standard model, nor general
relativity. Such examples are the oscillation of neutrinos (implying
that they are massive), the apparent necessity for an exponential
expansion phase in the early Universe (known as inflation), as well as
the presence in the Universe of a matter species that interacts only
through gravitation (dark matter). Secondly, there are problems of
purely theoretical nature. These are not to be underestimated. Let us
draw a parallel with the situation of Newtonian gravity around 1910. The
observed advance of the perihelion of Mercury was deviating from the
predictions of Newton’s theory. This argument falls in the first
category, the unexplained phenomena. However, rather than this problem,
what lead Einstein to his theory of general relativity was mostly the
theoretical inconsistency of the instantaneous propagation of gravity,
i.e., a purely theoretical argument against Newton’s theory. Standard
model and general relativity face several of such problems nowadays.

First of all, general relativity is a non-renormalizable theory, as
opposed to the standard model. In other words, general relativity loses
its predictive power above the Planck energy scale, that is around
@xmath GeV. It is still a major challenge of modern physics to find a
quantum theory of the gravitational interaction, that would be
predictive at all energy scales. However, in principle, we do not need
to know the whole high-energy structure of the theory to treat lower
energy scales. In this thesis, we will always consider gravitational
interaction as a classical process.

Aside of this question are the so-called naturalness problems. In
quantum field theory, all parameters are the sum of a fixed ‘‘bare’’
value and of quantum corrections, under the form of a series expansion
in powers of the coupling constants. This series is generated by
creation and annihilation of virtual particles. Naturalness problems
occur when the measured value of the parameter is much smaller than the
quantum corrections. This situation is unnatural because it requires a
fine adjustment between the bare value and the quantum corrections, so
that they leave a very small overall contribution. The two main
quantities ² ² 2 Another fine-tuning issue is the so-called strong CP
problem. It corresponds to the absence in the standard model of a
specific gluon-gluon interaction allowed by the symmetries. The
dimensionless quantity that parametrizes this interaction is constrained
by experiment to be smaller than @xmath . that exhibit this fine-tuning
problem are the cosmological constant @xmath and the Higgs boson mass
@xmath . Assuming an ultraviolet cutoff @xmath for the standard model,
the leading order ³ ³ 3 From a slightly different viewpoint, one can
allow for a fine tuning between the bare value and the leading-order
correction. Indeed, these two quantities (bare value and first
correction) are actually divergent. One cancels out these two
infinities, so why not canceling out two (finite) large numbers?
However, such a tuning is completely spoiled by the
next-to-leading-order correction, and further ones. Thus, the quantum
corrections one would need to cancel depend heavily on the ultraviolet
completion of the theory, which we do not know. This problem is known as
radiative instability [ Kaloper:2014dqa ] . corrections to the Higgs
boson mass @xmath are of order @xmath [ tHooft:1979rat ] . The Higgs
boson mass itself is @xmath GeV [ Aad:2012tfa , Chatrchyan:2012xdj ] .
The Yukawa couplings @xmath being of order unity, the situation may be
considered natural if @xmath GeV (not too large with respect to @xmath
). If @xmath GeV, characteristic scale of grand unified theories, the
bare mass must be tuned with the quantum corrections at a level of one
part in @xmath . It is even worse if the cutoff of the standard model is
assumed to be at Planck scale, around @xmath GeV. This fine tuning was
one of the reasons to introduce supersymmetry, and to expect it to show
up around @xmath GeV. However, the Large Hadron Collider now probes
these energy scales, and shows no sign of new physics. Concerning the
cosmological constant, the situation is much worse. Observationally, it
is estimated to be @xmath GeV @xmath . Assuming a sharp cutoff @xmath at
Planck scale, one expects quantum corrections of order @xmath GeV @xmath
. In other words, if the bare value of the cosmological constant was
deviating of more than one part in @xmath of the quantum corrections,
the Universe would behave entirely differently. Actually, a more
involved computation, using dimensional regularization rather than a
sharp cutoff, gives @xmath GeV @xmath [ Martin:2012bt ] . This still
leaves a fine tuning of fifty-five orders of magnitude. Contrary to the
Higgs boson mass, one cannot hope to cure the problem by a breakdown of
the theory at a relatively low energy scale. Indeed, through the naive
cutoff approach, the theory should already fail at @xmath meV for the
value of @xmath to be natural. The cosmological constant problem is
further reinforced by considering phase transitions in the early
Universe, like electroweak or quantum chromodynamics phase transitions.
These will de-tune the value of the cosmological constant by amounts of
similar magnitude as the quantum corrections @xmath . The problem seems
inextricable in the framework of general relativity together with the
standard model.

#### Infrared modifications of gravity

The unnatural magnitude of the cosmological constant is probably the
most vivid reason for trying to modify our theory of gravity over large
distances. However, scientists did not wait for this discovery to
explore alternative theories of gravity, pushed sometimes only by
theoretical curiosity. It is certainly beyond the scope of this thesis
to review extensively all modifications of gravity that were proposed.
We will focus on scalar-tensor theories, characterized by a scalar
degree of freedom that is non-minimally coupled to the metric, and say a
few words about higher-dimensional models as well as massive gravity
(insofar as they are related to scalar-tensor theories).

In 1961, Brans and Dicke proposed that the Newton constant @xmath is
actually not a constant and may vary with spacetime location, thus
behaving as a scalar field [ Brans:1961sx ] . One may define a scalar
field @xmath , where @xmath is a bare Newton constant, a priori
different from the one measured in Cavendish experiments (defined this
way, @xmath has no mass dimension). This scalar field is given some
dynamics through a kinetic term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is assumed to be a (dimensionless) constant. This action
describes the gravitational sector, and is supplemented by a matter
action, with matter fields minimally coupled to the metric. It can
accommodate all general relativistic solutions, by simply assuming that
@xmath is a constant. Therefore, from experiment, one can only put
bounds on the @xmath parameter; the most constraining bound on @xmath
comes from the Shapiro delay measured by the Cassini spacecraft [
Alsing:2011er ] , and yields @xmath (general relativity being restored
in the large @xmath limit).

A quite straightforward extension of Brans-Dicke theory, often
designated as scalar-tensor theories — though all other theories we will
encounter in this thesis may also be called scalar-tensor theories — was
proposed by Wagoner in 1970 [ Wagoner:1970vr ] . In comparison with
Brans-Dicke theory, Eq. ( 12 ), the coupling @xmath is now allowed to
depend on the scalar field @xmath , and a potential term @xmath is
added:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

An arbitrary function of @xmath in front of the Ricci scalar would not
make the action more generic, because of possible field redefinitions.
At this point, one can wonder what is the most general scalar-tensor
theory that can legitimately be written. To answer this question, let us
make a little detour through purely metric theories. In this framework,
Lovelock proved an essential result in 1971 [ Lovelock:1971yv ] . He
established that, in four dimensions, the action of general relativity,
Eq. ( 10 ), is the only one that generates divergence-free second-order
field equations ⁴ ⁴ 4 Lovelock actually worked directly with the field
equations, but he also proved that the rank-2 tensors he obtained
correspond to Lagrangian densities; in four dimensions, the only
relevant densities are a cosmological constant, the Ricci scalar and the
Gauss-Bonnet invariant, which is a mere boundary term. Similar results
were obtained by Cartan, Weyl and Vermeil long ago, but under slightly
more restrictive assumptions (see the bibliography of Ref. [
Lovelock:1971yv ] for detailed references). . The point of requiring
second-order field equations is to avoid a type of instability called
Ostrogradski ghost. Generically, higher than second-order field
equations imply that the canonical momentum of some degree of freedom
contributes linearly to the Hamiltonian density of the theory. This is
the case whenever the Lagrangian satisfies a condition called
non-degeneracy [ Woodard:2006nt ] . As soon as the Ostrogradski degree
of freedom is coupled to any other, the vacuum of the theory becomes
unstable. Indeed, higher and higher energy modes of the coupled degree
of freedom will be populated, while the Ostrogradski degree of freedom
will compensate with an increasingly lower negative energy.

To avoid the presence of this unphysical degree of freedom (called a
ghost), one can either impose second-order field equations, or
degeneracy of the Lagrangian. In the framework of scalar-tensor
theories, the first option was analyzed by Horndeski in 1974. Following
the work of Lovelock for purely metric theories, he determined the most
general theory involving a metric and a scalar field, requiring
divergence-free second-order field equations [ Horndeski:1974wa ] . His
results remained unsung for thirty years. They were rediscovered
independently in the past decade [ Nicolis:2008in , Deffayet:2009wt ,
Deffayet:2009mn , Deffayet:2011gz ] , motivated this time by the large
cosmological constant problem ⁵ ⁵ 5 Generalized vector theories were
also developed, already by Horndeski [ Horndeski:1976gi ] , and more
recently (see for example [ Deffayet:2010zh , Heisenberg:2014rta ,
Tasinato:2014eka ] ). . This is the reason why Horndeski theory is also
known by the name of Generalized Galileons. The two theories were proven
to be equivalent by Kobayashi et al. in [ Kobayashi:2011nu ] .
Explicitly, Horndeski theory may be labeled in terms of four arbitrary
functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the scalar @xmath and
the kinetic density @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (17)
                          (18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where a subscript @xmath stands for the derivative with respect to
@xmath , @xmath is the Einstein tensor, and @xmath . Usual scalar-tensor
theories, in the fashion of Eq. ( 13 ), are of course a subclass of the
Horndeski action. They correspond to vanishing @xmath and @xmath , and
to @xmath , @xmath .

As mentioned in the previous paragraph, Horndeski theory is still not
the most generic theory one may write in order to avoid the presence of
an Ostrogradski ghost. It is sometimes possible to allow for higher than
second-order field equations, as long as the dynamical structure of the
Lagrangian exhibits a degeneracy. A natural path that leads to consider
healthy degenerate theories is to consider the so-called disformal
transformations (first introduced by Bekenstein [ Bekenstein:1992pj ] ).
They consist in a field redefinition of the metric:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

with some arbitrary functions @xmath and @xmath (when @xmath , it
reduces to a conformal transformation). Reference [ Bettoni:2013diz ]
first introduced these transformations in the framework of Horndeski
theories, but still trying to avoid higher-order field equations.
Indeed, in general, writing the Horndeski action @xmath in terms of
@xmath generates higher-order derivatives (since @xmath already contains
derivatives of @xmath ). Reference [ Zumalacarregui:2013pma ] was the
first to show that, although the field equations associated with @xmath
are of higher order, the resulting theory might be healthy ⁶ ⁶ 6 As long
as the disformal transformation ( 19 ) is invertible, pure scalar-tensor
theories formulated in terms of @xmath and @xmath are equivalent.
However, the presence of matter makes the two formulations different
according to whether it is minimally coupled to @xmath or @xmath . .
This reference proved that, applying an arbitrary disformal
transformation on the Einstein-Hilbert action, Eq. ( 9 ), the field
equations can still be recast in a form that involves no higher than
second-order time derivatives.

Applying the disformal transformation ( 19 ) to the Lagrangians @xmath
and @xmath leaves them in the same class. However, a purely disformal
transformation depending on @xmath only — i.e., with @xmath and @xmath —
applied on @xmath and @xmath separately yields the following terms [
Gleyzes:2014dya , Gleyzes:2014qga ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Again, we use the notation of Wald [ Wald:1984rg ] for @xmath (in
particular, @xmath ). One may consider free @xmath and @xmath functions,
and combine the above terms with the Horndeski ones. These new terms
were first proposed in [ Gleyzes:2014dya ] , and are known as beyond
Horndeski (or Gleyzes-Langlois-Piazza-Vernizzi) terms. Generically, a
couple of quartic functions @xmath and @xmath can be mapped back to a
pure Horndeski model @xmath . This is also true for a couple of quintic
functions @xmath and @xmath : they can in general be mapped to a pure
quintic model @xmath [ Gleyzes:2014dya , Gleyzes:2014qga ] . However, if
both @xmath and @xmath are present, they cannot be mapped to a pure
Horndeski model.

An important work [ Gleyzes:2014dya , Gleyzes:2014qga , Lin:2014jga ,
Deffayet:2015qwa , Langlois:2015cwa , Langlois:2015skt , Achour:2016rkg
, BenAchour:2016fzp , Crisostomi:2016tcp , Crisostomi:2016czh ] was
carried out to explore the Hamiltonian structure of the beyond Horndeski
terms, Eqs. ( 20 )-( 21 ), together with standard Horndeski ones, Eq. (
14 ). The presence or absence of the quadratic and cubic terms @xmath
and @xmath , does not matter for this analysis. Then, any combination of
@xmath and @xmath (purely quartic model), or @xmath and @xmath (purely
quintic model), or else @xmath and @xmath (purely beyond Horndeski
model) leads to a degenerate — and thus healthy — model. Coherently,
Ref. [ Gleyzes:2014qga ] also showed that, if a beyond Horndeski model
can be disformally related to a Horndeski one, then the field equations
may be written in a way that contains no more than second order time
derivatives. On the contrary, the simultaneous presence of @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath generically leads to a non-degenerate
Lagrangian with a deadly Ostrogradski degree of freedom. In the rest of
this thesis, we will refer to the healthy subset of the sum of
Lagrangians ( 15 )–( 18 ) and ( 20 )-( 21 ) as Horndeksi and beyond
theory. The corresponding action will be noted @xmath .

There actually exists an even larger framework of degenerate
scalar-tensor theories, which encompasses Horndeski and beyond theory.
These models can be sorted by powers of the second derivatives of the
scalar field, @xmath . They go by the name of Degenerate Higher-Order
Scalar-Tensor (DHOST) theories, or extended scalar-tensor theories [
Langlois:2015cwa , Langlois:2015skt , Achour:2016rkg , BenAchour:2016fzp
, Crisostomi:2016tcp , Crisostomi:2016czh ] . They were fully
investigated up to cubic order. A priori nothing forbids an arbitrary
high order [ Crisostomi:2016czh ] . On the other hand, Ref. [
Langlois:2017mxy ] has found that only the subclass of degenerate
higher-order theories that are in relation with Horndeski theory through
a disformal transformation, Eq. ( 19 ), exhibits a healthy Newtonian
limit. For concreteness and simplicity, in this thesis, we will focus on
the subclass of Horndeski and beyond theory as defined above. In other
words, we will not consider degenerate higher-order theories, in
particular models that can be obtained from Horndeski and beyond theory
through a conformal transformation @xmath . Horndeski and beyond theory
should capture the essential features of the healthy degenerate
higher-order theories (some of these features being specific to beyond
Horndeski models). Besides, in the case where the scalar field is a dark
energy candidate, recent experiments ruled out the degenerate
higher-order theories that are of higher order than quadratic in @xmath
, as we will see in detail in Part III .

Let us also emphasize that the above parametrization for Horndeski and
beyond theory is only a choice among others. Appendix A references other
existing parametrizations, with the corresponding dictionary to switch
from one to the other. Most of the terms (scalar or metric) in the above
Lagrangian densities are not renormalizable. This is however not a
problem since the motivation here is not to propose a renormalizable
theory of gravity. Another objection comes from the effective field
theory point of view. In such an approach, all terms that are not
forbidden by the symmetries of the theory must be present; the
non-renormalizable ones are sorted by inverse powers of the ultraviolet
cutoff scale of the theory; they come with dimensionless coefficients
that are assumed to be natural (in the sense explained above).
Therefore, from this point of view, it is hard to justify considering
specific terms only among the Horndeski and beyond class. One should
keep this caveat in mind, especially in Part III , where a special
relation between @xmath and @xmath is assumed in order to pass
gravitational wave tests.

As mentioned above, there exist many other modified theories of gravity.
Among these, let us cite higher-dimensional models and massive gravity
because they often exhibit a scalar-tensor limit. This is the case for
instance of the Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati model [ Dvali:2000hr ] . This
model assumes that matter is located on a four-dimensional brane, inside
a five-dimensional bulk spacetime. Gravity is allowed to “leak” in the
fifth dimension. Expanding the five-dimensional metric and integrating
out the fifth dimension, one can rearrange the perturbations into a
tensorial, a vector and a scalar degrees of freedom (all in four
dimensions). In a certain limit, the degrees of freedom decouple from
each other; in this decoupling limit, a cubic interaction term is left
over in the scalar sector. The associated action corresponds to @xmath
and @xmath in Horndeski notation, Eq. ( 14 ). More details are given in
Sec. 4.3 . Massive gravity constitutes another example. Indeed, a
massive spin-2 field generically has six degrees of freedom, one of them
being a ghost. It is only very recently that (non-linear) theories
without ghosts were constructed [ deRham:2010ik , deRham:2010kj ,
Hassan:2011hr , Hassan:2011ea ] . These healthy theories again exhibit a
structure with a tensorial degree of freedom, a vector and a scalar one.
Again, one can define a limit in which the scalar mode decouples from
the others, leaving effectively a scalar-tensor theory.

#### Black holes

Generalized Galileon theory, the Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati model or
massive bi-gravity were all studied intensively for cosmological
reasons, and their potential ability to generate a more natural
accelerated expansion of the Universe. This corresponds to an extremely
weak gravity regime. On the other hand, these theories were much less
studied on local scales, in the intermediate and strong gravity regimes.
Before exposing the purposes of this thesis, let us recall briefly some
concepts and observations from the strongest gravity regime we have
access to, that is black holes.

The simplest way to characterize a black hole is probably to define it
as a region of spacetime where the pull of gravity is so strong that
neither matter nor radiation can escape ⁷ ⁷ 7 In general relativity, a
more mathematically accurate definition can be given, namely a region
that is not in the causal past of the future null infinity [ Wald:1984rg
] . . The concept is not entirely specific to general relativity, and
had already been evoked by 18th and 19th century scientists. In 1916,
Schwarzschild proposed his famous solution, though it was not
interpreted as a black hole at the time. It was not before the late
fifties that it was given this interpretation. Kerr found the exact
solution for a black hole in rotation in 1963 [ Kerr:1963ud ] . It was
then conjectured that very few solutions exist for steady-state black
holes. Some theorems were established, proving that in general
relativity, a stationary black hole is entirely defined upon
specification of its mass, electric charge and angular momentum [
Israel:1967wq , Carter:1971zc , Robinson:1975bv ] . These results and
subsequent are generically designated by the name of no-hair theorem, or
more exactly no-hair theorems, since there exist many with specific
hypotheses. We will review these theorems in more detail in Chapter 1 .
Around the same time, other important results were established for black
holes. Among these are singularity theorems, which prove that the
central singularity at the center of a black hole is not a mere symmetry
artifact, but is actually always present [ Penrose:1964wq ,
Hawking:1969sw ] . Black hole thermodynamics also established
thermodynamical laws for black holes and lead to the notion of thermal
Hawking radiation [ Bardeen:1973gs , Hawking:1974rv ] . There remain
nowadays open questions about black holes, such as the information loss
paradox. Without a full theory of quantum gravity, it will probably be
difficult to bring a definitive answer to these questions.

In general relativity, black holes are believed to be mostly of two
types: stellar mass black holes and supermassive black holes. Stellar
mass ones are formed by the collapse of sufficiently heavy stars.
Supermassive ones have masses of the order of millions of solar masses,
and their formation process is more uncertain (they likely form through
absorbing stars or merging with other black holes). Black holes are
essentially difficult to observe. However, the accretion of matter by
black holes is accompanied by electromagnetic radiation. The emission of
X-rays during an accretion process is what lead to propose Cygnus X-1 as
the first black hole ever detected in 1972 [ Webster:1972bsw ] . On the
other hand, the motion of stars near Sagittarius A @xmath , at the
galactic center of Milky Way, shows that 4.3 million solar masses are
compacted in a sphere of radius smaller than @xmath light years [
Gillessen:2008qv ] . This does not prove the existence of supermassive
black holes, but is a strong hint. The Event Horizon Telescope goal is
to observe the hot accretion disk that should surround Sagittarius A
@xmath . The results are expected by the end of the year 2018. Finally,
the most direct proof of the existence of black holes was offered by the
detection of gravitational waves in 2015 [ Abbott:2016blz ] (and several
times since). Just as we detect light, which is the dynamical sector of
electromagnetism, we can now detect the dynamical part of gravity. In
principle, any massive body creates gravitational waves while moving;
but only the fusion of two black holes, or neutron stars, releases
enough energy to be detectable by actual gravitational interferometers.
So far, the signals that were detected fit the theoretical expectations.
In the forthcoming years, an avalanche of data is going to be available
through earth-based interferometers, allowing us to test general
relativity in the strongest energy regime available (where effective
field theory invites us to expect deviations if there are some).
Finally, the launch of the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) is
expected in 2034. This experiment will notably try to observe the fusion
of supermassive black holes.

#### Structure of the thesis

This thesis gathers the knowledge and results collected during the time
of my PhD. For the reader’s convenience, I summarize here the structure
of the thesis. It is divided in three parts, each of them subdivided in
several chapters. The overall aim of the thesis is the study of compact
objects in Horndeski and beyond theory.

The first part is devoted to no-hair theorems, both in metric and
scalar-tensor theories. Chapter 1 reviews the powerful no-hair theorems
that exist in general relativity, each time with their precise
assumptions. It also discusses their extension to scalar-tensor theories
in the fashion of the action ( 13 ), and clarifies the notion of hair
for compact objects. Then, Chapter 2 is devoted to a black hole no-hair
theorem that was proposed a few years ago in the framework of Horndeski
theory. We further detail its assumptions and potential extensions. In
the same spirit, we show in Chapter 3 that an analogue theorem can be
proven to hold in the case of stars rather than black holes. In other
words, under very similar assumptions, the only solutions allowed for
stars are the general relativistic configurations.

Of course, these no-hair results hold only under certain hypotheses,
that might prove physically relevant or not. It is the aim of Part II to
investigate all possible ways to circumvent the theorem. We show that
there actually exist many successful ways to build black hole or star
solutions with non-trivial scalar hair. In Chapter 4 , we justify
through cosmology the introduction of time dependence for the scalar
field while keeping a static metric. This way, we detail the
construction of black holes with scalar hair in cubic and quartic
Horndeski sectors; the former sector does not have reflection symmetry
for the scalar field, while the latter does. Chapter 5 is devoted to
isolated objects, with a static scalar field and an asymptotically flat
geometry (thus closer to the target of the initial no-hair theorem).
Still, we exhibit some new classes of black hole solutions in this
context. Some of them stem from non-analytic Lagrangians, but we also
discuss the cause of a linear coupling between the scalar field and the
Gauss-Bonnet invariant. Chapters 4 and 5 additionally summarize what has
been done to extend these non-trivial black hole solutions to the case
of stars, and the potential deviations one can expect from general
relativity in the case of neutron stars.

Part III is further built on the non-trivial solutions presented in Part
II . It regroups results about stability of these solutions and
propagation of gravitational waves. Although these two concepts may
appear disjoint, they rely on the same calculations, namely linear
perturbations of the background solution. In Chapter 6 , we expose the
formalism of linear perturbations, and use the effective metrics in
which matter, gravitational and scalar perturbations propagate to
establish stability criteria. We discuss the conclusions that can be
drawn from the bounded or not character of the quadratic Hamiltonian,
notably showing that an unbounded from below Hamiltonian does not
necessarily imply an instability. Last, Chapter 7 is also based on the
effective metrics mentioned above, but with in mind the speed of
propagation of gravitational waves. We show that, starting from the
solutions presented in Part II , it is easy to construct solutions where
gravitational waves propagate at the same speed as light; this remains
true even in highly curved backgrounds, like the neighborhood of a black
hole.

The thesis ends with a summary of the main results, and an outlook for
further investigations in the field. This thesis gave rise to the
publications listed herinbelow:

-   E. Babichev, C. Charmousis, G. Esposito-Farèse and A. Lehébel,
    Hamiltonian vs stability and application to Horndeski theory

-   E. Babichev, C. Charmousis, G. Esposito-Farèse and A. Lehébel,
    Stability of Black Holes and the Speed of Gravitational Waves within
    Self-Tuning Cosmological Models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120  (2018) 241101

-   A. Lehébel, E. Babichev and C. Charmousis, A no-hair theorem for
    stars in Horndeski theories, JCAP 1707  (2017) 037

-   E. Babichev, C. Charmousis and A. Lehébel, Asymptotically flat black
    holes in Horndeski theory and beyond, JCAP 1707  (2017) 037

-   E. Babichev, C. Charmousis, A. Lehébel and T. Moskalets, Black holes
    in a cubic Galileon universe, JCAP 1609  (2016) 011

-   E. Babichev, C. Charmousis and A. Lehébel, Black holes and stars in
    Horndeski theory, Class. Quant. Grav. 33  (2016) 154002

## Part I No-hair theorems

### Chapter 1 The hair of black holes

The aim of this first chapter is to lay the foundations of the
discussion we will pursue in this thesis. As mentioned in the
introduction, the idea that “black holes have no hair” dates back from
the late sixties. Many and various results have been established in this
direction, as well as counter-examples. Instead of starting straight
away with Horndeski theory and its extensions, it will be useful to
review the history of what was achieved earlier, with a particular
accent on scalar-tensor theories. We start this chapter with a reminder
of some useful definitions. Then, we go through the variety of no-hair
theorems, underlining their assumptions and briefly indicating possible
ways out.

#### 1.1 Some definitions

The statements we will make on black holes require the definition of
some geometrical concepts. We will follow the definitions given in Wald
[ Wald:1984rg ] . First of all, the no-hair theorems often refer to the
end point of gravitational collapse, when the black hole is quiescent.
This may be encoded in the notion of a stationary spacetime. Consider a
spacetime manifold @xmath equipped with a metric @xmath . Suppose there
exists a one-parameter group of isometries @xmath — that is, for all
@xmath , @xmath is a diffeomorphism such that the pullback of @xmath ,
@xmath , is equal to @xmath . At any point of spacetime, a vector @xmath
might be associated to @xmath , that locally generates the orbits of
this group. Suppose additionally that this vector is everywhere
timelike, @xmath . Then, @xmath is called stationary. Alternatively, one
can define a stationary spacetime as possessing a timelike Killing
vector field. A static spacetime is a stationary spacetime which
possesses a hypersurface @xmath that is orthogonal to the orbits of the
group of isometries. @xmath can be carried over through @xmath , and as
a consequence spacetime is foliated by hypersurfaces orthogonal to the
orbits. Staticity is thus a stronger requirement than stationarity.

In addition, compact astrophysical objects are usually more or less
spherical. Therefore, it will be useful, as an approximation, to define
spherically symmetric spacetimes. A spacetime is said to be spherically
symmetric if the group of its isometries contains SO(3) as a subgroup.
The orbits of this subgroup define 2-spheres that can be sorted
according to their area @xmath , and thus to their areal radius @xmath
defined through @xmath . For a spacetime that is both static and
spherically symmetric, one can always construct coordinates in which the
metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will use the above metric often throughout this thesis. More
realistic physical systems, in particular rotating ones, can often be
considered axisymmetric . An axisymmetric spacetime is one which
possesses a one-parameter group of isometries @xmath with closed
spacelike curves. An axisymmetric and stationary spacetime is called so
only if it is both axisymmetric and stationary, and if the action of the
two isometries commute.

Another geometrical notion that is very useful in the context of no-hair
theorems is the notion of asymptotic flatness. In usual general
relativity, the concept of asymptotically flat spacetime has been given
a more and more elaborate definition [ Penrose:1962ij , Penrose:1965am ,
Geroch:1972up , Ashtekar:1978zz , 1980grg2.conf...37A ] . The price to
pay for a coordinate-independent definition is a refinement of
technicalities. Furthermore, these definitions, beyond their complexity,
were designed for general relativity and do not obviously extend to
scalar-tensor theories. For our purposes, it will be enough to stick
with a simple definition of asymptotic flatness, in the preferred system
of coordinates associated with spherical symmetry. We will call a
spacetime with line-element ( 1.1 ) asymptotically flat if ¹ ¹ 1 In our
notations, @xmath means that there exists a bounded function @xmath
defined on a neighborhood of @xmath such that @xmath . Therefore, for
instance, @xmath means that @xmath decays at most like @xmath , but can
decay faster.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

A slightly more generic definition, for a non-spherically symmetric
spacetime, is to require that there exists a coordinate system @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . We will call a spacetime pseudostationary when it is
stationary “far enough”, i.e., if there exists a Killing vector field
that is timelike when @xmath (or more precisely, close to the future and
past null infinites, @xmath and @xmath ). This is the case of the usual
vector @xmath of Kerr solution — in the form given in Eq. ( 5.48 ) for
instance — which is a timelike Killing vector only outside of an oblate
region. Finally, one can define the concept of a black hole in an
asymptotically flat spacetime (again, as a region that does not lie in
the past of the future null infinity, @xmath ). The topological boundary
of this region is called the event horizon . These notions may be
extended to spacetimes with suitable asymptotic properties (such as open
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker spacetimes).

Additional physical input is in general required in the proof of no-hair
theorems. It often comes under the form of so-called energy conditions.
There exist several of them; we will present the weak and strong energy
conditions. It should be noted that the weak energy condition does not
imply the strong one. The weak energy condition is the assumption that
the energy density associated to any field will be seen as positive by
any observer. If the field in question is described by an
energy-momentum tensor @xmath , it means that, for any 4-velocity @xmath
(therefore timelike),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The strong energy condition is the assumption that, for any 4-velocity
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In general relativity, this last condition may be given the meaning that
timelike geodesic congruences are convergent, or that “matter must
gravitate towards matter” [ Curiel:2014zba ] . These energy conditions
are hypotheses, assumed to hold for physically relevant types of matter.
We will now see how they articulate with the various concepts defined in
this section. Section 1.2 reviews a family of theorems established about
(electro-)vacuum black holes in general relativity. Then, in Sec. 1.3 ,
no-hair theorems for scalar-tensor theories are presented.

#### 1.2 The hair of vacuum black holes in general relativity

Israel first proved a theorem for static vacuum solutions in general
relativity [ Israel:1967wq ] (the vacuum assumption means that the only
non-trivial field is the metric, all matter fields are assumed to
vanish). He additionally assumed asymptotic flatness, regularity of the
Riemann tensor squared @xmath , a spherical topology for the constant
redshift surfaces (other plausible geometries include the toroidal one)
and a regularity property called non-degeneracy for the horizon. Under
these assumptions, the only solution is the Schwarzschild geometry. The
important point is that spherical symmetry is not assumed. Carter proved
a similar theorem, assuming pseudostationarity and axisymmetry instead
of staticity [ Carter:1971zc ] . In this case, he found only discrete
families of solutions, with either one or two free parameters. Robinson
further showed that only the Kerr family is suitable [ Robinson:1975bv ]
. Kerr black holes are fully characterized by a mass parameter @xmath
and a rotation parameter @xmath , @xmath being the angular momentum of
the black hole. These results were strengthened by the findings of
Hawking [ Hawking:1971vc ] . The weak energy condition, Eq. ( 1.5 ),
allows to get rid of the assumption of axisymmetry, and implies that the
spatial sections of the event horizon must have the topology of a
2-sphere (excluding for instance toroidal geometries). These last
results go by the name of rigidity theorem.

If, instead of assuming vacuum solutions, one allows the electromagnetic
field to be non-trivial, one can prove similar results. The only
physically viable solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell theory are inside
the Kerr-Newman family (see [ Chrusciel:2012jk ] for a review). In this
case, the solutions are characterized by a third free parameter, the
electric charge of the black hole @xmath .

This sequence of theorems lead to a conjecture: it is likely that,
during a gravitational collapse that forms a black hole, all matter will
either fall into the black hole or be expelled away. If this is true,
the above theorems will apply. It is thus reasonable to assume that any
quiescent black hole is in the Kerr-Newman family. However, this
intuition might prove wrong: what if another field, which is not the
metric nor the electromagnetic field, can develop a non-trivial
structure during gravitational collapse, which survives in the
equilibrium state? Such a structure would be what we call hair . We will
distinguish between primary and secondary hair. We call primary hair
non-trivial profiles described by an additional free parameter (on top
of mass, angular momentum and possibly electric charge). This new
parameter may take values either in a discrete or a continuous set. The
first example of black holes with primary hair was found in the context
of Einstein-Yang-Mills theory [ Volkov:1989fi ] . When a solution
differs from the Kerr-Newman ones because an additional field has a
non-trivial structure, but at the same time it is still described in
terms of mass, angular momentum and electric charge, we say this
solution exhibits secondary hair. Note that there may exist very soft
hair: solutions for which the geometry is identical to the Kerr-Newman
metric, while some field does not vanish. This is the case of stealth
solutions, that we will describe in Chapter 4 . To know whether
realistic solutions with hair exist in some given theory, a first step
is to find an explicit solution of the field equations. Then, if these
solutions are meant to represent the endpoint of gravitational collapse,
it is important to check their stability, and — often numerically —
their formation through the collapse of a star.

#### 1.3 No scalar hair theorems

As we just saw, the electromagnetic field can acquire a non-trivial
structure in a stationary black hole spacetime. One may legitimately
wonder whether this is true also for other fields; if some scalar field
is allowed not to vanish, do we obtain a more general class of black
holes, parametrized by a scalar charge in addition to Kerr-Newman
parameters? There actually exist a family of theorems proving that
scalar fields, as opposed to the electromagnetic field, must be in a
trivial configuration for quiescent black holes. We review these
theorems in this section, together with some paths to circumvent them.
For more details on the hair of black holes in scalar-tensor theories,
the reader may report to [ Herdeiro:2015waa , Sotiriou:2015pka ] .
Reference [ Volkov:2016ehx ] also reviews solutions with Yang-Mills
fields and in massive gravity.

##### 1.3.1 Bekenstein’s theorem and its extensions

A first no-hair theorem was obtained for canonical scalar fields without
potential in [ Penney:1968zz , Chase ] . Then, Bekenstein proposed a
theorem that forbids scalar hair [ Bekenstein:1972ny ] , using a
procedure that was declined in many variants, and lead to several
extensions [ Bekenstein:1971hc , Bekenstein:1972ky ] . Let us give this
theorem and go through its relatively short proof, to understand where
the various assumptions play their role. Bekenstein’s theorem deals with
the following canonical theory:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this action, @xmath is chosen to have no mass dimension. It is
assumed that:

1.  spacetime is pseudostationary and the scalar field inherits the
    symmetries of spacetime,

2.  spacetime is asymptotically flat, and the scalar field decays at
    least as fast as @xmath at spatial infinity (in adapted
    coordinates),

3.  the scalar field is regular ( @xmath ) on the horizon,

4.  the potential obeys @xmath , and the weak energy condition holds for
    the scalar energy-momentum tensor ² ² 2 To avoid confusion with the
    radial derivative that we will usually note with a prime, we write
    @xmath for the derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath . .

Under these conditions, the scalar field is necessarily in a trivial
configuration, and the only solutions belong to the Kerr family. Before
giving the proof, let us note that a no-hair theorem exists for
Horndeski and beyond theory; as we will see in Chapter 2 , the structure
of the assumptions is similar (although they are stronger, which makes
the latter theorem weaker). In passing, the condition @xmath is
satisfied for instance in the case of a massive potential @xmath .

The proof goes as follows. Thanks to the weak energy condition,
Hawking’s rigidity theorem applies, and spacetime is axisymmetric. Thus,
there exist a Killing vector @xmath associated to stationarity, and
another one @xmath associated to axisymmetry. The scalar field equation
for the action ( 1.7 ) reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us integrate this equation, multiplied by @xmath , over a 4-volume
@xmath (to better picture @xmath , the reader may refer to Fig. 3.1 of
Chapter 3 , that will be used in a similar context). This 4-volume is
delimited by a first hypersurface @xmath , that will hug part of the
black hole horizon @xmath , a timelike hypersurface @xmath far enough
from the black hole, and two hypersurfaces @xmath and @xmath . @xmath
can be chosen as a @xmath hypersurface, where @xmath is the affine
parameter of the geodesics generated by @xmath . @xmath is then the
hypersurface generated when “shifting” @xmath by a constant amount of
@xmath , along the geodesics generated by @xmath . Taking @xmath far
enough in space, and @xmath , @xmath far enough in time (or at least in
affine parameter @xmath ), one may cover the whole exterior region of
the black hole. Note that the procedure of integrating the scalar field
equation is common to many no-hair theorems, notably the one we will
prove in Chapter 3 . In the present case,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
              @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where Eq. ( 1.10 ) is obtained through integration by parts, @xmath is
the boundary of @xmath , @xmath is the metric induced over the boundary,
and @xmath is the normal to this boundary. By construction, the
contributions of @xmath and @xmath in the last term of Eq. ( 1.10 )
exactly cancel. The contribution of the faraway hypersurface @xmath
vanishes when it is taken to spatial infinity, because of the second
assumption of the theorem. Only the contribution of @xmath remains. To
eliminate it, let us note that the event horizon of a stationary and
asymptotically flat spacetime is a Killing horizon [ Hawking:1973uf ] .
Thus, when @xmath , @xmath tends towards a Killing vector, and it can
only be a linear combination of @xmath and @xmath . At the same time,
@xmath respects the isometries (assumption 1), which can be translated
as @xmath , @xmath . As a consequence of this and the regularity of
@xmath on the horizon, @xmath tends towards zero. Equation ( 1.10 ) thus
tells us that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the last assumption of the theorem, the right-hand side is
negative. Since @xmath , it is clear that the gradient of @xmath cannot
be timelike in the region where @xmath is timelike (far from the black
hole). It is further argued in [ Hawking:1972qk ] that @xmath can only
be spacelike anywhere outside the black hole. Thus, if @xmath at any
point of spacetime, the left-hand side will be positive. This is a
contradiction, and the only way out is to set @xmath . This proves the
theorem.

One can wonder what becomes of this theorem for more generic
scalar-tensor theories. It was notably extended to Brans-Dicke theory,
Eq. ( 12 ), by Hawking [ Hawking:1972qk ] . Faraoni and Sotiriou
extended it later [ Sotiriou:2011dz ] to usual scalar-tensor theories,
Eq. ( 13 ). The argument is based on a field redefinition. Indeed, let
us rewrite here the scalar-tensor action ( 13 ) with a slight change of
notations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is thus defined in terms of the dynamical variables @xmath and
@xmath . The metric @xmath , often called Jordan frame metric, is the
physical metric to which matter (other than the scalar field) is assumed
to be minimally coupled. Here, such matter fields are taken to be zero.
Now, writing the action ( 1.12 ) in terms of

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

one recovers a canonical scalar field action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined @xmath . The metric @xmath is called the Einstein frame
metric, because the dynamical part of the spin-2 degree of freedom takes
the form of a standard Einstein-Hilbert action. Provided the above field
redefinition is not singular, Bekenstein’s theorem applies under the
same assumptions. Note that in both cases (canonical scalar field and
scalar-tensor theories), the assumption that @xmath might be replaced by
the assumption that @xmath . The proof is exactly similar, except that
one has to multiply the scalar field equation, Eq. ( 1.8 ), by @xmath
instead of @xmath .

No scalar hair theorems have also been slightly extended in at least two
other directions. First, some potentials clearly do not respect the
condition @xmath , or @xmath ; this is the case for instance of the
Higgs potential, Eq. ( 11 ). Efforts to improve the theorem in this
direction have lead to extensions in the simplified case of spherically
symmetric and static solutions. In this case, if a canonical scalar
field respects the strong energy condition, it is necessarily trivial [
0264-9381-9-9-016 , Heusler:1996ft ] . Bekenstein, also in the case of
spherical symmetry and staticity, was able to extend his no-hair results
to an arbitrary number of scalar fields, and to scalar-tensor models
with non-canonical kinetic terms [ Bekenstein:1995un ] . Second, one may
allow the scalar field not to respect the symmetries of spacetime — only
the associated energy-momentum tensor cannot break these symmetries. For
canonical scalar fields, as well as for arbitrary Lagrangian functionals
of @xmath and the kinetic density @xmath , it was proven that the scalar
field cannot depend on time in a stationary spacetime [ Pena:1997cy ,
Graham:2014ina ] . We will however see that this idea is successful in
the case of Horndeski and beyond theory.

##### 1.3.2 Some solutions with scalar hair

Outside of the range of no-hair theorems, there actually exist solutions
with scalar hair, either exact or numerical. We will now briefly
describe some of them, insisting on why they are not ruled out by the
above theorems. Chronologically, the first of these solutions was
derived by Bocharova et al. [ Bocharova:1970skc ] in USSR, and slightly
later by Bekenstein in the USA [ Bekenstein:1974sf , Bekenstein:1975ts ]
. It is a solution of the following theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which possesses a conformally invariant scalar field equation (i.e.,
this equation is invariant under @xmath and @xmath with an arbitrary
function @xmath ). Note however that the whole action is not conformally
invariant, due to the presence of the Einstein-Hilbert term. The theory
( 1.16 ) possesses the following solution with non-trivial @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is free and represents the gravitational mass of the black
hole in Planck units (if one does not set Newton’s consant @xmath to a
unit value, the gravitational mass is @xmath ). The geometry is
identical to the one of a Reissner-Nordström extremal black hole (that
is, a spherically symmetric black hole with maximal electric charge).
This is a typical example of secondary hair, as defined in Sec. 1.2 :
the scalar field is not trivial, but it is entirely fixed in terms of
the mass parameter @xmath . There are two reasons why this solution is
not excluded by existing no-hair theorems. First, the scalar field is
not regular at the horizon. Whether this is a physical issue is
arguable, since the scalar field singularity does not render the metric
itself singular. We will encounter the same problem for Horndeski and
beyond theory in Sec. 5.2 . Note however that the solution ( 1.17 )-(
1.18 ) was claimed to be unstable against perturbations [
Bronnikov:1978mx ] . Another reason is that the field redefinition that
is required to bring the action into canonical form is ill-defined at
@xmath . To conclude with this model, it was shown that the action (
1.16 ) does not possess other spherically symmetric, static and
asymptotically flat solutions than Schwarzschild’s when @xmath is finite
on the horizon [ Zannias:1994jf ] .

Another remarkable way to bypass the no-hair theorem in general
relativity was found by Herdeiro and Radu [ Herdeiro:2014goa ,
Herdeiro:2015gia ] . They simply used a canonical complex scalar field
(that can be seen as a pair of real fields):

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of the scalar field. The solutions they found
were built numerically, assuming a stationary and axisymmetric ansatz
for the metric. Crucially, the scalar field does not respect these
symmetries. It explicitly depends on both @xmath and @xmath (the
coordinates respectively associated with the timelike and spacelike
Killing vectors):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real function, @xmath is a frequency and @xmath an
integer (for periodicity). Clearly, the energy-momentum tensor
associated with @xmath respects the symmetries of the spacetime, and
Einstein’s equations are consistent. Numerical solutions can be found
when @xmath belongs to a continuous interval. It thus constitutes an
example of primary hair.

Non-trivial solutions were also found when quadratic curvature terms are
included, such as the Gauss-Bonnet density @xmath , defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

A term proportional to @xmath naturally arises in the effective action
of heterotic string theory, where @xmath is called the dilaton field.
Perturbative [ Campbell:1990fu , Mignemi:1992nt , Mignemi:1993ce ] and
numerical [ Kanti:1995vq , Alexeev:1996vs , Torii:1996yi ] solutions to
this theory were shown to exhibit secondary hair. In Sec. 5.2 , we will
come back in detail on a model that can be viewed as the linear
expansion of the @xmath term.

Other possibilities include scalar multiplets (known as Skyrmions),
coupling of the scalar field to gauge fields or specific potentials that
do not respect the positivity conditions (see [ Herdeiro:2015waa ] for
detailed references). There clearly exist many ways to build black holes
with scalar hair. Part II of this thesis will be devoted to the
exploration of similar tracks in the framework of Horndeski and beyond
theory. But first, let us present the no-hair results that have been
obtained in this theory so far.

### Chapter 2 A black hole no-hair theorem in Horndeski theory

The scalar-tensor theories studied in Chapter 1 were the most generic
one may construct using only the first derivatives of the scalar field.
However, as we saw in the introduction, it is known since the work of
Horndeski [ Horndeski:1974wa ] that sensible actions can be built using
also the second derivatives of the scalar field. The dynamical structure
of the scalar and tensor degrees of freedom become intricated, and
Bekenstein’s procedure to prove the absence of scalar hair breaks down.
However, a no-hair theorem was proposed by Hui and Nicolis [ Hui:2012qt
] in the context of Horndeski theory. It affects the shift-symmetric
version of Horndeski theory, that is the subclass of Horndeski theory
such that the action is invariant under the transformation @xmath ,
where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. This subclass is obtained by
imposing that all Horndeski functions depend on @xmath only:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is in fact equivalent to require that only the field equations
possess this shift-symmetry [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] . To this global
invariance is associated a conserved Noether current @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This current obeys a conservation equation, @xmath . It is a crucial
tool in the proof of the theorem, and an ubiquitous quantity in all this
thesis. Explicitly, for the shift-symmetric Horndeski action ( 14 )-(
2.1 ), it reads, with the same notations as used in the introduction:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the next section, we give a detailed version of the no-hair theorem
first formulated by Hui and Nicolis. Then, we discuss its extensions in
several directions and its limits.

#### 2.1 The theorem

We will start with the no-hair theorem, and then go through its proof.
In addition to asymptotic flatness, it relies on several classes of
assumptions. First, it assumes some specific symmetries for the
background solution. Then, it requires the norm of the Noether current
introduced above to be bounded everywhere. Whether this assumption is
physical or not is arguable, as we will see notably in Sec. 5.2 .
Finally, it assumes that the action is regular enough. The theorem reads
as follows:

Consider a shift-symmetric Horndeski model as in ( 14 )-( 2.1 ) where
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath .
Let us now suppose that:

1.  spacetime is spherically symmetric and static and the scalar field
    respects these symmetries,

2.  spacetime is asymptotically flat, the gradient of @xmath vanishes at
    spatial infinity,

3.  the norm of the current @xmath is finite on the horizon,

4.  there is a canonical kinetic term @xmath in the action and the
    @xmath functions are analytic at the point @xmath .

Under these hypotheses, one can conclude that @xmath is constant and
thus the only black hole solution is locally isometric to Schwarzschild
spacetime.

The proof of the theorem is divided in two steps; first, one can prove
that the radial component of the current vanishes. Secondly, one can use
this result to establish that the scalar field is trivial. Let us start
by making use of spherical symmetry and staticity. The metric may thus
be written as in Eq. ( 1.1 ), while the scalar can depend on the radial
coordinate only:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In this system of coordinates, only the radial component of the current
is non-trivial. Thus, the scalar field equation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

the generic solution of which is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a free integration constant. It follows that the norm of
the current is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The event horizon of the black hole is located at the point where @xmath
first vanishes, starting from @xmath . Thus, we see that if @xmath , the
norm of the current diverges when approaching the horizon of the black
hole, which is excluded by the third assumption of the theorem. The only
way out is to set @xmath , i.e., to impose that the Noether current
vanishes identically. It seems quite reasonable that, in a static
geometry, the black hole cannot accrete a continuous flux of scalar
current. We have thus completed the first step of the proof. To go
further, we need the explicit form of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where a prime stands for a derivative with respect to @xmath . Let us
now use the last assumption of the theorem, about the regularity of the
action, together with the second one about asymptotic flatness. Under
these assumptions, Eq. ( 2.9 ) can be put under the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

depends analytically on @xmath since @xmath and the @xmath functions are
analytic. The vanishing of @xmath locally splits the solutions into two
branches: at any point, either @xmath or @xmath vanishes. Let us
demonstrate that, under the assumptions of the theorem, @xmath is the
solution. Indeed, a careful examination of the various terms in ( 2.9 )
shows that @xmath . Because of asymptotic flatness and because the
scalar field derivative is assumed to vanish at infinity, @xmath when
@xmath . Therefore, @xmath tends towards @xmath at infinity. Let us
consider a radius @xmath large enough for @xmath to remain negative when
@xmath . Since @xmath cancels exactly everywhere, so does @xmath in the
whole outer region @xmath . As a consequence, the contribution of the
scalar to the field equations vanishes in this region, and the solution
is uniquely given by general relativity: it is Schwarzschild geometry.
We must finally establish that @xmath also cancels in the inner region ¹
¹ 1 One could think that the system of field equations together with the
general relativistic initial conditions at @xmath constitute a well
posed Cauchy problem, thus forcing the solution to be general relativity
in the inner region. However, because of the branch structure, the
Cauchy-Kowalevski theorem does not apply. . For @xmath , since @xmath
vanishes, the expression of @xmath is easily derived from ( 2.11 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath component of Einstein tensor. Since in the
region under consideration, the geometry is uniquely given by
Schwarzschild solution, @xmath vanishes identically. Note that it will
not be true any more in the case of a star, where even the general
relativity solution has @xmath in the presence of matter. Still, in the
vacuum, @xmath is trivially equal to @xmath . When entering the region
@xmath , @xmath remains non-zero by continuity. Accordingly, @xmath does
not deviate from 0. This in turns implies that @xmath remains equal to
@xmath . Thus, down to the horizon where @xmath first vanishes, one has
no other choice than to stick to the @xmath branch. One is left with
Schwarzschild geometry as the unique solution over @xmath , where @xmath
is the Schwarzschild radius of the black hole. This proves the theorem.
Note that the theorem can be straightforwardly extended to the
shift-symmetric version of Horndeski and beyond theory @xmath , that is
when imposing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

by requiring also that the function @xmath and @xmath , introduced in
Eqs. ( 20 )-( 21 ), are analytic around the point @xmath [
Babichev:2017guv ] .

#### 2.2 Generalization to stationary solutions?

In comparison with the theorems presented in Chapter 1 , the no-hair
theorem of Sec. 2.1 seems relatively weak. In particular, the assumption
of spherical symmetry and staticity is very restrictive. Realistic
physical solutions rotate, even if the rotation might be slow. A natural
question to ask is then whether the theorem can be extended to include
stationary spacetimes, thus covering realistic cases. So far, no generic
proof was found in the case of rotating solutions. However, no solution
with scalar hair was found either that violates the assumption of the
theorem only because it is stationary, rather than static and
spherically symmetric. Since the stationary case appears very complex,
one can start by assuming that the rotation is very slow, and can be
treated as a perturbation with respect to spherical symmetry. This is
the principle of the Hartle-Thorne formalism [ Hartle:1967he ,
Hartle:1968si ] . In Horndeski theory, the slow rotation limit was first
discussed in [ Sotiriou:2013qea ] . Generically, a stationary and
axisymmetric solution can be written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath parametrizes the rotation speed, @xmath and @xmath are
given by the spherically symmetric solution, and @xmath is determined as
a function of the spherically symmetric solution for the scalar and the
metric. In general relativity, @xmath depends on @xmath only and obeys
the following equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric ( 2.14 ) is the most general that is invariant under a
simultaneous change of the sign of the rotation parameter @xmath and of
the sign of either @xmath or @xmath . The scalar field solution can be
expanded as well in terms of @xmath . Because of the background
symmetry, at any order in perturbation theory, it can depend only on
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spherically symmetric solution, and @xmath the first
order correction due to rotation. Reference [ Sotiriou:2013qea ] noticed
that reversing the sense of the rotation, i.e., changing the sign of
@xmath , would clearly change the solution ( 2.16 ) even when @xmath or
@xmath is reversed, because these two variables do not enter the linear
correction. As a consequence, if the no-hair theorem applies at the
level of spherical symmetry, it also applies at first order in @xmath .
Indeed, when the theorem applies, @xmath and @xmath are given by the
Schwarzschild solution, and @xmath vanishes. Then, @xmath reduces to its
general relativity counterpart and @xmath vanishes identically as
explained above.

This result goes in a favorable direction for the extension of the
theorem to stationary and axisymmetric solutions. Another result that
points towards the same direction was given in [ Barausse:2015wia ,
Barausse:2017gip ] . It is explained in more detail in Chapter 3 . It
basically states that, under assumptions 2 and 4 of the no-hair theorem
of Sec. 2.1 , binary stars cannot develop a non-trivial scalar profile.
The gravitational wave emission is then expected to be identical to
general relativity. For the precise conditions of validity of this
statement, see Chapter 3 .

Finally, one can also look at the slow rotation limit from a different
perspective. Reference [ Maselli:2015yva ] asked the following question:
if the background solution already has scalar hair, how does the slowly
rotating solution behave? Does it follow Eq. ( 2.15 ), or another master
equation? The answer clearly depends on the theory under consideration.
For further discussion, one might report to Paragraph 4.2.5 and Sec. 5.2
.

### Chapter 3 Extending the result to stars

Black holes are not the only type of objects where huge curvatures
effects are present. In the sequence that leads to the formation of a
black hole, stars go through different steady states, such as white
dwarfs and neutron stars. For instance, neutron stars of mass @xmath
have an estimated radius of @xmath km [ Guillot:2013wu ] . The
associated Schwarzschild radius is @xmath km. The gravitational field is
therefore already very intense close to and inside such objects. The
investigation of neutron stars is really a timely subject. Indeed, in
2017, gravitational wave detectors observed for the first time the
inspiral and fusion of a binary neutron star system [
TheLIGOScientific:2017qsa , Monitor:2017mdv , GBM:2017lvd ] . This
observation and upcoming ones open an interesting and enlightening
window on gravity.

In the context of alternatives theories of gravity, different aspects of
compact stars must be studied. The first step is to investigate the
properties of solitary stars. How different from general relativity can
scalar-tensor strong field solutions be? When considering star
solutions, the uniqueness theorems break down, already in general
relativity ¹ ¹ 1 This is actually a good feature of general relativity.
Newton’s gravity predicts a whole variety of gravitational fields around
planets or stars. We chart these fields thanks to artificial satellites
in the Solar System. A theory that would allow for a unique
gravitational field in the vacuum would be ruled out at once. . Would
the introduction of a fundamental scalar field enrich the spectrum of
general relativistic star solutions, and in what way? Second, one can
study the properties of binary neutron star systems. Since the
seventies, we have information on such systems through the study of
pulsars. This information has been used to put strong bounds on
scalar-tensor theories, Eq. ( 13 ), see e.g., [ Freire:2012mg ] . As
already mentioned, gravitational wave interferometers have also started
detecting binary neutron star mergers. So far, only one event was
detected, with very little information on the post-merger phase.
However, many observations will likely follow. The emitted gravitational
waves carry information on binary systems, but also on the details of
the equation of state of neutron stars. The latter is poorly known up to
now, and the post-merger phase will provide a lot of constraints on
hypothetical models [ Takami:2014zpa ] .

In this chapter, based on [ Lehebel:2017fag ] , we provide the first
step, namely a no-hair theorem, investigating the spherically symmetric
and static star configurations in scalar-tensor theories with minimal
matter coupling. This result is in very close relation with the black
hole no-hair theorem of Chapter 2 . We show that, generically, the
scalar profile is trivial, still under the key requirement that only
derivatives of the scalar field are present in the action (with some
extra technical assumptions). We first prove in Sec. 3.1 that in a
regular, spherically symmetric and static spacetime, there cannot be a
non-vanishing and time-independent scalar flow. In Sec. 3.2 , we use
this fact in the framework of Horndeski and beyond theories, and examine
the various assumptions that lead us to the no-hair result. We enumerate
the possible ways out, that will be investigated in more detail in Part
II . At every step, we make the link with black hole configurations,
underlining the similarities and differences with stars. Finally, we
also discuss the results of Ref. [ Barausse:2017gip ] .

#### 3.1 No influx on stars

We will study the shift-symmetric Horndeski and beyond theory, but
instead of considering vacuum solutions for standard matter, we allow
its presence with minimal coupling to the metric. Namely, we analyze the
following action:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the shift-symmetric version of the beyond Horndeski action @xmath
can be read from Eqs. ( 14 ), ( 20 )-( 21 ) and ( 2.13 ). It involves
the scalar field @xmath and the metric @xmath ; the matter action @xmath
contains matter fields collectively denoted as @xmath . The latter obey
the weak equivalence principle: they couple minimally to the metric. Let
us restrict our attention to a spherically symmetric and static geometry
which is regular everywhere (that is, we assume the metric and scalar
field are @xmath everywhere). Let us also assume that no horizon for the
metric is present across the spacetime, thus excluding black holes form
our analysis; rather, we have in mind star configurations. The scalar
field is assumed to respect the symmetries of spacetime. Again, the
theorem will be based on the Noether current associated with shift
symmetry, @xmath , Eq. ( 2.2 ). Under the above assumptions, the most
general ansatz for the metric and scalar field are the ones given in
Eqs. ( 1.1 )-( 2.5 ). The only potentially non-vanishing component of
@xmath is still the radial one. In a static configuration, it seems
problematic that a non-vanishing flux can indefinitely flow towards the
origin of coordinates, especially if this point cannot be a singularity
hidden behind some horizon. Indeed, we will now prove that such star
configurations are forbidden. In terms of the scalar charge introduced
in Eq. ( 2.7 ), this means that @xmath will have to vanish. To draw a
parallel, Maxwell’s equation in vacuum @xmath also locally allows a
radial electric field @xmath . However, integration over an extended
domain imposes that actually vanishes in the absence of a charge
distribution. Similarly here, @xmath will vanish because it is not
sourced.

To prove that @xmath is indeed zero, let us integrate the conservation
equation ( 2.6 ) over a particular 4-volume @xmath . This volume is
defined as the interior of a 2-sphere of radius @xmath between time
@xmath and @xmath , as displayed in Fig. 3.1 . Matter fields are not
required to be located in a compact region. To set the ideas though, one
can think of a star located at the origin of coordinates, with matter
fields present below the surface @xmath .

We have explicitly required that the geometry is regular everywhere, in
particular at the origin of coordinates. Therefore, @xmath is a compact
manifold with boundary @xmath . From Fig. 3.1 , it is easy to understand
that @xmath consists of the top, bottom and side of the light gray
cylinder. More precisely, the top and bottom are the interior of
2-spheres of radius @xmath , at time @xmath and 0 respectively; the side
@xmath is the Cartesian product of the 2-sphere of radius @xmath with
the segment of time @xmath . The Gauss-law version of Stokes theorem ² ²
2 Stokes theorem normally applies to @xmath functions. However, it might
be extended to fields that have a @xmath pole at some point, as is
usually done in electrostatics. Here, Eq. ( 2.7 ) tells us that @xmath
precisely has a @xmath pole, or identically vanishes. for @xmath then
reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the outward-pointing unit vector normal to @xmath . The
left-hand side vanishes because of current conservation. The integral
over the top and bottom of the cylinder vanishes because @xmath and
@xmath are orthogonal on these surfaces. Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
              @xmath      (3.4)
              @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This is valid for arbitrary @xmath . The only solution is to set @xmath
, or equivalently @xmath . Therefore, a permanent influx of scalar
current is forbidden for a star configuration.

A calculation similar to the one presented in this section was first
carried out in [ Barausse:2017gip ] . Note also that, so far, the proof
follows a path similar to the one developed in [ Yagi:2015oca ] .
Reference [ Yagi:2015oca ] deals in particular with a special type of
Lagrangian, where a linear coupling between the scalar field and the
Gauss-Bonnet invariant is present (see Sec. 5.2 for more details about
this model). Such a theory is included in the class ( 14 )-( 2.13 ) up
to boundary terms, because the Gauss-Bonnet invariant is a total
divergence. Due to this fact precisely, the associated scalar field
equation can be put under the form of a conservation equation. Using
this fact and under some assumptions on the faraway behavior of the
metric, the authors of [ Yagi:2015oca ] prove that the scalar field
cannot exhibit a @xmath decay at infinity. In the next section, we show
that shift symmetry together with certain hypotheses — notably excluding
the case of linear coupling to Gauss-Bonnet invariant — allows to
establish a considerably stronger result for the very general Horndeski
and beyond theory @xmath .

The result established in this section is similar to the first step of
the proof of Sec. 2.1 for black holes. Of course, the latter does not
assume that spacetime is regular everywhere. Instead, it requires that
the norm of the current @xmath is finite at any point, especially when
approaching the horizon. Interestingly, this extra assumption imposes
that @xmath everywhere. In the situation examined in this section, the
regularity of spacetime unequivocally imposes that @xmath vanishes. When
studying a black hole, one thus has to impose an additional regularity
assumption on the current which is not a trivial requirement. The
question in this case amounts to know whether a divergence of @xmath has
any observable effect. Black hole solutions with such behavior were
exhibited in [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] . Although not stated in [
Sotiriou:2014pfa ] , the norm of the current diverges at the horizon for
the exhibited solutions [ Babichev:2016rlq ] . However, the metric is
regular everywhere. This issue is discussed with more detail in Sec. 5.2
.

#### 3.2 No scalar field around stars

The previous section allowed us to prove that the radial component of
the current has to vanish in regular geometries. Similarly to the case
of black holes, one now needs to use this in order to conclude that the
scalar field is in a trivial configuration. For a Horndeski and beyond
Lagrangian, the radial component of the current is given in Appendix B ,
Eq. ( B.2 ). On top of the assumptions about the symmetry of the
background solution, let us assume hypotheses 2 and 4 of the black hole
no-hair theorem; that is, roughly speaking, asymptotic flatness and
regularity of the action. Then, one can follow the same procedure as in
Sec. 2.1 . The solutions split into two branches. Far away, the scalar
field is necessarily in the trivial branch. This implies that @xmath ,
introduced in Eq. ( 2.10 ), is given according to Eq. ( 2.12 ) in the
outer region. We rewrite this equation here for convenience:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The situation is now slightly different with respect to the black hole
case. Indeed, when matter fields are present, the @xmath component of
Einstein tensor does not vanish any more. We thus see that the presence
of a linear term in @xmath is important. If @xmath , the end of the
proof is exactly similar to the one for the black hole case: the scalar
field is forced to follow the trivial branch because @xmath never
vanishes. Indeed, we assumed that the spacetime under study contains no
black hole; therefore, @xmath does not vanish at any point, and @xmath
remains trivial down to @xmath .

If @xmath , the end of the proof requires a bit more work. Let us start
by splitting the @xmath metric field equation in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the energy-momentum tensors that originate
respectively from the scalar field and matter sector. In the outer
region, and as long as one follows the branch @xmath , @xmath
identically vanishes, or at most brings a cosmological constant
contribution @xmath ³ ³ 3 In general, this contribution corresponds to a
constant in the quadratic Horndeski sector: @xmath . . Therefore, noting
@xmath and @xmath , the function @xmath takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath should be thought of as the pressure due to matter fields. It can
now happen that the pressure reaches the critical value @xmath , defined
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us assume this indeed happens at some radius @xmath . Then, nothing
a priori forbids the solution to jump from the first branch where @xmath
to the second one, with @xmath . In this case, the solution would differ
from general relativity in the ball @xmath . As we are going to see now,
this is forbidden by the regularity of the solution when taking into
account the other field equations. In the outer region @xmath , the
solution corresponds to general relativity and one can show by using
Eq. ( 3.8 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . On the other hand, since @xmath would be
trivial for @xmath , one has immediately

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a transition would happen inside the star and not at its surface,
since the pressure @xmath would reach the value @xmath already. It is
therefore natural to ask that @xmath (there may exists modified gravity
models where @xmath at some non-zero radius, but there is absolutely no
reason why this would happen precisely when @xmath ). Finally, in the
inner region, @xmath can be put in the form @xmath by use of the @xmath
equation ( B.3 ) in presence of matter, instead of its defining form
@xmath — that is, one can trade @xmath for @xmath . Thus, a priori,
@xmath depends on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . All these functions are continuous at @xmath by
assumption, except maybe @xmath . However, one can also replace this
quantity in terms of the other functions as well as the matter energy
density @xmath , by use of the @xmath equation ( B.1 ). One ends up with
@xmath which must itself be continous at @xmath , in contradiction with
Eqs. ( 3.10 )-( 3.11 ). In summary, even when @xmath , no physically
sensible solution exists apart from general relativity. The scalar field
cannot jump from the trivial branch to another one.

Let us summarize what was proven, and under which conditions. Consider
any shift-symmetric Horndeski or beyond theory with a minimally coupled
matter sector, as in ( 3.1 ). Assuming that:

1.  the metric and scalar field are @xmath everywhere, spherically
    symmetric and static, and there exists no metric horizon,

2.  spacetime is asymptotically flat with @xmath as @xmath ,

3.  there is a canonical kinetic term @xmath in the action and the
    @xmath - @xmath functions are analytic at the point @xmath ,

one can conclude that @xmath is constant, and that the only solutions
are given by general relativity. In particular, star solutions are
identical to their general relativistic counterparts.

As detailed above, it was not necessary to assume that the norm of the
current is regular, as opposed to the no-hair theorem for black holes of
Sec. 2.1 . As an alternative proof, one can decide to keep the
assumption that @xmath is regular everywhere. This is slightly more
restrictive, but allows a nice comparison with the black hole case,
through Eq. ( 2.8 ). Indeed, in this equation, there can be two reasons
for @xmath to blows up. Either @xmath vanishes, and this indicates the
presence of a horizon, or @xmath vanishes, that is, one approaches the
origin of coordinates. The latter case always happen in a regular
geometry as assumed here, because no singularity or horizon shields the
origin of coordinates. Hence, from this perspective, it is either the
presence or absence of a horizon that forbids the presence of scalar
hair.

A number of ways out exist for the black hole no-hair theorem in
Horndeski and beyond theories, that we will extensively detail in the
forthcoming part, Part II . Since the theorem proposed for stars relies
on very similar assumptions, the same possibilities are offered to
escape from it. We explore or indicate theses possibilities in Secs. 4.4
and 5.4 .

Interestingly, the no-hair result established here is complementary to
what Ref. [ Barausse:2015wia ] derived. Let us summarize here the main
result of this paper. It investigates the emission of gravitational
waves for binary stars in shift-symmetric Horndeski theory. Assuming
that the dynamics of the system is perturbative, one can approximate the
stars as stationary objects, and perform an expansion around a Minkowski
background with @xmath . This expansion is parametrized by @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The perturbations then obey the following propagation equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the d’Alembertian operator in Minkowski spacetime and
@xmath ; @xmath is a linear function of the so-called sensitivities of
the stars 1 and 2, defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the mass of the star @xmath , @xmath its total baryon number
and @xmath its entropy. Reference [ Barausse:2015wia ] further assumes
assumption 3 of the above theorem for stars, and that the scalar field
decays as @xmath while the metric also deviates from Minkowski spacetime
as @xmath for large @xmath . Under these conditions, sensitivities
@xmath actually vanish; thus, the expansion in Eqs. ( 3.12 )-( 3.13 ) is
identical to general relativity at leading order.

This result concerns wave propagation, while the no-hair theorem focuses
on the static structure of stars. However, they both combine to point at
the absence of differences between general relativity and
shift-symmetric (beyond) Horndeski theories. The proof of Ref. [
Barausse:2015wia ] comes however with a caveat. The @xmath decay of the
scalar field and non-homogeneous metric part is valid only outside the
Vainshtein radius @xmath of the theory if it exhibits a Vainshtein
screening (see Sec. 4.4 for more details about this mechanism).
Therefore, the above analysis is valid only for wavelenghts @xmath
greater than the Vainshtein radius. For binary pulsars, @xmath is of
order @xmath km, while for the late inspiral stage of binary neutron
stars, it is of order @xmath km. In the latter case, it is clear that we
cannot be in the regime where the sensitivities vanish. Thus, a more
refined analysis may be necessary.

In conclusion, we proved that a shift-symmetric scalar-tensor theory
cannot accommodate a non-vanishing Noether current as soon as spacetime
is required to be regular, static and spherically symmetric. Using this
result, some complementary assumptions allow us to conclude that stars
cannot develop scalar hair in Horndeski and beyond theories. Star
solutions are therefore identical to general relativity solutions for
these theories. This extends what was known previously in the case of
black hole geometries. Most of the ways out known for black holes, and
presented in Chapters 4 - 5 , still allow to circumvent the theorem for
stars, as detailed in Secs. 4.4 and 5.4 .

## Part II Compact objects in Horndeski theory and beyond

In this part, we will systematically explore the paths allowing to
circumvent the no-hair theorems for black holes (presented in Chapter 2
) and for stars (presented in Chapter 3 ). Almost all procedures that
allow to construct black holes with scalar hair also provide stars with
non-trivial scalar profile, with one exception however. There actually
exist many such paths; indeed, one can play with the assumptions of the
theorem, and with a huge class of models fitting in the Horndeski and
beyond theory. This also means that the no-hair theorems for the
shift-symmetric Horndeski theory are relatively weak: it is enough to
break only one or two assumptions at a time to obtain solutions that are
not physically extravagant. This is summarized in Table 1 . The second
line of the table refers to some solutions that we will describe in the
forthcoming part. The table should be read as follows. For instance, the
solution proposed by Rinaldi in Ref. [ Rinaldi:2012vy ] , fulfills all
the assumptions of the theorem, but asymptotic flatness of the metric
(it has de Sitter asymptotics). One may refer to Table 1 if lost in the
diversity of solutions we will encounter in this part.

Note that there does not exist a physically sensible solution whenever
breaking only a single assumption of the theorem. In some cases, one
needs to break two assumptions at least to obtain a non-trivial solution
that deviates from general relativity. Let us also remark that no
solution was built exploiting the lack of spherical symmetry and/or
staticity of the metric. Of course, one should not expect that a no-hair
theorem exists if the background has no symmetry at all. However, it
might be interesting to know if abandoning, say, staticity and spherical
symmetry for stationarity and axisymmetry is enough to obtain solutions
with scalar hair in Horndeski and beyond theory (as opposed to usual
scalar-tensor theories, where the theorems of Chapter 1 are known to
hold). We already discussed this question in the slow rotation limit in
Sec. 2.2 . Another interesting track would be to abandon the staticity
assumption for the metric, while keeping spherical symmetry. In the
corresponding case in general relativity, Birkhoff’s theorem ensures
that no other solution than Schwarzschild’s exists in the vacuum; a
black hole cannot “breath”, contracting or inflating while maintaining
spherical symmetry. We will discuss in Paragraph 4.1.2 how this is
modified in the context of scalar-tensor theories.

Before going into the detail of these solutions, let us also mention
another characteristic of the theorem that can be seen as a weakness.
Its formulation is parametrization-dependent. Indeed, one needs to
invoke the analyticity of the @xmath and @xmath functions in order to
conclude. As we have seen, there exist several parametrizations of
Horndeski and beyond theory, see Appendix A . Therefore, it would be
much better to be able to formulate the theorem in a way that does not
depend on the parametrization. At first, it seems that requiring the
analyticity of the @xmath and @xmath functions is simply equivalent to
requiring the analyticity of the Horndeski and beyond action. Strictly
speaking, this is true; however, one does not really care about the
action itself, but rather about the associated field equations. It can
happen that a theory with a non-analytic action is equivalent, up to
boundary terms, to an action that is perfectly analytic. One such
example is the non-analytic Lagrangian with @xmath . It is actually
equivalent, at the level of field equations, to a linear coupling
between the scalar field and the Gauss-Bonnet invariant. Details are
given in Sec. 5.2 .

The plan of the part is as follows. In Chapter 4 , we introduce a linear
time-dependence for the scalar field, while keeping a static metric. We
first motivate such a behavior through cosmology, and then investigate
in full detail the solutions of two types of Lagrangians: one with
reflection symmetry @xmath , and the other without this symmetry.
Chapter 5 is devoted to isolated objects. We thus focus on
asymptotically flat solutions, and keep a static scalar field. We
explore three different ways to circumvent the no-hair theorem. Sections
4.4 and 5.4 also give details on the construction of star solutions with
a non-trivial scalar field.

### Chapter 4 Black holes and stars with a time-dependent scalar field

The no-hair theorem of Sec. 2.1 relies crucially on the staticity of the
metric. Since the field equations bind the scalar to the metric, it is
tempting to assume that the scalar field itself is static. However,
there is no mathematical obligation to do so. Only the energy-momentum
tensor of the scalar field must inherit the symmetries of the geometry,
as we mentioned in Chapter 1 , in the context of general relativity with
a complex scalar field [ Herdeiro:2014goa ] . In fact, if one has in
mind the cosmological motivation for modifying gravity, it is natural to
allow for a time dependence of the scalar field. Let us see why on the
simple example of a de Sitter geometry, which is generically an exact
solution of the field equations when no extra matter field is present.
Choosing the flat slicing of de Sitter spacetime, the metric takes its
well-known form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with constant Hubble rate @xmath . A homogeneous scalar field @xmath can
only depend on @xmath in these coordinates. One can map this geometry to
the static slicing by the following change of coordinates:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Then, the metric takes a static form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the same time, inverting the change of coordinates ( 4.2 )-( 4.3 ),
the scalar field @xmath becomes a function of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
. It is therefore legitimate to consider static metrics alongside a
time-dependent scalar field. If the cosmological evolution is slow, one
may expand the scalar field around a given time @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the value of @xmath and its
time derivative at @xmath . Thus, a linear time-dependence for @xmath
arises as a natural approximation of cosmological evolution. This will
also result in a linear time-dependence in the “static time” @xmath , as
can be seen form Eq. ( 4.2 ). Additionally, @xmath was shown to be an
exact cosmological solution for various Horndeski models [
Babichev:2012re , Babichev:2016fbg , Appleby:2015ysa , Babichev:2013cya
] , as well as a cosmological attractor for models that include cubic
and quadratic Horndeski terms [ Deffayet:2010qz ] . Of course, the
presence of some massive body makes things more complicated than a mere
coordinate transformation; the scalar field will acquire an additional
space dependence which does not result of the coordinate change. Let us
parametrize this through the following ansatz:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a free parameter — corresponding to @xmath in Eq. ( 4.5
) — and @xmath is to be determined from the field equations. As
explained, this linear ansatz derives from cosmology, but it also has
the following nice property: since the considered models depend only on
the derivatives of the scalar field, a linear time dependence of the
scalar field does not generate any time dependence in the associated
energy-momentum tensor. This does not yet guarantee the existence of
solutions, but it is a first consistency check.

In the next section, we will establish the consistency of the ansatz (
4.6 ) in light of the field equations, as well as other possible time
dependence. Then, we will examine explicit solutions for the simplest
terms that arise in cubic and quartic Horndeski sectors (keeping a
simple quadratic sector for consistency). In Sec. 4.2 , we present the
black hole solutions that were built using the ansatz ( 4.6 ) in the
framework of quartic Horndeski models. These have nice integrability
properties. We will then explore in Sec. 4.3 cosmological as well as
black hole solutions in the simplest cubic model, that can arise from
the higher dimensional Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati model. The equations are
more difficult to integrate in this case, and we resorted to numerical
integration, based on the results of our work [ Babichev:2016fbg ] .
Finally, Sec. 4.5 summarizes the results of this chapter.

#### 4.1 Consistency and robustness of the ansatz

##### 4.1.1 Mathematical consistency

We justified that solutions with a static metric and a time-dependent
scalar field exist. However, one can wonder whether the ansatz ( 4.6 )
for the scalar field, together with a static and spherically symmetric
metric, Eq. ( 1.1 ), generically provides solvable field equations. In
other words, can we prove a priori that the ansatz ( 1.1 )-( 4.6 ) comes
with solutions in general? This question was answered positively by the
authors of [ Babichev:2015rva ] . Let us consider a generic
scalar-tensor theory with Lagrangian density @xmath . Only
diffeomorphism invariance is required. The action @xmath can be used to
generate the field equations, that we denote as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

for the scalar and metric field equations respectively. The ansatz ( 1.1
)-( 4.6 ) only switches on some of the components of @xmath , namely the
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath equations. Spherical
symmetry additionally imposes that the @xmath and @xmath equations are
trivially related through @xmath . Together with the scalar field
equation, there are in total five non-trivial equations. On the other
hand, only three free functions are at disposal: @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Therefore, a naive counting seems to indicate that the system
is overconstrained. In fact, thanks to diffeomorphism invariance, one
can prove that two of the five equations can be deduced from the others.
Indeed, let us consider the change of coordinates generated by an
infinitesimal vector field @xmath . In the new system of coordinates
@xmath , the scalar field and metric read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The action is invariant under this coordinate redefinition, which
translates mathematically as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
              @xmath      (4.12)
              @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary @xmath . Thus, integrating by parts the second term in the
previous integral,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of the above vector equation, two components are non-trivial. They read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This explicitly gives, for instance, the scalar field and @xmath metric
equations in terms of the other equations. Thus, only three independent
equations remain, with three free functions. The system is not
overconstrained, and solutions generically exist.

When the scalar field possesses shift symmetry, one can push further the
above calculation. In this case, the scalar field equation @xmath takes
the simpler form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Noether current associated with shift symmetry,
defined in Eq. ( 2.2 ). Integrating by parts the first term in Eq. (
4.13 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the particular change of coordinates @xmath , the same
equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, for the specific vector @xmath considered,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserted into Eq. ( 4.19 ), and taking into account that @xmath is
arbitrary, this gives an interesting relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation corresponds to the integral of Eq. ( 4.15 ), with the
additional information that the integration constant vanishes.
Physically, the @xmath metric equation is related to matter accretion
(more details are given in the next paragraph). Therefore, forbidding
accretion onto the central object (as a consequence of staticity) also
forbids a radial flow of the scalar Noether current, quite consistently.
We further discuss in the next paragraph the legitimacy of imposing the
staticity of the metric. Before doing so, we use Eq. ( 4.21 ) to prove
an extension of the no-hair result of Sec. 2.1 .

###### Extension of the no-hair theorem

As a side result, the relation ( 4.21 ) allows to extend the no-hair
theorem to some linearly time-dependent solutions. Indeed, one of the
assumptions of the theorem was that the norm of the current, @xmath ,
remains finite everywhere. This allowed us to show as a first step that
@xmath had to vanish. Whenever @xmath , Eq. ( 4.21 ) already tells us
that @xmath vanishes. Thus, when @xmath is assumed to depend linearly on
time, one can get rid of the assumption that @xmath is finite. However,
at the same time, the second part of the proof is altered. Indeed, for
non-zero @xmath , the radial component of the Noether current of
shift-symmetric Horndeski theory reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a prime stands for a radial derivative — to compare with Eq. ( 2.9
) for the static case. In general, one cannot factor out a @xmath term
in this equation, because of the cubic and quintic Horndeski terms.
However, it is still possible to carry the exact same procedure as in
the static case when only reflection-symmetric Horndeski terms are
present. Therefore, it is possible to formulate an extension of the
no-hair result in the following way; let us keep all the assumptions of
the theorem in Sec. 2.1 except that the scalar field is no longer
assumed to be static, nor the current @xmath to have a finite norm.
Instead, the scalar field is required to depend linearly on time, and
the theory to have the reflection symmetry @xmath . Then, the same
conclusion holds, and all black holes have a Schwarzschild geometry.

##### 4.1.2 Robustness

We established that it is legitimate to consider a time-dependent scalar
field in a static geometry, and that a linear time dependence
generically allows for solutions. However, choosing a static metric is
physically questionable for at least two reasons. The first objection is
related to black hole considerations. In general relativity, Birkhoff’s
theorem ensures that a spherically symmetric solution of Einstein’s
equations in the vacuum is also static. However, in Horndeski theory,
there is no such theorem, and a spherically symmetric spacetime can
perfectly evolve with time. There is therefore no objection against
spherically symmetric and non-static metrics in principle. Actually, one
can formally view the scalar field as a matter component, and this
matter could be accreted onto a black hole. The accretion process does
take place in Horndeski theory (for a review on the accretion of dark
energy, see [ Babichev:2014lda ] ). It can be treated perturbatively, by
neglecting the back-reaction on the metric [ Babichev:2010kj ] .
However, the accreted scalar will eventually change the geometry with
time. To be more precise, let us formally split the metric field
equations as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is Einstein’s tensor. Dropping the assumption that the
metric is static, the line element can be put in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Accretion onto the central object, say a black hole, is related to the
@xmath metric equation in the sense that @xmath is generically
proportional to @xmath [ Babichev:2014lda ] . An increase ¹ ¹ 1 The mass
can also decrease with absorption of dark energy, for instance in the
case of phantom energy [ Caldwell:2003vq ] , because the model violates
the energy conditions. in the mass function of the black hole
necessarily comes from a non-vanishing @xmath component. On the
contrary, in a static geometry, @xmath vanishes and therefore so does
@xmath . Imposing a static metric, one forbids by hand the natural
accretion; it is certain that one misses other solutions by doing so.
Clearly, the solutions with a static metric that we describe in the
forthcoming sections do not belong to the same branch as accreting ones.
This different branch exists thanks to the complex high-order structure
of the considered Horndeski models. Although there is no reason for
disregarding non-static metrics, there is a huge technical difficulty in
studying (and even finding) such solutions. Allowing the metric to
depend on time turns all ordinary differential equations into a set of
coupled partial differential equations. Still, time-dependent and
spherically symmetric metrics could be the key to unlock many
interesting solutions, as well as novel aspects specific to
scalar-tensor theories.

Another argument against a static metric comes from cosmology. After
all, we do not live in a de Sitter static spacetime (yet). Almost thirty
percent of the energy content of the Universe is matter, therefore the
spacetime we live in is certainly not static. This objection is maybe
less fundamental than the previous one, though more obvious. Indeed, one
can still use a de Sitter static metric as an approximation for our
current and future spacetime. In the perspective of the large
cosmological constant problem, the effect one aims at explaining is a
discrepancy of at least fifty five orders of magnitude. Therefore, even
an extremely rough approximation, such as saying that we live in a de
Sitter spacetime, should not spoil a potential explanation to the large
cosmological problem. Even if they are very approximative when it comes
to describe the Universe, it is still interesting to obtain exact
solutions, and to carry the analysis in explicit backgrounds such as de
Sitter or even Minkowski spacetimes.

With these two objections in mind, we shall pursue with a static
geometry. One can still ask whether a linearly time-dependent scalar
field is a convenient choice, or the only consistent possibility. There
exists an interesting case, where the geometry is Minkowski spacetime
and the scalar field depends quadratically on time, the so-called “Fab
Four” theory [ Charmousis:2011ea ] . The defining property of this
subset of Horndeski theory is that it admits self-tuning solutions.
Self-tuning has here a precise meaning: the model must admit flat
spacetime as a solution whatever the value of the bare cosmological
constant in the action. The scalar field adjusts dynamically through
potential phase transitions that modify the value of the bare
cosmological constant. Fab Four models are obtained by combination of
the four following Lagrangian densities:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath functions are arbitrary, @xmath is the Gauss-Bonnet
density, Eq. ( 1.21 ), and @xmath is the double dual Riemann tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The idea behind such models is of course to get rid of the large
cosmological constant. Different subsets are obtained in the same
fashion when one desires a de Sitter solution (with an effective
cosmological constant independent of the bare one) rather than a
Minkowski one [ Appleby:2012rx , Martin-Moruno:2015bda ] . In [
Charmousis:2014mia ] , a simple Fab Four model was considered (as well
as others), with constant @xmath and vanishing other potentials. It
admits the following Minkowski solution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is free and self-tuning imposes @xmath with @xmath the bare
cosmological constant that appears in the action. Therefore, there also
exist solutions with non-linear time dependence (similar solutions were
also obtained for the Paul Lagrangian in [ Appleby:2015ysa ] ). The
apparent inhomogeneity of the scalar field is very similar to what one
obtains for de Sitter spacetime in different slicings, Eqs. ( 4.1 )-(
4.4 ). The Minkowski solution ( 4.30 ) can be mapped to a hyperbolic
Robertson-Walker spacetime with a homogeneous scalar field, thanks to
the following change of coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution then reads as a specific hyperbolic Robertson-Walker
metric, known as Milne spacetime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In passing, one could think about using the Lorentz invariance of
Minkowski spacetime to generate infinitely many different scalar
profiles, by boosting the solution ( 4.30 ). However, @xmath is
proportional to @xmath , which is precisely a Lorentz invariant.

In conclusion, even when assuming a static metric, there can exist
different behaviors for the evolution of the scalar field with time, as
shown by the explicit example of the Fab Four theory. Not all evolutions
are permitted though. For instance, Ref. [ Appleby:2015ysa ] proved that
Minkowski spacetime is a solution of the simple model @xmath only when
@xmath depends quadratically or linearly on time. As checked explicitly
in Paragraph 4.1.1 , a linearly time-dependent scalar field ( 4.6 )
always yields solutions. That is why we will stick to this anstaz in
order to examine solutions to specific models in the following sections.

#### 4.2 Reflection-symmetric Horndeski models

Having justified and discussed the spherically symmetric ansatz ( 1.1
)-( 4.6 ), let us now turn to the analysis of specific Horndeski ² ² 2
The models discussed in this section, discovered and studied before the
gravitational wave event GW170817, are now ruled out as dark energy
candidates. However, we will see in Chapter 7 that they are very useful
to generate solutions in physically viable models. models with
shift-symmetry. In this section, we will impose an additional symmetry
to the theory, namely the @xmath symmetry @xmath . We saw at the end of
Paragraph 4.1.1 that, when the theory is reflection-symmetric, the
no-hair result can be straightforwardly extended to solutions with a
linear time-dependence. Therefore, if any non-trivial solutions are to
be found, they will have to break one of the other assumptions of the
theorem. Only non-analytic Lagrangian densities, or the ones lacking a
standard kinetic term, or else asymptotically curved solutions might
exhibit deviations from general relativity. The linearly time-dependent
ansatz ( 4.6 ) was first proposed in [ Babichev:2013cya ] , and several
solutions were given for the following specific model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is a bare cosmological constant, @xmath is a
constant without mass dimension and @xmath is another constant. In the
parametrization of Eq. ( 14 ) and after integrations by parts, it
corresponds to the following choice:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although this action is an arbitrary choice among all possible models
that possess shift and reflection symmetry, it is the simplest one that
captures the essential features of the theory we want to investigate.
Analytic results were also obtained for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath
functions [ Kobayashi:2014eva ] , but, in what follows, we will use the
model ( 4.33 ) for clarity and concision. One can recognize that the
term parametrized by @xmath is the John Lagrangian density of the Fab
Four theory, Eq. ( 4.25 ), with @xmath . The metric field equations for
the model ( 4.33 ) read:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.35)
  -- -- -- --------

while the scalar field equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the ansatz ( 1.1 )-( 4.6 ), these equations boil down to three
ordinary differential equations. The @xmath metric equation, according
to Eq. ( 4.21 ), takes a particularly simple form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can clearly see in this equation two allowed branches: the general
relativity branch with @xmath , or a new branch allowed by the higher
order structure of the considered theory, in which one has to impose the
geometrical condition @xmath . The best way to write the field equations
is in terms of the kinetic density @xmath , as in [ Kobayashi:2014eva ]
. The metric functions @xmath and @xmath are known in terms of @xmath ,
which has to be found as a root of the following cubic equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a free integration constant for now. In the literature,
exact solutions were given only for specific values of @xmath [
Babichev:2013cya , Kobayashi:2014eva ] . The authors of [
Charmousis:2015aya ] tried to obtain results for small deviations of the
@xmath parameter with respect to the previously known solutions. Here,
in addition to these results, we will find all regular solutions of the
model ( 4.33 ) when @xmath , with the ansatz ( 1.1 )-( 4.6 ). One can
sort the solutions in categories that correspond to the following
paragraphs ³ ³ 3 Additional solutions like Lifshitz spacetimes also
exist [ Bravo-Gaete:2013dca ] , but we do not discuss them because they
are not of direct cosmological interest. .

##### 4.2.1 Stealth Schwarzschild black hole

In the case where both @xmath and @xmath are taken to be zero in ( 4.33
), that is when focusing on a purely quartic Horndeski theory, one finds
that the unique solution of the form ( 1.1 )-( 4.6 ) is Schwarzschild
geometry. However, the scalar field itself does not vanish whenever
@xmath . Explicitly, the solution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a free integration constant, which represents the mass
of the black hole in Planck units. Here, the parameter @xmath is also
free. Additionally, the kinetic density @xmath in this case is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution is asymptotically flat, but does not contradict the
no-hair theorem, because the standard kinetic term is absent ( @xmath ).
It constitutes an example of ‘‘stealth’’ configuration. Such solutions
are defined as non-trivial configurations of a field with vanishing
energy-momentum tensor ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the case of Horndeski theory, one can
define this tensor through Eq. ( 4.23 ) for simplicity. [
Sokolowski:2003rg , AyonBeato:2005tu ] . Here, it is clear that
Schwarzschild geometry makes Einstein’s tensor vanish, so that the
energy-momentum tensor of @xmath vanishes as well. Such a stealth field
does not contribute to Einstein’s equations, and therefore does not
gravitate. One could object that such solutions are of academic interest
if they predict no deviation with respect to general relativity.
However, the energy-momentum tensor of the scalar field does not always
vanish. This is true only on shell, for a specific geometry. In
particular, as soon as standard matter is present, the geometry deviates
from the general relativity solution. Section 4.4 explores this idea
more quantitatively, in the case of stars.

##### 4.2.2 De Sitter asymptotics and self-tuning

The most interesting subclass of the solution has de Sitter asymptotics,
and allows for self-tuning, that is an effective cosmological constant
which does not depend of the bare one, @xmath [ Babichev:2013cya ] .
This class is obtained as soon as the constant @xmath of Eq. ( 4.38 ) is
non-zero. In this case, one can express @xmath and @xmath in terms of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where again @xmath is free and represents the mass of the black hole.
These equations show that, generically,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the effective cosmological constant is @xmath , totally
independent of the bare one @xmath . If one is interested in de Sitter
asymptotics, @xmath and @xmath must have opposite sign. Sensible anti de
Sitter solutions are also obtained for the opposite choice.
Incidentally, when @xmath , there is only a cosmological horizon and
@xmath tends towards one close to the origin, thus avoiding a conical
singularity. Therefore, there exist solitonic solutions in
asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes, i.e., solutions that are regular
everywhere with a non-trivial scalar field profile. The field equations
are fully integrated in the case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

although nothing else but integrability singles out this specific value.
The solution is then exactly Schwarzschild-de Sitter geometry, while the
kinetic density @xmath is constant:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With respect to Eq. ( 4.41 ), time has been rescaled to absorb the
constant factor between @xmath and @xmath . This has the effect to fix
the value of the velocity parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exact expression for the scalar field can be deduced from Eq. ( 4.46
). For a vanishing mass, this solution becomes a de Sitter spacetime,
which was first found in a cosmological framework [ Gubitosi:2011sg ] .

Let us make two comments about the self-tuning character of this
solution. First, one can be puzzled by the fact that the scalar field is
able to “eat up” as much vacuum energy as required in order to solve the
large cosmological constant problem. It seems that, to compensate the
immense amount of positive vacuum energy generated by quantum fields,
the scalar sector must be able to store an arbitrarily negative energy.
This really sounds like a quantum instability of the model. In fact, we
will see in Chapter 6 that the stability of the solution precisely
forbids self-tuning of the cosmological constant to arbitrary values.
The allowed range for the effective cosmological constant @xmath is
restricted to values close to @xmath . Therefore, the specific model (
4.33 ) cannot be used to solve the large cosmological constant problem.

Another point one must be careful with is the renormalization of
Newton’s constant. What we call Newton’s constant is the number obtained
as a result of, say, Cavendish experiments. In general relativity, this
measured number must be equated to the theoretical quantity @xmath .
However, this is not the case in Horndeski theory and its extensions [
Babichev:2016kdt ] . Performing an expansion in the Newtonian limit, one
ends up with a theoretical parameter that must be matched with the
experimental value of Newton’s constant ⁵ ⁵ 5 It is shown in [
Babichev:2016kdt ] that the theoretical parameter in question is
body-independent, but depends on the cosmological background (especially
the cosmological value of the scalar field). . It happens that setting
the parameter in question to the required value generically prevents the
self-tuning of the cosmological constant. If the cosmological constant
was large originally (as should be from quantum field theory), it is
still large after the self-tuning process. In other words, if one tries
to use self-tuning to decrease the value of the cosmological constant,
one ends up with a Newton’s constant that is way too small with respect
to observations. This fundamental difficulty can be overcome only when
considering beyond Horndeski models [ Babichev:2016kdt ] .

###### Full analysis in the case @xmath

As mentioned above, it is not necessary to fix the @xmath parameter to a
specific value. In this paragraph, we investigate in full detail the
solutions of the cubic equation ( 4.38 ) in the sub-case where @xmath .
We do not derive the full expressions for @xmath and @xmath , but they
can be obtained straightforwardly by numerical integration of the exact
solution for @xmath . The solution is most easily written in terms of
dimensionless variables. Let us define the following parameters:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some fixed length scale. Note that @xmath for de Sitter
asymptotics. Let us also redefine the unknown functions according to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.38 ) for @xmath has three roots, that we will denote as
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (4.50)
     @xmath         (4.51)
     @xmath         (4.52)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

An extensive study of the real and imaginary parts of the @xmath shows
that a real and regular solution for @xmath can be found over @xmath
only when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath is in this interval, @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
. At spatial infinity, this solution behaves like the exact
Schwarzschild-de Sitter solution ( 4.45 )-( 4.46 ). Finally, in order
for @xmath and @xmath to share the same sign, one must have @xmath ,
that is @xmath . Translated in terms of the original parameters, Eq. (
4.54 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure 4.1 shows the various behaviors of @xmath in terms of the
rescaled radial coordinate @xmath . The metric function @xmath is also
plotted for a vanishing black hole mass. These solutions can be
interpreted as solitons, since the scalar field has a non-homogeneous
structure although spacetime is empty and regular.

##### 4.2.3 Static universe

Another class of solutions is obtained when setting @xmath in Eq. ( 4.38
). The solution generically reads:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is again a mass integration constant, and @xmath was fixed
in order to recover @xmath at the origin. The solution exists and is
regular only provided that @xmath and @xmath . When the mass vanishes,
the above solution has no horizon and is regular at the origin. At
spatial infinity, it corresponds to a static spacetime with negative
curvature @xmath , as can be seen from the change of coordinate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Like the asymptotically de Sitter solutions, this solution circumvents
the no-hair theorem because it is not asymptotically flat. The
particular solution of Ref. [ Babichev:2013cya ] was obtained by tuning
the parameters of the theory according to @xmath . Except for this
specific tuning, the solution again exhibits a solitonic behavior, with
a non-homogeneous curvature even when the mass is set to zero.

##### 4.2.4 Regularity of the scalar field at the black hole horizon

Since @xmath itself does not enter the field equations (only @xmath
does), it is not directly measurable. Thus, what really matters is the
regularity of the quantities built upon @xmath , such as @xmath or
@xmath . For the solutions described in the above sections, the norm of
the current is @xmath since @xmath always vanishes. Using again the fact
that @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is generically regular at the horizon. The quantity @xmath is
determined through Eq. ( 4.38 ), where the mass of the black hole @xmath
does not appear. There is therefore absolutely no reason for @xmath to
be irregular at the black hole horizon. Indeed, for several solutions
that we encountered, @xmath is a mere constant — see Eqs. ( 4.46 ), (
4.40 ) or ( 4.56 ). When @xmath depends on the location, we still found
that it is regular, as shown in Fig. 4.1 for instance.

As a by-product of this analysis, the linear time-dependence of @xmath
can yield regularity of the scalar field itself close to the black hole
horizon [ Babichev:2013cya , Kobayashi:2014eva ] (a similar result was
already noticed earlier in general relativity [ Petrich:1988zz ] and
standard scalar-tensor theories [ Jacobson:1999vr ] ). Let us note
@xmath the position of the horizon where @xmath and @xmath vanish. Then,
defining @xmath and @xmath , the regularity of @xmath imposes that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radial-dependent part of @xmath , Eq. ( 4.6 ). This
expression clearly diverges when approaching the horizon. However, the
logarithmic divergence can precisely be reabsorbed by switching from
Schwarzschild to Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates. Let us define the
ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinate @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contrary to @xmath , this coordinate does not blow-up when approaching
the horizon for an observer who falls into a black hole. In terms of
this coordinate, the ansatz ( 4.6 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term in the above equation behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

close to the horizon, which exactly cancels the divergence of the plus
branch for @xmath , Eq. ( 4.61 ). Thus, the plus branch for @xmath is
regular at the future black hole horizon (while the minus branch is
actually regular in the outgoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinate, i.e.,
on the past event horizon).

On the other hand, we will see in Chapters 6 and 7 that the scalar field
associated to the de Sitter solutions of Paragraph 4.2.2 becomes
homogeneous at spatial infinity only for the minus branch of Eq. ( 4.61
). Thus, if one selects the cosmologically sensible branch, the scalar
field always blows up at the black hole horizon. Again, this is not a
real problem as long as the scalar field itself is not observable and
all quantities built out of its derivatives remain finite.

##### 4.2.5 The case of slow rotation

As mentioned in Sec. 2.2 , the scalar field will not receive any
correction from slow rotation at linear order. However, the metric will
be modified. This is parametrized by @xmath , introduced in Eq. ( 2.14
). Reference [ Maselli:2015yva ] proved that, for the spherically
symmetric solutions of the model ( 4.33 ) with static metric and
linearly time-dependent scalar field, @xmath obeys the following
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ Babichev:2016rlq ] , we showed that this equation can be integrated
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath an arbitrary constant. Thus, in general, the equation
governing the slow-rotation corrections differs from the general
relativistic one. However, many solutions of interest have a constant
kinetic density @xmath , see for instance Eqs. ( 4.40 ), ( 4.46 ) or (
4.56 ). The latter solution, Eq. ( 4.56 ), that describes an Einstein
static universe, is even more special, because it has @xmath ; this
means that Eq. ( 4.65 ) trivially vanishes. This is a case of strong
coupling, where one would have to investigate non-linear terms in order
to conclude. In fact, for the Einstein static universe, the lowest order
perturbative Lagrangian exactly vanishes, and all perturbations of the
solution are strongly coupled, as can be seen from the results of
Chapter 6 . For the stealth Schwarzschild and Schwarzschild-de Sitter
solutions though, only @xmath vanishes. In this case, Eq. ( 4.65 ) boils
down to its general relativistic counterpart. When @xmath , Eq. ( 4.66 )
shows that @xmath exhibits the usual @xmath decay. One cannot say that
this extends the no-hair theorem for shift-symmetric Horndeski theory,
because the background solution already differs from general relativity.
Thus, when @xmath is constant, one can only say that the way to compute
the slow-rotation limit is the same as in general relativity, knowing
the non-trivial background solution.

#### 4.3 Cubic Lagrangian

In this section, we will investigate the presence of black holes in a
model described by the cubic term of Horndeski theory together with a
standard quadratic term, based on Ref. [ Babichev:2016fbg ] . It is the
simplest Horndeski model with higher-order derivatives, and it does not
possess reflection symmetry @xmath . Explicitly, the action we will
analyze reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have the same meaning as in Eq. ( 4.33
), and @xmath is a constant that parametrizes the cubic term. In terms
of the Horndeski functions of Eq. ( 14 ), this corresponds to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The cubic and quadratic term arise in various contexts, e.g., in a
certain limit of the Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati braneworld model [
Dvali:2000hr ] mentioned in the introduction of this thesis. Explicitly,
the action for this model reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the five-dimensional metric on a manifold @xmath ,
@xmath is the induced metric on the boundary @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are the corresponding Ricci scalars and @xmath is the Gibbons-Hawking
term associated to @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are some defining mass
scales, such that @xmath is the scale under which gravity looks
four-dimensional. Perturbing @xmath around a Minkowski background,
@xmath , and integrating out the fifth dimension, the quadratic terms
can be diagonalized into three kinetic terms; one corresponds to the
kinetic term of a tensorial degree of freedom, the second one to a
vector and the last one to a scalar (all in four dimensions). At this
point, however, all degrees of freedom are coupled by cubic and higher
order interaction terms. Then, a specific limit, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

allows one to decouple the different degrees of freedom. The scalar
sector is then described by a kinetic term and a cubic interaction term
[ Luty:2003vm , Nicolis:2004qq ] , i.e., the resulting action is the
scalar part of action ( 4.67 ), with coefficients @xmath and @xmath
determined in terms of the mass scales of Eq. ( 4.71 ). It can be shown
that this action allows to account for an accelerated expansion of
spacetime [ Deffayet:2000uy , Deffayet:2001pu , Nicolis:2004qq ] (at
least as long as de Sitter metric can be viewed as a small deviation
from Minkowski spacetime). On the other hand, the
Dvali-Gabadadze-Poratti self-accelerating branch was shown to be plagued
by a ghost instability [ Koyama:2005tx , Charmousis:2006pn ] . However,
there is a priori nothing wrong in working with the action ( 4.67 ) from
the start.

When @xmath , the action ( 4.67 ) is known as the cubic Galileon, a
sub-case of the so called kinetic gravity braiding model. The latter has
been studied extensively in the cosmological context [ Deffayet:2010qz ]
as a dark energy candidate. There exists a self-accelerating branch free
from ghost instability, with however vanishing sound speed [
Deffayet:2010qz , Appleby:2011aa ] . It was further shown in the context
of local Solar System physics that the presence of a massive body
generates stricly positive corrections to the sound speed [
Babichev:2012re ] , at least inside the Vainshtein radius. Therefore, in
this regime, the Cauchy problem is well posed for the cubic Galileon.
Additionally, the model ( 4.67 ) passes the very important test of
multi-messenger astronomy. Indeed, arbitrary @xmath and @xmath Horndeski
functions do not affect the propagation of gravitational waves (this is
true in an arbitrary background, as shown in [ Babichev:2012re ,
Bettoni:2016mij ] ). Therefore, the model ( 4.67 ) predicts an equal
speed for electromagnetic and gravitational waves ⁶ ⁶ 6 The cubic
Galileon model is however in clear conflict with integrated Sachs-Wolfe
effect data [ Renk:2017rzu ] . This tension might be alleviated by the
presence of @xmath in ( 4.67 ), or by the consideration of more involved
@xmath functions. . The metric field equations read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Noether current associated with the shift symmetry of the action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

For numerical integration purposes, we write the scalar field ansatz in
a slightly different (but equivalent) way with respect to ( 4.6 ), still
using the ansatz ( 1.1 ) for the metric:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this ansatz, the scalar and metric field equations reduce to a
system of three ordinary differential equations (as explained in
Paragraph 4.1.1 ). They read:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.76)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.77)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.76 ) is the @xmath metric equation (or, equivalently,
@xmath ). Equations ( 4.77 ) and ( 4.78 ) are combinations of the @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath metric equations. Again, these field equations have
a trivial solution, identical to general relativity with a bare
cosmological constant. However, thanks to their higher order structure,
they also possess other branches of solution, that we will study in
detail in the following paragraphs. Paragraph 4.3.1 is devoted to exact
cosmological solutions. We will see that several branches exist
according to the parameters of the theory, and discuss the various
regimes. In Paragraph 4.3.2 , we explore analytic properties of black
hole solutions. Finally, we integrate the field equations numerically in
Paragraph 4.3.3 , and subsequently analyze the solutions.

##### 4.3.1 Cosmological solutions

Let us first consider homogeneous cosmological solutions for the model (
4.67 ). These homogeneous solutions describe the far away asymptotics
for the black hole solutions we will search for with numerical
integration later on. This analysis is complementary to [
Babichev:2012re ] , which studied the model ( 4.67 ) with @xmath in the
cosmological context. The solutions are de Sitter spacetimes:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is to be determined from Eqs. ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ). Note also
that the velocity parameter @xmath of Eq. ( 4.75 ) is not free; it is
fixed to some particular value @xmath , given in Eq. ( 4.83 ) below. One
can see the homogeneity of the previous solution by using the change of
coordinates ( 4.2 )-( 4.3 ). Then the metric ( 4.79 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a Hubble rate @xmath such that @xmath . It is clear that the scalar
field is homogenous when, in the Fridemann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker
coordinates, @xmath . Equations ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ) then show that @xmath
must be a solution of the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are two possible solutions for @xmath ( @xmath appears only as
@xmath in the equations of motion, so its overall sign is irrelevant):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to two possible effective cosmological constants:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , @xmath has to be negative and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

reducing to the kinetic gravity braiding case [ Babichev:2012re ] ,
hence the subscript KGB. To summarize, depending on the parameters of
the model, the cosmological solutions are given by Eqs. ( 4.79 )–( 4.83
), with the following values of the effective cosmological constant
@xmath , depending on the parameters of the model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The different branches are represented in Fig. 4.2 . The general
relativity solution is restored for @xmath , in which case the presence
of the cubic Galileon does not affect the metric. This limit can be
attained either via @xmath or via @xmath . The latter branch attains, at
the other end, the kinetic gravity braiding limit as @xmath , thus
corresponding to self-accelerating solutions [ Deffayet:2010qz ] with
@xmath . Tuning of a large bare cosmological constant to a small
effective one is possible in the lower branch @xmath , where @xmath .
For this branch the scalar field partially screens the bare value @xmath
, yielding a cosmological constant of lesser magnitude.

##### 4.3.2 Analytic approximations and asymptotics

No exact black hole solution is known for the field equations ( 4.76 )–(
4.78 ). Therefore, we will mostly resort to numerical integration of
these equations. It is possible, however, to get some analytic insights
about the solutions in different limits.

###### Test field limit

Before solving the full system of equations ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ) in the
case of black holes, it is instructive to look into a particular limit,
where the scalar field does not back-react onto the metric (the “test
field” approximation). Formally, this approximation can be obtained by
setting @xmath and @xmath , and then letting @xmath . It is then easy to
note that the metric is determined solely by the Einstein-Hilbert part
of the action. The Schwarzschild-de Sitter metric with cosmological
constant @xmath solves the two equations, Eqs. ( 4.77 )-( 4.78 ) in this
limit. The third equation ( 4.76 ), the @xmath metric equation,
decouples from the two first ones and gives the scalar field equation on
a fixed background metric. Explicitly, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

with free @xmath . Plugging the above expression into the @xmath
component of the metric equation yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Depending on the parameters of the Lagrangian, @xmath may become
negative for some range of @xmath , rendering the scalar field
imaginary. One can check however that, in the case of physical interest,
@xmath , @xmath can be positive everywhere outside the horizon by
requiring that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar field becomes imaginary for @xmath , i.e., in the interior
region of the horizon, so that the exterior solution is well-behaved
everywhere in this regime. At this point, we would like to draw a
parallel with the results of [ Babichev:2010kj ] . In this reference, a
process of scalar field accretion onto a static spherically symmetric
black hole was studied, where the back-reaction of the scalar field on
the black hole was neglected — exactly the situation considered in this
paragraph, the test approximation. The key difference of the accreting
solution in [ Babichev:2010kj ] is an integration constant, which
vanishes for the solution presented here. As discussed above, the
solution in the test field approximation follows from the @xmath
Einstein equation ( 4.76 ), which is equivalent to the equation @xmath .
This last equation can be obtained from the scalar field equation ( 4.74
) by integrating along the radial coordinate and setting to zero the
integration constant. In the case of accretion, this integration
constant (the primary hair of the black hole) is not set to zero;
instead, it is chosen in such a way that the solution for the scalar
field describes a so called transonic flow, so that it is smooth and
free of singularities (at least for radii larger than the radius of the
scalar sound horizon). The above considerations illustrate the fact
that, when back-reaction is taken into account, other solutions — with
non-zero flux — may exist, as already mentioned in Paragraph 4.1.2 .
Again, the ansatz ( 4.6 ) is not unique, but rather corresponds to a
special case of zero scalar flow.

###### Asymptotic behavior at small and large @xmath

Solving the system of equations ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ) near the origin,
@xmath , one finds the following asymptotic behavior:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.92)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath depend on the parameters of the theory and are
fixed by the field equations (their exact expressions are not
interesting for us here). Note that unlike general relativity black
holes, the @xmath component of the metric is finite at the origin.
Furthermore, one can actually show analytically that the behavior of the
solutions near the black hole singularity depends only on the radial
part of the scalar field and not on the time dependent part. Indeed,
imposing a static @xmath scalar field, and further setting @xmath , one
can find an exact solution for all @xmath which has the same behavior as
( 4.91 )–( 4.93 ) in the @xmath region. Therefore, we can also conclude
that, for @xmath , the leading order behavior of the solution is
determined by the higher-order Galileon term @xmath , rather than by
@xmath or the @xmath term. This is expected as, close to the
singularity, the higher order Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati term contains in
total more derivatives than the @xmath and @xmath terms. The numerical
integration presented below confirms the behavior ( 4.91 )–( 4.93 ), see
in particular Figs. 4.3 and 4.4 .

Let us now look for the large @xmath asymptotic behavior of the solution
to Eqs. ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ). We assume that, at spatial infinity, the
solution has the following power expansion in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can always rescale time so that @xmath , in order for the speed of
light to be asymptotically equal to unity. Then, the asymptotic
expansion reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.95)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are particular functions of the Lagrangian
parameters (we do not give their exact expression here, since they are
cumbersome). It is important to stress that the metric in the expansion
( 4.95 )–( 4.97 ) asymptotically approaches the metric of the
homogeneous cosmological solution, since @xmath in ( 4.95 )–( 4.97 ) is
given by ( 4.84 ). Note that in this expansion, the velocity parameter
@xmath remains arbitrary; it may not coincide with @xmath , which is
fixed by the cosmological solution. The question then arises whether the
asymptotic solution ( 4.95 )–( 4.97 ) is homogeneous, since in the
time-dependent part of the scalar field enters an arbitrary velocity
@xmath , which does not necessarily match the cosmological solution. To
check the homogeneity of the scalar field, one can find explicitly the
solution for @xmath by integration of ( 4.95 )–( 4.97 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then by the change of coordinates ( 4.2 )-( 4.3 ), one has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although @xmath appears to be inhomogeneous when @xmath , one should
keep in mind that the value of @xmath itself is not a physical
observable, because of the shift symmetry of the problem. Only
derivatives of @xmath enter equations of motion. One can easily conclude
from ( 4.99 ) that @xmath when @xmath , which becomes negligible with
respect to @xmath . @xmath behaves like the associated cosmological
solution from Paragraph 4.3.1 , i.e., the one with @xmath . In the case
@xmath , the previous expansion gets simplified as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.101)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are given correspondingly in ( 4.83 ) and ( 4.84
), and @xmath is a free constant. Here, we see effectively the important
role played by the time dependent part of the scalar field which
determines the asymptotic behavior of the black hole solution as well as
the modified value of the effective cosmological constant. The
asymptotic solution for @xmath in Friedmann coordinates reads, in this
case,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note the much faster decay of the inhomogeneous part, @xmath , in the
case @xmath with respect to the case @xmath , Eq. ( 4.99 ).

##### 4.3.3 Numerical integration

In this section, we will perform the numerical integration of the system
of ordinary differential equations ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ), which is a
consequence of the equations of motion of the model ( 4.67 ) with the
ansatz ( 4.75 ). It is convenient to introduce dimensionless quantities
in order to integrate numerically this system of equations. The theory (
4.67 ) contains four dimensionful parameters @xmath . Besides, the
ansatz for the scalar field introduces an extra dimensionful quantity
@xmath . Thus, in total, there are five dimensionful parameters, which
have to be combined in a number of dimensionless quantities. Let us
define first the dimensionless radius @xmath with @xmath some fixed
length scale (which we later choose to be the horizon radius). Then, let
us define three dimensionless constants as combinations of the
parameters of the Lagrangian, the velocity @xmath , and the length scale
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us also redefine the functions as in Eq. ( 4.49 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The above redefinition implies that the scalar field is measured in
units of @xmath . The equations of motion ( 4.76 )–( 4.78 ) can then be
rewritten in terms of the dimensionless quantities:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.106)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.107)
     @xmath               (4.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where a prime throughout this section denotes a derivative with respect
to the dimensionless radius @xmath . Henceforth, we choose the length
scale @xmath to be the radius of horizon, i.e., in terms of @xmath the
black hole horizon is at @xmath . Note that the first two equations (
4.106 ) and ( 4.107 ) are algebraic equations on @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, one can resolve Eqs. ( 4.106 ) and ( 4.107 ) to find @xmath and
@xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . By substituting the obtained
expressions in the third equation of the system, Eq. ( 4.108 ), one
arrives at a second order ordinary differential equation on @xmath . To
find the unique solution, two boundary conditions should be
supplemented. Let us impose one boundary condition at the black hole
horizon: we will require that the radial function @xmath vanishes at
@xmath (which can be simply thought as a definition of the black hole
horizon). As a second boundary condition, we specify (arbitrarily) the
derivative of @xmath at the point @xmath , @xmath . By integration from
@xmath , we then select the value of @xmath such that the solution has
the desired cosmological behavior at large @xmath . In other words, we
use the numerical shooting method.

###### The case @xmath, @xmath

First, let us consider the case of vanishing @xmath and @xmath . The
action ( 4.67 ) contains only the Einstein-Hilbert and the cubic terms
in this case. The only relevant dimensionless parameter is @xmath . In
the absence of a black hole, the corresponding cosmological solution is
Minkowski spacetime, represented by the blue dot at the origin in Fig.
4.2 . Solving numerically the system of equations ( 4.106 )–( 4.108 ),
one gets asymptotically flat black holes, as shown in Fig. 4.3 .

For general boundary condition of the equations, @xmath and @xmath
approach different constants at infinity. However, they can be matched
by adjusting the numerical value of the derivative of @xmath at the
location of the event horizon, @xmath . The numerical solutions are
always well-behaved in the direction of increasing @xmath (note that the
numerical integration is performed from the event horizon). However,
when the numerical precision is increased, the numerical integration
cannot be continued below some radius inside the horizon, because the
numerical code breaks down there. It should be stressed that this is a
generic feature of all the simulations we carried out (i.e., including
the ones described in the paragraph below), and not specific to the
@xmath , @xmath case. We could not conclude on the origin of this
numerical singularity: it can be either a numerical artifact or a
physical pathology at that point. However, the presence of a physical
singularity inside the horizon in the test field limit, as shown in
Paragraph 4.3.2 , suggests that the breakdown of the numerical code may
indeed indicate a singular behavior of the solutions, rather than a
numerical glitch.

###### Generic case

In this subsection, we will consider general non-zero values of @xmath
and @xmath . The typical behavior of such solutions is presented in Fig.
4.4 . In contrast to the case @xmath , @xmath , the asymptotic solutions
are no longer flat. One expects de Sitter asymptotics, according to the
study of Paragraph 4.3.1 .

Let us comment at this point on some details of the numerical solutions
presented here. We use the shooting method, starting from the location
of the black hole horizon, i.e., @xmath in the rescaled quantities. The
value of the derivative @xmath is not, however, fixed by the condition
at the event horizon. Whenever we find some numerical solution, @xmath
and @xmath always behave like @xmath at large @xmath , but with @xmath
asymptotically, in general. We therefore use the freedom of choosing
@xmath so that @xmath as @xmath , where @xmath is some constant related
to the effective cosmological constant. It is, however, only possible to
do for some range of @xmath (assuming the parameters of the Lagrangian
are fixed) such that @xmath does not deviate too much from the value
@xmath . In this case, there is a unique choice of @xmath so that @xmath
and @xmath coincide at large @xmath . On the contrary, for the values of
@xmath that are far from @xmath it is impossible to do so, whichever
boundary conditions are chosen. In what follows, we will focus on the
solutions for which @xmath asymptotically at large @xmath , and we will
discard other solutions. These numerical solutions have a de Sitter-like
asymptotic behavior,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.109)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with some positive constants @xmath , @xmath , c.f. Eq. ( 4.95 )–( 4.97
). In addition, we checked that the norm of the derivative of the
scalar, @xmath , approaches a constant value at infinity, a further
consistency check with the analytic cosmological solution ( 4.79 ).

Depending on the choice of parameters and therefore on the particular
branch, one may expect that all the black hole solutions fall in one of
the three families ( 4.86 ), with a corresponding asymptotic value of
@xmath . It was indeed possible to find black hole solutions for both
positive and negative @xmath . For positive @xmath , however, which
gives two cosmological branches, @xmath , we only found numerical
solutions which approach one of the branches, the @xmath one.

For a set of parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , the
cosmological solution is given by ( 4.79 ) with @xmath along one of the
branches of Eq. ( 4.86 ) and @xmath given by ( 4.83 ). Remarkably, all
numerical solutions for a fixed set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
asymptotically approach the @xmath cosmological solution for @xmath and
the @xmath cosmological solution for @xmath . This means that the
constants @xmath , @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.109 )-( 4.110 ) are respectively
@xmath and @xmath . In Fig. 4.5 , we show the (normalized) cosmological
constant which is read off the numerical solutions, versus the
analytical results for the homogeneous cosmological solutions.

It is important to stress here that the numerical values @xmath , @xmath
do not depend on a particular value of @xmath , which is a free
parameter entering the scalar field ansatz and eventually the definition
of the dimensionless parameters @xmath via Eq. ( 4.104 ). The value of
@xmath determines the details of the black hole solutions, but not the
faraway behavior, as expected from the discussion in Sec. 4.3.2 .
Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4.6 , there exists a whole family of
solutions parametrized by @xmath for a given set of parameters in the
Lagrangian and, more importantly, for a given black hole mass. Indeed,
in Fig. 4.6 for instance, the (black hole) horizon location is kept
fixed. The velocity parameter @xmath thus has the characteristics of
primary hair.

It is worth mentioning that from the numerical solutions described
above, with @xmath at large @xmath , one can construct physically
equivalent solutions with @xmath at infinity. Indeed, changing the time
parametrization according to @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.111)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

instead of ( 4.75 ). Defining @xmath and @xmath , one gets back the old
ansatz ( 4.75 ) with @xmath . Note that if the solution in the
coordinates @xmath is such that @xmath at large @xmath , the same
solution in the coordinates @xmath has the asymptotic behavior @xmath .
In terms of dimensionless parameters, this corresponds to replacing
@xmath by @xmath . It is clear, however, that all these solutions with
arbitrary @xmath are physically equivalent.

#### 4.4 Star solutions

So far, we have been focusing on black hole solutions. It is natural to
ask what happens if a smooth matter source is placed instead of a black
hole, so that the solution now describes a star configuration. Most of
the ways to circumvent the black hole no-hair theorem, listed in Table 1
, may be extended to the case of star solutions.

On the other hand, it is known that screening mechanisms generically
operate in Horndeski theory (in particular Vainshtein’s mechanism [
Vainshtein:1972sx , Babichev:2013usa ] ). When such a mechanism
operates, deviations with respect to general relativity exist, but they
remain very small in dense environments. In the case of Vainshtein’s
mechanism, considering a massive and spherical body, there exists a
region where the scalar field is heavily suppressed and the general
relativistic solution is restored. This region is delimited by the
Vainshtein radius @xmath , function of the mass of the object and the
coupling constants parametrizing the theory. The suppression of the
scalar background is achieved either through non-linear
self-interactions of the scalar degree of freedom, or interactions
between the spin-2 and scalar degrees of freedom. This screening
mechanism is believed to operate generically in Horndeski theory [
Narikawa:2013pjr , Koyama:2013paa , Kase:2013uja ] . Therefore, one
could legitimately expect that star solutions are very close to general
relativity, even if the scalar field is not exactly trivial.

However, Vainshtein’s mechanism relies on some assumptions. In
particular, if some terms in the action ( 14 ) are absent, the argument
may break down. It is notably the case if the linear coupling of the
scalar to Einstein’s tensor dominates [ Kase:2013uja ] . The simplest
example that exhibits this behavior is the following action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the action that describes ordinary matter. This
corresponds to the action @xmath , Eq. ( 4.33 ), with @xmath and @xmath
. Star solutions for this model were first studied in [ Cisterna:2015yla
] . We saw in Paragraph 4.2.1 that the model ( 4.113 ) possesses a
stealth Schwarzschild solution, Eq. ( 4.39 ). The idea is to match this
exact exterior solution with a regular star solution. To find the
solution inside the star, one must first specify which type of matter it
is made of. The simplest model is a perfect fluid, with the following
energy-momentum tensor ⁷ ⁷ 7 A non-minimal coupling of matter to the
metric might actually prove interesting in light of the gravitational
wave event GW170817, see Part III for more details. :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the energy density and the
pressure of the perfect fluid, and @xmath is its normalized four
velocity. We will use a static and spherically symmetric metric, Eq. (
1.1 ). The pressure and energy density are also assumed to depend on
@xmath . At hydrostatic equilibrium, only the time component of @xmath
is non-vanishing. On the other hand, we will keep the linear time
dependence of the scalar field, Eq. ( 4.6 ). There are thus five unknown
functions: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As in the
black hole case, the first three equations are the @xmath and @xmath
metric equations, and the condition @xmath . Another equation is
obtained by requiring that the energy-momentum tensor of matter is
conserved:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, the fifth equation required is the equation of state that links
@xmath to @xmath . One can work either with simplified equations of
state or tabulated ones (see e.g., [ Akmal:1998cf , Haensel:2004nu ] ).
Here, we will use a polytropic equation of state as a naive model. The
pressure is then given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the baryonic mass density, @xmath the polytropic index
and @xmath is some constant. The first law of thermodynamics allows us
to relate @xmath and @xmath , and we arrive at the following equation of
state:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now have a closed system of ordinary differential equations. For
practical purposes, units of length, time and mass are chosen so that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ; the values @xmath and @xmath (in the chosen
units) give sensible results for the mass and radius of neutron stars in
general relativity. As a boundary condition, one can provide the
baryonic mass density at the center of the star @xmath ; it will be
chosen of order @xmath kg/m @xmath (i.e., @xmath in the adapted units)
to fit with realistic equations of state. The equations are then
integrated numerically from the center of the star to the point where
the pressure practically vanishes. This point corresponds to the surface
of the star. The solution is matched with the exterior Schwarzschild
metric in a @xmath way. From this matching, one can extract the
gravitational mass of the star. A typical result is shown in Fig. 4.7 .

As an experimental observable, one can plot the mass-radius relation for
various values of the central density. For the polytropic equation of
state described above, the mass-radius relation has the shape presented
in Fig. 4.8 . The curve is also plotted for general relativity with the
same equation of state, in order to allow comparison. For a given star
radius, @xmath implies heavier neutron stars, while @xmath implies
lighter stars compared to general relativity. The observation of stars
with mass higher than, say, 1.5 @xmath can thus rule out the solutions
with positive @xmath . One should keep in mind that the equation of
state that we used is very idealized. Thus, the obtained mass-radius
relations are very approximate.

Let us stress again that, although Schwarzschild solution is recovered
outside the star, the situation is different from usual screening
mechanisms. First, there is a huge deviation from general relativity
inside the star. Second, the scalar field is not screened up to some
radius @xmath as in the case of Vainshtein’s mechanism. It does not
back-react at all on the metric, arbitrarily far from the source.

Star solutions of the model ( 4.113 ) were further studied in [
Silva:2016smx , Cisterna:2016vdx , Maselli:2016gxk ] . These references
took into account more realistic equations of state, and examined the
relation between mass and moment of inertia for neutron stars. These
solutions should account for most neutron stars, except millisecond
pulsars [ Cisterna:2016vdx ] . Requiring the theory to reproduce the
heaviest known pulsar, PSR J0348+0432, which has mass @xmath [
Antoniadis:2013pzd ] , puts a bound on @xmath when it is positive [
Cisterna:2016vdx ] . Gamma ray bursts from the pulsar SGR0526-066
provide an additional test for redshift [ Higdon:1990dv ] . The authors
of [ Cisterna:2016vdx ] checked that their solutions are consistent with
the allowed redshifts @xmath for masses between 1 and 1.5 @xmath . The
redshift analysis does not provide sharper constraints than the maximal
mass test, though.

Alternatively, one can find significant deviations with respect to
general relativity in beyond Horndeski theory. Indeed, Ref. [
Kobayashi:2014ida ] proved that Vainshtein’s mechanism generically
breaks down inside matter sources for these models (as opposed to
Horndeski theory). This result was checked by a fully non-linear and
numerical calculation in [ Babichev:2016jom ] . In this case, the scalar
field is assumed to play a role at cosmological scales (as dark energy).
Matching between the local and the cosmological solution crucially
generates the breaking of Vainshtein’s mechanism inside the star. Again,
this work was extended to slow rotation and realistic equations of
state, giving some bounds on the parameters of the considered model [
Sakstein:2016oel ] .

It remains though to elucidate which configurations would be
energetically favored, between general relativity and Horndeski and
beyond models. In standard scalar-tensor theory ( 13 ), it is well known
that solutions with a non-trivial scalar profile can be energetically
favored with respect to general relativity, a process named
“scalarization”. Damour and Esposito-Farèse exhibited some non-minimal
couplings between matter and the metric for which it is indeed the case
[ Damour:1993hw ] . Such a study in Horndeski and beyond theory would
require a better understanding of the concept of energy.

#### 4.5 Conclusions

In this chapter, we introduced solutions where the scalar field does not
only depend on space, but also on time. This is actually imposed by the
boundary conditions if the scalar field is assumed to play a significant
role as dark energy. We saw in detail how this can be a consistent
procedure when the scalar field depends linearly on the cosmological
time. We also saw that, in order to be fully general, one should allow
the metric to depend on time as well. Still, it is possible to build
solutions with scalar hair when keeping a static metric.

We studied solutions in two significant subclasses of Horndeski theory.
The first subclass possesses reflection symmetry, @xmath . We focused on
the specific action ( 4.33 ) because it is the simplest model that is
representative of both the quartic and quadratic Horndeski sectors. The
solutions presented for this model include some exact Schwarzschild and
Schwarzschild-de Sitter solutions, as well as an Einstein static
universe and solitons. The stealth Schwarzschild and Schwarzschild-de
Sitter solutions are particularly interesting for self-tuning purposes.
We will further analyze them from the point of view of stability in
Chapter 6 , and use them as well in Chapter 7 to generate solutions for
other interesting models. We also discussed the regularity of the scalar
field and invariants built upon it close to the horizon, and examined
the slowly rotating limit. We showed that the equation which governs
slow-rotation corrections is often similar to its general relativistic
counterpart.

The second subclass of Horndeski theory that we studied does not possess
reflection symmetry. It is the simplest model with higher order
derivatives one can consider: an Einstein-Hilbert term, a cosmological
constant, together with the simplest quadratic and cubic Horndeski terms
( 4.67 ). Although it was not possible to integrate the full system of
equations exactly, we could still study analytically various asymptotic
regimes and some specific limits, obtaining insight about the full
solutions. Additionally, we performed numerical integration of the full
system of equations for different parameter ranges. It is important to
stress that solutions exist for a range of the scalar field velocity
@xmath entering the scalar field ansatz ( 4.75 ) (for fixed parameters
of the theory @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). @xmath is a free
parameter, independent on the mass of the black hole. Thus, @xmath can
be treated as a parameter corresponding to primary hair. At the same
time, the asymptotic behavior at large distances is controlled by the
fixed — in terms of the Lagrangian parameters — value @xmath , Eq. (
4.83 ). @xmath determines the behavior of a solution at intermediate
distances, while the cosmological homogeneous configuration is restored
at large radii, independently on @xmath . This interpretation of @xmath
should be taken with the following reservation: the solution for @xmath
in fact depends on @xmath even asymptotically, Eq. ( 4.99 ); however,
the value of @xmath approaches the cosmological homogeneous solution.

As an outlook, it would be interesting to incorporate other @xmath or
@xmath functions in the study. A straightforward extension of our work
is to examine the stability of the above black hole solutions; as
already mentioned, this was discussed in some perturbative regime in [
Babichev:2012re ] . All it takes to get the full result is to combine
the upcoming stability analysis, Chapter 6 , with the numerical
solutions presented in Sec. 4.3 .

Finally, we discussed star solutions, also in the case where the scalar
field depends on time. For some models, stars significantly differ from
those of general relativity. Neutron star data allow to put some bounds
on the parameters of these models. These bounds will be improved with a
better knowledge of the equation of state, which should follow from
gravitational wave observations [ Takami:2014zpa ] . We also saw that
the interplay between the cosmological time dependence and local physics
is crucial, notably in the case of beyond Horndeski theory.

### Chapter 5 Black holes and stars with a static scalar field

This thesis is devoted to the study of compact astrophysical objects. To
describe them, we would like to define the notion of an isolated system.
Of course, realistic objects cannot literally be isolated from the rest
of the Universe. Distant stars surround us, and at cosmological scale,
the presence of various energy components makes the Universe curved. In
spite of these objections, it seems reasonable that the local properties
of, say, a star, should be well approximated by assuming that spacetime
behaves likes Minkowski spacetime far away from the source of the
gravitational field. Additionally, if a scalar field is invoked to
account for dark energy, one could expect that its cosmological
evolution is slow with respect to black hole time scales. Thus, we will
consider in this section asymptotically flat spacetimes, as defined in
Chapter 1 , with a static scalar field.

On the side of the scalar field, it might appear in contradiction with
the arguments given in the previous chapter to consider a static scalar.
Indeed, for the solutions presented above, the radial profile of the
scalar field is directly proportional to its time derivative @xmath .
Therefore, it does not make sense to approximate these particular
solutions as static, even when the scalar field evolution at the
cosmological level is slow. However, the scalar field does not
necessarily roll with time in general; if a potential term is present,
it can stabilize the field to the minimum value of the potential
— breaking shift-symmetry at the same time, though. What is sure is that
other branches of solutions exist, and that the scalar field does not
always need to depend on time in static coordinates, even when used for
cosmological purposes (see the solutions presented in [ Rinaldi:2012vy ,
Anabalon:2013oea , Minamitsuji:2013ura ] for instance). Furthermore, one
can look at scalar-tensor models from a different perspective, simply
assuming that a scalar field is present in the fundamental theory of
gravity. Even if this field plays no role at cosmological level, the
resulting theory is in the class ( 14 )-( 20 )-( 21 ) (or at least is
part of the degenerate higher-order scalar-tensor theories). It differs
from general relativity, and can be tested against observations in
strong curvature regimes. In passing, from this perspective, the scalar
field vanishes over cosmological scales; thus, the simultaneous
observation of gravitational and electromagnetic waves does not
constrain these models any more (or at least very weakly). With this in
mind, we are now going to see how to implement solutions that deviate
from general relativity, based on our work [ Babichev:2017guv ] . We
will respect the assumptions of the theorem concerning asymptotic
flatness and staticity, especially for the scalar field. That is, we
will consider a scalar field that depends on the radial coordinate
@xmath only, and such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant, that one can decide to set to
zero because of shift symmetry. Since we will respect the first
assumptions of the theorem, it is necessary to break at least one of the
remaining hypotheses in order to find non-trivial solutions. One can
either use Horndeski densities that are not analytic around Minkowski
vacuum, allow the norm of the current to diverge, or remove the standard
kinetic term from the action. Each of the three following sections is
accordingly devoted to explicit examples illustrating these three
possible ways to circumvent the theorem.

#### 5.1 Non-analytic Horndeski functions

The first possibility to get round the theorem is to examine Lagrangian
densities that are not analytic when the spacetime becomes flat and the
scalar field approaches a constant. In general, such models will not
possess physical solutions; however, there exist exceptions where the
spacetime can be asymptotically flat, with an asymptotically trivial
scalar field. The loophole in this case is in the second step of the
no-hair theorem proof. For certain (non-analytic) models, a vanishing
radial component for the current does not lead to the trivial solution
@xmath . In order to find these models, the idea is to select @xmath
Horndeski functions (or beyond Horndeski @xmath ) that yield a @xmath
-independent piece in @xmath , Eq. ( B.2 ) ¹ ¹ 1 It could also occur
that @xmath contains negative powers of @xmath . However, such solutions
would acquire an infinite current when approaching Minkowski vacuum. .
At the same time, we will keep the standard kinetic term @xmath , so we
do not break this assumption of the theorem. This way, @xmath (appearing
in the standard kinetic term) will be forced to a non-trivial value from
the condition @xmath . A careful examination of Eq. ( B.2 ) reveals that
for each function @xmath and @xmath , there exists an appropriate
choice:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

An action involving the standard kinetic term, @xmath , additionally to
one of the above Lagrangians, has the potential to possess a
non-trivial, static and asymptotically flat black hole solution, with
also regular behavior for the current. It suffices a priori for one of
the @xmath or @xmath functions to have such a form. However, although
this imposes that @xmath is not trivial, it does not guarantee the
existence of a black hole solution. It is only a necessary condition.
Indeed, we will see in Paragraph 5.1.3 that the model @xmath , together
with a standard kinetic term and a Ricci scalar, does not possess any
black hole solution with regular @xmath . In this section, we present
exact black hole solutions in Horndeski and beyond Horndeski theories,
for models with @xmath and @xmath respectively. Both solutions admit
secondary hair and are asymptotically flat while the scalar field
asymptotically decays. On the contrary, we show that no black hole
solutions with a regular norm of the current @xmath can be found for the
model with @xmath .

##### 5.1.1 Quartic Horndeski Lagrangian

Following the method stemming from ( 5.2 ), let us first consider the
following action:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where “n.a.” stands for non-analytic. Equivalently, one can set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the usual meaning for @xmath and @xmath . Here, @xmath is a new
coupling constant that is dimensionless as @xmath . Note that @xmath or
@xmath could be absorbed in a redefinition of the scalar field. We will
not do so, in order to keep track of the origin of the various terms.
The @xmath term is simply a canonical kinetic term, and the coefficient
@xmath in @xmath yields an Einstein-Hilbert piece in the action. The
@xmath term is in the class defined by ( 5.2 ) and gives a @xmath
-independent contribution to the current. It is interesting to note in
passing that the above action for @xmath admits global scale invariance,
as was shown in [ Padilla:2013jza ] . Using the ansatz ( 1.1 )-( 2.5 )
for the metric and scalar field, one obtains for the radial component of
the current, Eq. ( B.2 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term does not depend on @xmath ; it depends on its sign, but
as we will see below, all solutions keep a fixed sign in the static
region of the black hole. Solving Eq. ( 5.5 ), one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression for @xmath is real for @xmath , i.e., outside of the
black hole horizon. Applying the sgn function to the @xmath equation,
one finds that @xmath and @xmath necessarily share the same sign. Two
other equations remain to be solved, namely the @xmath and @xmath
components of Einstein equations. They can be found by specializing the
equations of Appendix B to the specific model ( 5.3 ). The @xmath
equation is particularly simple to solve once Eq. ( 5.6 ) has been used.
It is actually a first order differential equation on @xmath . The
@xmath equation then imposes that @xmath is equal to @xmath (up to an
overall constant that simply amounts to a redefinition of time). The
solution takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a free integration consant. Additionally, the kinetic
density @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which one can compute the scalar field. Because of shift symmetry,
the scalar field is determined up to some constant. This freedom can be
used to impose that @xmath vanishes at spatial infinity. Then, the
solution depends on the sign of the parameters @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above solution describes a black hole with mass @xmath . Note that
the non-trivial scalar field back-reacts on the metric in an interesting
way: the spacetime solution is of the Reissner-Nordström form. This is
possibly related to the remnant of global conformal invariance shared by
the action ( 5.3 ), as the spacetime metric solution has zero Ricci
scalar curvature (as does Reissner-Nordström spacetime). Positive @xmath
formally corresponds to an imaginary charge of the Reissner-Nordström
metric. In this case, there exists an event horizon for any value of
@xmath including that of zero (unlike Reissner-Nordström spacetime). On
the other hand, when @xmath is negative, the scalar field manifests
itself in an electric-like contribution where @xmath plays a role
similar to that of electric charge for spacetime. This “electric charge”
is however not an integration constant; it depends entirely on the
parameters of the theory, which are fixed. Any such black hole
experiences the exact same correction to the Schwarzschild metric.
Choosing a negative @xmath significantly affects the inner structure of
the black hole, but the solution is not to be trusted beyond the event
horizon, as can be seen from the fact that @xmath becomes imaginary
there. For negative @xmath , there exists a lower bound on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, when saturated gives an extremal black hole. Whenever @xmath ,
the solution does not describe a black hole any more, but rather a naked
singularity. In terms of stability, positive @xmath corresponds to the
“correct” sign in the standard kinetic term. The stability, however,
also depends on the quartic Horndeski term. Therefore, one cannot
conclude on the stability of the solutions only by the sign of @xmath ,
see e.g., [ Deffayet:2010qz , Babichev:2012re ] . The solution presented
above is asymptotically flat. It then fulfills all assumptions of the
no-hair theorem but the analyticity of the Horndeski densities @xmath ,
due to the presence of @xmath in @xmath . The metric features a
Newtonian fall-off at spatial infinity. At @xmath , the scalar field
decays as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution does not have primary hair, as no integration constant
other than @xmath appears in ( 5.11 ). The black hole manifestly has
secondary hair due to the non-trivial scalar-tensor mixing. To conclude
about faraway asymptotics, let us remark that a cosmological constant
can be added to the initial action. The solution is modified in the same
way as it is in general relativity, and acquires anti-de Sitter or de
Sitter asymptotics. Explicitly, setting @xmath and @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the scalar field can still be computed from Eq. ( 5.6 ).

Let us now examine the near-horizon asymptotics. As a direct consequence
of Eq. ( 5.6 ), the derivative of the scalar field diverges at the
horizon. This is however a coordinate-dependent statement, which ceases
to be true using the tortoise coordinate, for instance; the divergence
is absorbed in the coordinate transformation. On the other hand, it is
easy to check from Eq. ( 5.9 ) that the scalar itself is finite at the
horizon. Crucially, @xmath does not diverge either close to the horizon,
Eq. ( 5.8 ). Also, since the metric is identical to the
Reissner-Nordström solution, it is clearly regular. Therefore, all
physically meaningful quantities are well behaved when approaching the
horizon.

Finally, in the interior of the black hole, @xmath and Eq. ( 5.6 ) would
imply that @xmath becomes imaginary. This feature is not specific to the
solution presented here: all known static solutions possess it [
Rinaldi:2012vy , Minamitsuji:2013ura , Anabalon:2013oea ] . The solution
can therefore not be trusted beyond the event horizon.

##### 5.1.2 Quartic beyond Horndeski Lagrangian

A very similar analysis can be carried out for the beyond Horndeski
quartic function @xmath . Following Eq. ( 5.2 ), one may consider the
Lagrangian defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new constant @xmath parametrizes the beyond Horndeski term. One can
follow the same steps as in the previous paragraph. The @xmath equation
provides an expression for the kinetic density @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, using the @xmath equation ( B.3 ), it is possible to determine a
particular combination of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this into the @xmath equation, one ends up with a first
order differential equation on @xmath , the solution of which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a free integration constant. @xmath is known in terms of
@xmath , by combining Eqs. ( 5.14 ) and ( 5.15 ). One can also compute
@xmath from Eq. ( 5.15 ). The explicit expression for @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assumed that @xmath is positive ( @xmath and @xmath must have
opposite sign). Again, this solution is asymptotically flat, with a
Newtonian fall-off. Taking for instance a positive @xmath , and defining
the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can expand @xmath at spatial infinity and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, @xmath should be interpreted as the gravitational mass of the
black hole. The solution is very similar to the one obtained when
considering @xmath .

##### 5.1.3 Quintic Horndeski Lagrangian

In this section, we will examine the quintic Horndeski Lagrangian built
of the following elements:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the beyond Horndeski sector is assumed to vanish, and where @xmath
is a constant. We discuss in more detail the origin and the properties
of this model in Sec. ( 5.2 ). For now, it is sufficient to see that the
function @xmath is not analytic at the point @xmath . We shall impose
that the radial component of the current vanishes: @xmath . First, let
us take a look at the spatial infinity expansion of the solution,
assuming that it can be expanded in a @xmath series:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a free integration constant. The corrections with respect to
general relativity are therefore very mild far away from the source.
These corrections are in agreement with the post-Newtonian corrections
for a distributional source found in [ Amendola:2007ni ] . The scalar
field @xmath decays as @xmath and the only free parameter is the mass of
the central object, @xmath . There is no tunable scalar charge as
expected, since @xmath is already an integral of the scalar equation of
motion. The above expansion cannot be trusted whenever the @xmath
corrections become of the same order as the mass term, i.e., when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

To go further, we resort to numerical integration, because we could not
integrate analytically the field equations. The radial component of the
current reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one can still use the @xmath and @xmath equations of Appendix B .
First, imposing @xmath , it is possible to extract @xmath as a function
of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 5.26 ), the @xmath equation becomes a second-order algebraic
equation on @xmath ; the solution for @xmath in terms of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Two branches exist for @xmath . Relying on the numerical analysis, we
select the plus branch of the above two; the minus branch gives
pathological solutions that extend only to a finite radius. Equation (
5.27 ) also fixes the sign of @xmath . Indeed, taking the limit @xmath ,
as expected for a black hole, one can check that the sign of the term
under the square root is determined by the sign of @xmath at leading
order ( @xmath is positive by convention). If @xmath was negative, the
scalar field would become imaginary before reaching the assumed horizon.
Therefore, we will restrict the analysis to positive @xmath . One is
then left with a single master equation on @xmath , which turns out to
be a first-order ordinary differential equation. To write it in a form
adapted to numerical resolution, let us introduce a length scale @xmath
, and consider functions of @xmath , rather than @xmath . Then, the
master equation depends merely on one dimensionless parameter, that we
will call @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the following dictionary between dimensionless and dimensionful
quantities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The master equation in terms of @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this is a first-order differential equation, one needs to specify
a single initial condition. Because we are a priori looking for a black
hole, we will impose that @xmath vanishes at @xmath . Then one can
proceed to numerical integration. A typical result of the numerical
integration is displayed in Fig. 5.1 . Far away, the metric and scalar
field fit very well the expansion given in Eqs. ( 5.21 )–( 5.23 ).
However, taking a closer look at the black hole region itself, one
remarks that @xmath does not vanish when @xmath does, as should be the
case for a black hole. This behavior is shown in Fig. 5.1 , and we also
confirmed this by an analytical expansion close to the point where
@xmath vanishes. All curvature invariants being finite there, this
suggests the presence of a coordinate singularity.

To go further, one must remark that there is no way to extend the
solution in the region @xmath because @xmath becomes imaginary there.
Therefore, one has to change coordinates. As the coordinate singularity
arises from the @xmath part of the metric, let us define a new radial
coordinate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ansatz for the metric now takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a new unknown function, interpreted as the areal radius,
i.e., the radius that measures the area of constant @xmath 2-spheres.
Repeating the same procedure as above, one can eliminate @xmath and
@xmath in the equations and obtain a master equation on @xmath only,
which is second order ² ² 2 The higher order of the equation translates
the fact that the new ansatz ( 5.33 ) involves an additional
reparametrization freedom @xmath constant. . With the same convention as
before for the units and the index n, let us define @xmath . The master
equation then reads:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.34)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.35)
  -- -- -- --------

To proceed with numerical integration, one needs to specify two initial
conditions. The configuration we will impose is equivalent to the one of
the previous analysis: we will require that @xmath and @xmath . In terms
of the old ansatz, this would translate as @xmath , and @xmath is mapped
to @xmath . The result is shown in Fig. 5.2 .

The solution can be continued in the @xmath range, i.e., beyond the
point where the old coordinate system becomes singular. In the new
coordinates, the areal radius of 2-spheres @xmath decreases with @xmath
up to @xmath , and then starts increasing again when @xmath goes to
negative values. However, the solution can be continued only in a very
short range of negative @xmath . When the integration fails, the Ricci
scalar explodes; thus, this solution describes a curvature singularity
which is not shielded by any horizon.

A second possibility though, is to interpret this type of solution as a
wormhole. For a similar solution, although for the different theory (
5.37 ) presented in the next section, this interpretation has been
suggested [ Kanti:2011jz ] . There are two branches of the solution for
@xmath , and the idea of [ Kanti:2011jz ] amounts to gluing these two
branches at @xmath , so that the solution on the left is symmetrical to
the solution on the right: @xmath , @xmath , etc. One obtains two copies
of the same asymptotically flat universe, glued together at @xmath ,
where the areal radius @xmath is minimal. Doing this, one creates a
throat that relates two universes, i.e., a wormhole. The price to pay
for this is that certain quantities, namely @xmath and @xmath , become
discontinuous at @xmath . This can be fixed, as proposed in [
Kanti:2011jz ] , by adding some matter located on the throat. If one
tunes this matter to the right density and pressure, one can account for
the discontinuities at the throat.

Thus, there are no black hole solutions for the Lagrangian ( 5.20 ), if
one requires that the norm of the current is finite. Far away from the
curvature singularity though, the metric can describe the exterior of a
star. A similar behavior was found in [ Charmousis:2015txa ] in a
different but close set-up.

#### 5.2 Infinite norm of the current

In this section, we wish to present briefly another specific solution
that circumvents the no-hair theorem, discussed in [ Sotiriou:2013qea ,
Sotiriou:2014pfa ] . It is based on an action that includes a standard
kinetic term and a linear coupling between the scalar field and the
Gauss-Bonnet density @xmath , defined in Eq. ( 1.21 ). Explicitly, the
action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with usual @xmath and @xmath , and coupling constant @xmath . The black
hole solutions of a very similar action were studied previously in [
Campbell:1990fu ] and [ Kanti:1995vq ] . In these references, the
coupling of the scalar was inspired by the dilaton of string theory,
under the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The characteristic features of the solutions in this theory are similar
to those of the model ( 5.36 ), which actually results from ( 5.37 ) in
the limit @xmath . At first sight, one could object that the action (
5.36 ) does not fit in the framework of shift-symmetric Horndeski
theory. First, the presence of @xmath itself appears in contradiction
with the shift symmetry. However, the field equations derived from (
5.36 ) are shift-symmetric. Indeed, under the transformation @xmath with
consant @xmath , one ends up with an additional term @xmath . Knowing
that the Gauss-Bonnet density is a total derivative, this additional
term is merely a boundary term. Thus, one can omit it and recover the
original action: the action is indeed shift-symmetric. Another objection
is that such a term does not seem to be present in the generic
formulation of Horndeski theory ( 14 ). However, the action ( 5.36 )
certainly generates second-order field equations, and Horndeski theory
is precisely the most generic scalar-tensor theory with second-order
field equations. Therefore, the model ( 5.36 ) must be describable in
terms of Horndeski theory. Reference [ Kobayashi:2011nu ] actually
proved that it is equivalent to the model ( 5.20 ) with @xmath , by
comparing the field equations of both theories. We already studied this
model in the previous section, because of its non-analytic character
that a priori allows for non-trivial solutions. We showed there that no
black hole solutions exist. However, we assumed a finite norm for the
Noether current @xmath . Reference [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] found solutions
in this framework by allowing the scalar quantity @xmath to diverge near
the horizon of the black hole. Therefore, the solutions described in
this section will break two of the assumptions of the theorem: the
@xmath function is not analytic at @xmath , and the norm of the current
@xmath is not finite everywhere. It should be underlined that the action
( 5.36 ) has an interesting distinctive property with respect to other
non-analytic models ( 5.2 ). It is the only one that has analytic field
equations around @xmath at the covariant level [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] (for
the other models, it is only true in the case of spherical symmetry).

The model ( 5.36 ) has the following scalar field equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath only vanishes in flat spacetime, this equation actually
says that @xmath cannot be trivial in a curved background. The no-hair
theorem therefore does not apply, and Schwarzschild metric is not even
present among the solutions to the field equations. One can get a
perturbative or numerical solution to these field equations [
Kanti:2011jz , Campbell:1990fu , Sotiriou:2014pfa ] . The scalar field
can be made regular at horizon. To do so, one must tune the integration
constant @xmath of the scalar field equation @xmath accordingly with the
mass of the black hole. @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 2.7 ). Note that for
solutions with regular @xmath , @xmath vanishes and @xmath . @xmath is
called a “scalar charge”, because when it does not vanish,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution with regular @xmath has secondary hair, because @xmath
depends on the mass of the black hole. The (numerical) solution appears
to have a singularity at non-zero radius, which can be shielded by a
horizon for a large enough mass of the black hole. The norm of the
current diverges as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius of the horizon and @xmath the derivative of
@xmath at this point. The fact that @xmath is not bounded is unusual and
puzzling. First, @xmath implies that there is a continuous flux of
scalar current towards the black hole, while the metric is assumed to
remain static. In the case of a star, this is impossible because of the
regularity of the solution at the origin. Here, the problem is hidden
behind the black hole horizon. However, there is no obvious
contradiction in starting from a static star with @xmath , and
collapsing it down into a black hole with @xmath ; indeed, there is in
between a dynamical phase where @xmath can evolve. Some work has been
initiated for studying collapses in the model ( 5.36 ), in [
Benkel:2016kcq ] . However, this work only studied the decoupling limit
in which the scalar field does not back-react on the metric. In this
study, the scalar indeed has the behavior ( 5.39 ), but this is
automatic as soon as @xmath . To obtain significant results, one must
study the problem in full generality, in particular at the horizon of
the black hole, where regularity must be ensured.

Concerning perturbations, we checked that the solution presented in [
Sotiriou:2014pfa ] is linearly stable, as presented in Chapter 6 .
Finally, the slow rotation limit of the solution presented in this
section also differs from general relativity. Indeed, the equation that
governs the evolution of the rotation speed @xmath , Eq. ( 2.14 ), reads
[ Maselli:2015yva ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the ansatz ( 1.1 )-( 2.5 ) was used. As a consequence,
frame-dragging experiments can a priori help distinguishing this theory
from general relativity.

#### 5.3 No standard kinetic term

The third possibility to look for non-trivial black hole solutions is to
give up the presence of a standard kinetic term, and to consider a model
which only involves the other Horndeski and beyond terms. In this
section, we exhibit a family of Lagrangian densities with a general
relativistic metric, but a non-trivial scalar field. These black hole
solutions are therefore stealth, and as such similar to the
Schwarzschild solution discussed in Sec. 4.2.1 in the context of the
model ( 4.33 ). In contrast to this solution, however, the solutions
presented here have time-independent scalar field configurations. For
concreteness and simplicity, let us set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with arbitrary (regular) @xmath and @xmath . Doing so, one automatically
gets rid of the canonical kinetic term, so that the no-hair theorem does
not apply any more. The scalar field and the metric are still assumed to
be static, Eqs. ( 1.1 )-( 2.5 ). The equations of motion actually
involve the density @xmath only, as one can see from the equations of
Appendix B . Extracting the combination @xmath from both the @xmath
equation and the @xmath equation and equating the two expressions, one
is left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is remarkable that the above equation does not involve the radial
parameter @xmath . Equation ( 5.43 ) should be understood as an equation
on @xmath for a fixed choice of @xmath and @xmath . Let us assume for
now that Eq. ( 5.43 ) has a solution, @xmath . The fact that Eq. ( 5.43
) does not involve @xmath means that @xmath is constant everywhere. This
greatly simplifies the @xmath equation, which can be immediately
integrated. The solution reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant and keeping in mind that @xmath
must be a solution of Eq. ( 5.43 ). Therefore, the static and
spherically symmetric solutions of a fully general quartic Horndeski
theory boil down to a simple Schwarzschild metric, up to a solid angle
deficit (corresponding to the constant in front of @xmath ). One can
avoid a solid angle deficit (which would lead to a curvature singularity
even for @xmath ) by requiring an extra condition on the functions
@xmath and @xmath , such that the factor in front of @xmath is 1. The
combination of this condition with Eq. ( 5.43 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for some value @xmath . Thus, infinitely many theories possess a stealth
Schwarzschild black hole solution. Namely, all those which fulfill the
constraints given in Eqs. ( 5.45 )-( 5.46 ) at some point @xmath . It is
very interesting to notice that the condition ( 5.45 ) is exactly the
one that allows for the propagation of gravitational waves at the speed
of light, see Part III . The models that pass this gravitational wave
test are therefore also free from conical singularity in spherical
symmetry.

There is a subclass among these models that has interesting properties
in order to find exact stealth solutions; it is the subspace of @xmath
theories where @xmath . In this subclass, the models that possess such a
stealth black hole are the theories with @xmath and @xmath . Any theory
of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

will allow for a Schwarzschild metric with a non-trivial scalar field. A
more general examination of theories having @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath shows that any such theory allows for all Ricci-flat solutions,
with a non-vanishing hidden scalar field. For instance, these theories
admit as a solution the Kerr metric (here in Boyer-Lindquist
coordinates):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a scalar field given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the rotation parameter and @xmath the mass of the black
hole. This scalar field is regular everywhere outside of the event
horizon of the Kerr black hole. A remarkable characteristic of this
class of solutions is that, even though the geometry is asymptotically
flat, the scalar does not vanish at spatial infinity: its derivative
@xmath tends towards a finite constant. This violates another assumption
of the no-hair theorem; it is required that @xmath at spatial infinity.
Therefore, the class of solutions discussed in this paragraph breaks two
hypotheses.

The black hole solutions found in this section are reminiscent of the
properties of the ghost condensate in the field of a black hole [
Mukohyama:2005rw ] . Indeed, for this theory, which contains only a
non-trivial function @xmath (while other functions are zero) with a
minimum at some @xmath , the situation is very similar. At the point
@xmath , the energy-momentum tensor for this theory becomes equivalent
to that of the cosmological term. Adjusting @xmath in such a way that
the cosmological term is zero, one gets a stealth black hole solution,
similar to the solutions presented in this paragraph. In the case of the
@xmath theory, there is a pathology though — the theory becomes
non-dynamical at the point @xmath . A way to overcome this pathology is
to introduce higher-order terms. Therefore it is still to be understood
whether a theory that satisfies ( 5.45 )-( 5.46 ) is healthy at the
point @xmath .

#### 5.4 Camouflaged stars

In this paragraph, we would like to exhibit a class of solutions that we
call “camouflaged” stars, because the solution outside the star is the
Schwarzschild metric with a vanishing scalar field, while the interior
solution deviates from general relativity. We will still consider a
static ansatz for both the metric and scalar field, as in the rest of
this chapter. Such solutions circumvent the Cauchy-Kowalewski theorem
because of the higher order branch structure of Eq. ( 2.10 ). Let us
recall that it was proven in Sec. 3.1 that the radial component of the
scalar current must vanish for stars, and this can be achieved either
through setting @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 2.11
). Here, we are interested in the non-trivial branch @xmath . We thus
want to circumvent the argument of Sec. 3.2 . Rewriting Eq. ( 3.8 )
without normalizing the kinetic term, i.e., considering a term @xmath
instead of @xmath , one has:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.50)
  -- -- -- --------

If the transition from the outer branch @xmath to the inner branch
@xmath happens precisely at the surface of the star, it is natural to
expect that the derivative of the pressure vanishes at the same point.
In this case, the argument about the continuity of @xmath given in Sec.
3.2 does not work any more, and one can a priori find solutions that
jump from one branch to the other. The transition happens at the surface
of the star if the critical pressure @xmath , Eq. ( 3.9 ), vanishes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from a fine tuning of the parameters, this is possible only if
@xmath and @xmath . A vanishing bare cosmological constant is not
problematic if one is examining asymptotically flat solutions. Setting
@xmath removes the standard kinetic term and breaks an assumption of the
no-hair theorem, which is exactly what we want. Therefore, in the rest
of this paragraph, we will set @xmath and @xmath . Then, outside of the
star, since @xmath , Eq. ( 5.50 ) shows that @xmath automatically
vanishes. This means that one does not even have to change of branch at
the surface of the star: one just follows the branch @xmath everywhere,
which happens to coincide with the trivial branch @xmath in the outer
region. Therefore, camouflaged star solutions should exist for any
Horndeski or beyond theory without standard kinetic term and bare
cosmological constant.

Such a solution was exhibited by Cisterna et al. in [ Cisterna:2015yla ]
, again for the action ( 4.113 ), that we studied in detail in Sec. 4.4
. The notable difference between Sec. 4.4 and the solution presented
here is that the scalar field does not depend on time any more ( @xmath
). The characteristics of this solution are detailed in Figs. 5.3 and
5.4 .

Let us remark that one could straightforwardly construct similar
solutions in the quartic Horndeski and beyond sector, for the theories
that fulfill the constraints ( 5.45 )-( 5.46 ). It suffices to solve
numerically the field equations inside the star. This would be a way to
check explicitly that theories with @xmath , @xmath — in the notations
of Eqs. ( 5.45 )-( 5.46 ) — are not equivalent to general relativity.

In passing, nothing opposes to the existence of solutions with
non-analytic @xmath – @xmath functions, as was done for black holes in [
Babichev:2017guv ] . On the other hand, the black hole solution
presented in [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] for the linear coupling between @xmath
and the Gauss-Bonnet density cannot describe the exterior of a star.
Indeed, it possesses a non-vanishing current, and we showed this is
impossible in Sec. 3.1 . Rather, for this theory, the faraway behavior
of the star solutions is the one derived in [ Amendola:2007ni ,
Babichev:2017guv ] , with a scalar decaying as @xmath , and @xmath
corrections to the Schwarzschild metric.

#### 5.5 Conclusions

This chapter was devoted to finding static, spherically symmetric and
asymptotically flat solutions with a static scalar field. Such
configurations were the main target of the no-hair theorem given in
Chapter 2 . As a result, it is difficult to find non-trivial solutions,
and only specific models can accommodate such solutions — as opposed to
the solutions of Chapter 4 , where hair was generically non-trivial, and
we only examined the simplest models.

A first way to generate scalar hair is to work with models that are
built using specific functions @xmath and @xmath as in Sec. ( 5.2 ). In
fact, for this class of solutions, @xmath has to be non-trivial in order
to achieve a finite norm of the current. We found six different models
in the Horndeski and beyond theory (four if restricted to the Horndeski
theory) which possibly admit hairy black holes, see Eq. ( 5.2 ). As two
illustrative examples, we found black hole solutions with secondary hair
in a subclass of quartic Horndeski and beyond Horndeski theory. All
observable quantities made of the metric and the scalar field are
well-behaved, both at spatial infinity and at the horizon. The scalar
field decays like @xmath , and back-reacts on the metric through a
rapidly damped contribution in @xmath . In the same spirit, we also
investigated in detail the quintic theory which is in the family ( 5.2 )
under study. Interestingly, it is equivalent to a linear coupling
between the scalar field and the Gauss-Bonnet density, whereupon the
scalar field is sourced by the Gauss-Bonnet curvature scalar away from
the trivial configuration. Within this subclass, no black hole solutions
were found with a regular norm of the current @xmath , although the
solutions asymptotically agree with Dirac sourced star solutions found
previously in this theory [ Amendola:2007ni ] . This might mean that the
finiteness of the norm is not relevant for black hole solutions. Indeed,
for the same theory, solutions with a diverging norm of the current have
been obtained in [ Sotiriou:2014pfa ] , thus violating another
assumption of the no-hair theorem. They exhibit secondary scalar hair,
where the scalar charge is fixed according to the mass in order for the
scalar field not to diverge at horizon. This solution, although
puzzling, exhibits no pathology. A third way to build black holes with
hair, presented in Sec. 5.3 , is to remove the canonical kinetic term
from the action. Although this is not very natural from an effective
field theory point of view, this corresponds to breaking another
assumption of the theorem. We allowed arbitrary @xmath and @xmath
quartic Horndeski and beyond functions. We obtained the generic
solution, which is described by a Schwarzschild metric. In the case of
@xmath alone, inspection of the field equations shows that regularity
conditions actually allow for any Ricci-flat solution with a constant
density @xmath . The stationary Kerr metric is indeed solution to the
field equations, with a non-trivial scalar field profile. Finally, we
briefly examined star solutions in models which exactly recover general
relativity as a vacuum solution, but allow for two branches when matter
is present. Again, it would be interesting to study the energetic
properties of such objects.

The study of the perturbations of such solutions, however, could reveal
hidden pathologies of the theories or/and solutions. For instance, an
unpleasant feature of the family of Lagrangians ( 5.2 ) is that they are
non-analytic around Minkowski vacuum. The solutions of Sec. 5.3 with
@xmath , on the other hand, are strongly coupled around a Ricci-flat
background. These peculiarities, unseen at the level of solutions, would
probably play a role at the level of perturbations.

## Part III Linear perturbations

As mentioned in the introduction, the existence of some solution with
scalar hair does not make it a physically relevant black hole candidate.
One must in principle check that it can result from gravitational
collapse, and first that it is stable. A fully non-linear treatment of
stability is a mathematically monumental task. So far, in general
relativity, only Minkowski spacetime was proven to be fully stable [
Christodoulou:1993uv ] , which goes to show the difficulty of the
problem. A slightly easier task is to establish linear stability, i.e.,
to show that initial data close enough to some given solution are not
evolved too far by the linearized field equations, and eventually
asymptote the solution in question. This remains very difficult, and, in
general relativity, it was only established that Schwarzschild solution
is linearly stable in this sense [ Dafermos:2016uzj ] .

We will restrict our analysis to a simplified version of linear
stability, based on the quadratic expansion of the Horndeski and beyond
action. When expanded at second order, this action contains a massless
spin-2 degree of freedom, with two polarizations, and a scalar degree of
freedom. Each of them obeys a wave equation, and thus propagates in its
own effective metric. There are three pathologies one wants to avoid:

-    gradient instabilities . This happens when the signature of (one
    of) the effective metric(s) is not Lorentzian, and thus some degree
    of freedom has exponentially growing modes;

-    tachyonic instabilities . Again, some degree of freedom has
    exponentially growing modes, but this time because the associated
    mass term in the quadratic action has a wrong sign;

-    ghosts . A ghost is a degree of freedom which can acquire an
    arbitrarily negative energy; as soon as it interacts with a healthy
    degree of freedom, an instability appears. The energy of the ghost
    decreases while the energy of the healthy degree of freedom
    increases of the same amount. Then, the modes of these two fields
    are filled by an infinity of particles, which immediately
    destabilizes the solution.

In this thesis, we focus only on gradient instabilities and ghosts,
because they are more dangerous than tachyonic instabilities. To
understand why, let us consider some field @xmath obeying a Klein-Gordon
equation (in two-dimensional flat spacetime for simplicity). Let us
decompose it in modes of given momentum @xmath , @xmath . If the sign in
front of @xmath is the wrong one in the field equation (which
corresponds to a gradient instability):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the modes with @xmath will grow exponentially on a time-scale
@xmath when @xmath . There is no lower bound on this time scale, i.e.,
the solution is immediately destabilized. On the other hand, if the sign
in front of @xmath is correct while the sign of the mass term is wrong
(tachyonic instability):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modes with @xmath will grow exponentially on a time-scale of @xmath .
Thus, the instability might be kept under control if @xmath is small
enough. This is why the study of the kinetic operator must come before
the study of the mass terms, although the latter is important also. Note
that a ghost degree of freedom also leads to an infinitely rapid
instability, at the quantum level. For instance, if the ghost field is
coupled to some positive energy degree of freedom through gravity, a
virtual graviton may decay into ghost particles and healthy ones. The
production rate is infinite if no cutoff is imposed in the ultraviolet
sector of the theory [ Cline:2003gs ] .

In common lore, the presence of a ghost is often deduced from the
absence of lower bound on the Hamiltonian density. We discuss this
criterion in Chapter 6 , and show that we must abandon it for a more
generic one, as we argued in [ Babichev:2018uiw ] . In the same chapter,
we compute the effective metric for gravitational waves and scalar
perturbations of some solutions presented in Chapter 4 . We apply the
new criterion to establish the stability domain of these solutions. In
parallel, the linear perturbations tell us at which speed gravitational
waves propagate; therefore, thanks to the tools developed in Chapter 6 ,
it is possible to examine the speed of gravitational waves in light of
the recent binary neutron star merger, GW170817. This is the aim of
Chapter 7 , based on our work [ Babichev:2017lmw ] .

### Chapter 6 Black hole stability

The notion of causal cone and effective metric will be essential to the
stability arguments, so let us dwell on this point before entering
details in the body of the chapter. Since no mass term is associated
with the rank-2 tensor mediating gravity, general relativity is
dynamically described by a massless spin-2 degree of freedom. The
effective action describing this degree of freedom can be found by
expanding the action ( 10 ) up to the second order, around some given
background solution. According to this effective action, the spin-2
degree of freedom obeys a second-order differential equation (see
Appendix C for more details). This kinetic operator might be encoded in
an effective metric, which defines then a causal cone of propagation. In
the case of general relativity, this effective metric is the metric
@xmath itself. A second and independent assumption of general relativity
is that all matter fields universally couple to this metric, in order to
satisfy the weak equivalence principle. These postulates imply that
electromagnetic and gravitational waves propagate on the same causal
cones, i.e., with the same speed.

However, modified gravity degrees of freedom --- including spin-2
ones --- propagate in an effective metric which can be different from
that of general relativity. Each degree of freedom now a priori comes
with its own kinetic operator, or equivalently its own effective metric
¹ ¹ 1 We do not consider here Lorentz-breaking theories [ Horava:2009uw
, Jacobson:2008aj ] , where equations of motion can be of higher order.
Also, in beyond Horndeski theory and degenerate higher-order
scalar-tensor theories, one may get Euler-Lagrange equations of third
order; at least for beyond Horndeski models that can be disformally
related to Horndeksi theory, the equations can be cast in a form that
involves second-order time derivatives only [ Gleyzes:2014qga ] . .
Provided that the equation of motion is hyperbolic, each effective
metric defines a causal cone of propagation. These causal cones are
inherently different for different spins — scalar, vector, or tensor —
and their structure determine whether the degrees of freedom are healthy
or not. Note that for Horndeski and beyond theory, the scalar and tensor
degrees of freedom mix together, and it is in general only for the most
symmetric backgrounds that one manages to demix them. Furthermore, in
modified gravity theories, matter is still assumed to couple universally
to a single metric in order to pass stringent fifth-force experiments.
This introduces the matter causal cone, in addition to gravity cones,
and the physical metric, associated to geodesic free-fall, which matter
couples to.

Brans-Dicke theory, Eq. ( 12 ), or more generally scalar-tensor
theories, Eq. ( 13 ), constitute simple examples of theories with
different metrics for matter and spin-2 perturbations. When one works
with the variable @xmath of Eq. ( 1.12 ), one is said to work in the
Jordan (or physical) frame; @xmath is the metric which defines the
causal cone of matter. On the other hand, the scalar-tensor action may
be rewritten in terms of @xmath as defined in Eq. ( 1.13 ). If one uses
@xmath as a variable, one works in the so-called Einstein frame, because
the dynamical part of the action becomes a mere Ricci scalar for the
spin-2 degree of freedom. As a consequence, the causal cone of this
degree of freedom is defined by @xmath . However, in this case, the two
cones still coincide because @xmath and @xmath are conformally related.
As we will see, this is no longer the case for Horndeski and beyond
theory.

The effect of multiple causal cones and mixing is that different species
can now have subluminal or superluminal propagation ² ² 2 These multiple
possibilities have actually been recently constrained by the
gravitational wave event GW170817, but we will not say more for the
moment (this constraint is treated in Chapter 7 ). (luminality being
defined with respect to the matter causal cone, the one felt by
electromagnetic waves). In this chapter, we will see how, starting from
the causal cone structure of propagating degrees of freedom, one can
infer if the perturbations in question are healthy — in other words that
they do not generate ghost or gradient instabilities. In particular, the
sign of the determinant of the effective metric defines the
hyperbolicity condition, which if satisfied, means that a particular
solution is safe from imaginary speeds of propagation and therefore
gradient instabilities. On the other hand, the local orientation of the
cone tells us about the absence/presence of a ghost degree of freedom.

A complementary way to find the good or sick nature of propagating
degrees of freedom is often described via the Hamiltonian density of the
degrees of freedom in question. Once the effective action of some degree
of freedom is known, one defines the conjugate momentum and writes down
the Hamiltonian density of the associated field. It is known that if the
Hamiltonian density is bounded from below, then there exists a stable
ground state. The contrary is often assumed to be true: if a Hamiltonian
density is unbounded from below, then the system is unstable and admits
a ghost instability. One of the main aims of this chapter is to
explicitly show that this inverse statement is not always true. In other
words, if a Hamiltonian density is unbounded from below, this does not
necessarily signify that it generates a ghost instability.

Section 6.1 explains in detail why the reciprocal Hamiltonian criterion
may fail. A sounder criterion, based on causal cones, is proposed and
used to re-derive the stability conditions of k-essence, as an
application. We will then move on, in Sec. 6.2 , to apply the causal
cone criterion to the stability of a Horndeski model, namely the action
( 4.33 ), and the associated Schwarzschild-de Sitter solution, Eqs. (
4.44 )–( 4.47 ). The mixed combination of space and time dependence for
the scalar, as well as the higher order nature of the theory, leads to
causal scalar and tensor cones which are quite complex. This is the
reason why the Hamiltonian-based analysis proposed in [ Ogawa:2015pea ]
(as well as Refs. [ Takahashi:2015pad , Takahashi:2016dnv , Kase:2018voo
] that use the same arguments ³ ³ 3 Reference [ Maselli:2016gxk ] also
uses these arguments, but it proves the stability of the odd-parity
modes outside neutron stars, and this is correct. as in [ Ogawa:2015pea
] ) gave the wrong conclusion, stating the instability of such black
holes. Although the Hamiltonian density associated with the spin-2
degree of freedom is unbounded from below in Schwarzschild coordinates,
we will see that it is bounded from below in an appropriate coordinate
system. The spin-2 and matter causal cones indeed keep compatible
orientations. We will complete this analysis by deriving the scalar
causal cone, and by showing that it also has a compatible orientation
with the two previous cones for a certain range of parameters of the
model. We present conclusions in Sec. 6.3 .

#### 6.1 Hamiltonian vs stability

The reason why the Hamiltonian criterion for instability may fail is
simple, although it goes against standard lore originating from particle
physics or highly symmetric backgrounds associated to
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker cosmology. The Hamiltonian density
is not a scalar quantity, and therefore depends on the coordinate system
it is associated with. As such, we will explicitly see that Hamiltonian
densities can be unbounded from below, but under a coordinate
transformation can be transformed to a bounded density. The key point
will be the coordinate system on which the Hamiltonian is to be defined
in relation to the effective causal cones. The coordinate system will
have to be of a certain “good” type in order for the Hamiltonian density
to be conclusive.

For our purposes, we will restrict ourselves to configurations where
essentially the problem is mathematically 2-dimensional. This includes
the case for planar, cylindrical or spherical symmetry, for example. A
‘‘good’’ coordinate system will first involve the existence of a common
timelike direction for all causal cones. Secondly, it will involve the
existence of a common spacelike direction exterior to all causal cones ⁴
⁴ 4 A causal cone represents an open set whose interior is bounded by
the characteristics of the cone. The complementary of this set with
boundary is an open set which is the exterior of the cone. . If such a
coordinate system exists, then we will show that the total Hamiltonian
density is bounded from below in this coordinate system, and the
solution is stable. If such a coordinate system does not exist, on the
contrary, then the Hamiltonian density is always unbounded from below.
The relevant criteria emerging from the causal cones will inevitably
lead to the knowledge of ghost or gradient instabilities present in the
system.

##### 6.1.1 Causal cones and Hamiltonian in a general coordinate system

Let us consider any possible effective metric @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 We use the
notation @xmath for the effective metric, because we will first apply
this discussion to k-essence, where the degree of freedom is a @xmath
calar. @xmath will be used in Sec. 6.2.1 to denote the effective metric
in which the spin-2 degree of freedom ( @xmath ravitational waves)
propagates. in which some field @xmath propagates. @xmath is to be
viewed as the perturbation of some background field, and @xmath is
derived from the second-order (in terms of @xmath ) action of the theory
under consideration. Locally, @xmath defines a causal cone through
@xmath , or equivalently through @xmath for a wave vector @xmath (
@xmath denotes the inverse of @xmath ). Additionally, let us consider
the physical metric @xmath , to which matter fields are universally
coupled. To simplify, we shall assume that this standard metric @xmath
is flat. This is not restrictive, since one can always chose a local
system of coordinates where this is the case. If the Lagrangian defining
the dynamics of @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

then the conjugate momentum of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Hamiltonian density associated to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that its positiveness depends only on @xmath and @xmath , but not
on the mixed components @xmath , although we shall see that they are
actually crucial for the stability analysis. Stability is indeed a
physical (observable) statement, which should be coordinate independent,
whereas the Hamiltonian density is not a scalar and depends thus on the
coordinate system.

To simplify even further the discussion, let us assume that @xmath is of
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath , and let us focus on the @xmath subspace as
shown in Fig. 6.1 .

In the neighborhood of a spherical body, for instance, it is natural to
choose spherical coordinates where @xmath and @xmath , the difficulties
being restricted to the @xmath subspace. In order for this metric to
define a cone, with non-empty interior and exterior, it is necessary
that its determinant be negative:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this hyperbolicity condition depends on the off-diagonal
component @xmath , contrary to the sign of Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 )
above. The inverse @xmath of matrix ( 6.4 ) (this is not the tensor
@xmath with indices lowered by @xmath , i.e., @xmath ) reads in the
@xmath subspace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can thus conclude that when @xmath indeed defines a cone, then
@xmath has the opposite sign of @xmath , and @xmath the opposite sign of
@xmath .

Let us now consider the exhaustive list of possible cone orientations of
Fig. 6.1 . In the situation of panel (a), the time axis is outside the
dashed blue cone defined by @xmath . This means that @xmath , and
therefore @xmath . This implies that the Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) is
unbounded from below because of the contribution of @xmath , when @xmath
is large enough (and @xmath is chosen to compensate @xmath ). This
conclusion remains the same for all panels of this figure in which the
time axis is outside the dashed cone, namely (f), (h), (i), (j), and
(k). On the contrary, when the time axis is within the dashed cone (in
all other panels of Fig. 6.1 ), this corresponds to @xmath , and the
second term of the Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) is thus positive.

Similarly, in the situation of panel (d), the @xmath axis is within the
dashed cone, therefore @xmath , which implies @xmath . In this case, the
Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) is unbounded from below because of the
contribution of its first term @xmath . This conclusion remains the same
for all panels in which the @xmath axis is inside the dashed cone,
namely (g), (h), (j), (k), and (l). In all other panels, the @xmath axis
is outside the dashed cone, therefore @xmath and the first term of the
Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) is thus positive.

Note that panels (h), (j) and (k) have both their time axis outside the
dashed cone and their @xmath axis within it. This means that the
Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) is always negative, while that corresponding
to matter (coupled to @xmath and propagating thereby in the solid grey
cone) is always positive. It thus naively seems that any coupling
between matter and @xmath , or any indirect coupling via another field
(for instance gravity), will lead to deadly instabilities. This is
indeed the case for panels (j) and (k), but not for panel (h). Indeed,
if one chooses another coordinate system such that the new time @xmath
lies within the intersection of both cones (superposition of the grey
and blue regions), and the new spatial direction @xmath is outside both
cones (white region), then one gets simultaneously the four conditions
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Therefore, both the Hamiltonian
density ( 6.3 ) for the degree of freedom @xmath and its analogue for
matter are positive in this coordinate system. This suffices to prove
that no instability can be caused by the kinetic terms in the situation
of panel (h).

Let us recall that when a total Hamiltonian density (including all
interacting fields) is bounded from below, then the lowest-energy state
is necessarily stable. It is indeed impossible to reach a higher energy
state (for any field) without violating energy conservation. But note
that the converse theorem does not exist, as underlined by the reasoning
above: a Hamiltonian density which is unbounded from below does not
always imply an instability.

Although the Hamiltonian density is not bounded by below in the
situations corresponding to panels (a), (d), (f), (g) and (h) of Fig.
6.1 , there exists a choice of coordinates mapping them to panels (b),
(c) or (e), where the new total Hamiltonian density is bounded from
below. This suffices to guarantee the stability of the lowest-energy
state, as computed in this new coordinate system. The only generically
unstable cases correspond to the third row of Fig. 6.1 , panels (i) to
(l), because their total Hamiltonian density is never bounded from below
in any coordinate system. They are such that the matrix @xmath is
diagonalizable and possesses two negative eigenvalues. Conversely, it is
easy to write the inequalities needed on the components of the effective
metric @xmath to be in the eight safe cases corresponding to the first
two rows, panels (a) to (h): in addition to the hyperbolicity condition
( 6.5 ), one just needs

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

when focusing on the @xmath subspace in a coordinate system such that
@xmath . But these inequalities are less enlightening than Fig. 6.1
itself, in which it is immediate to see whether the two causal cones
have both a common exterior (when one should specify initial data) and a
common interior. When one chooses new coordinates such that time lies
within the cone intersection, and space is outside both cones, then the
total Hamiltonian density caused by kinetic terms becomes positive.

##### 6.1.2 An illustration: the effect of boosts

To understand this better, let us just consider the boosts of special
relativity in flat spacetime, instead of the arbitrary coordinate
transformations allowed in general relativity. Under these boosts, the
metric @xmath in which matter propagates is unchanged and still reads
@xmath . In the simple cases of panels (b) and (c) of Fig. 6.1 , the
components of @xmath in the @xmath subspace read @xmath (up to an
overall positive constant), where @xmath is the speed corresponding to
the characteristics of the dashed blue cone. The wave equation for the
field @xmath reads @xmath , and it admits as solutions arbitrary
functions of @xmath . Panel (b) corresponds to @xmath while panel (c)
corresponds to @xmath . If one now performs a boost of speed @xmath ,
one finds that the components of @xmath in the new coordinate system
read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One thus immediately sees that @xmath (with @xmath still negative) when
one chooses @xmath , i.e., that panel (b) is mapped to panel (a).
Although we started from the stable situation of panel (b), in which the
total Hamiltonian density is positive, the contribution of the field
@xmath is no longer bounded from below in this boosted frame
corresponding to panel (a). This is an illustration of what we stated in
the previous paragraph. The fact that the Hamiltonian density is
unbounded from below is a mere coordinate effect in the present
situation, and it has no physical meaning. The model is stable, but one
is not computing the “right” quantity in the boosted frame of panel (a)
(we shall come back to this “right” quantity below).

Note that a negative value of @xmath in the boosted frame of panel (a)
always comes together with a significant non-zero value of @xmath ,
where @xmath is the determinant ( 6.5 ). The reason is that this
determinant must remain negative in all coordinate systems — and
actually remains strictly equal to @xmath when one considers only
special-relativistic boosts as here. These non-zero off-diagonal
components of @xmath are crucial for the existence of an inverse boost
taking us back to the situation of panel (b), where the total
Hamiltonian density is positive. If they were absent, then the metric
@xmath would be negative definite, it would not define any causal cone,
and the Cauchy problem would be ill-posed. Note also that the magnitude
of these off-diagonal components of @xmath is crucial. For instance,
panel (i) of Fig. 6.1 corresponds to @xmath and @xmath like panel (a),
and it does satisfy @xmath , but also the inequality @xmath , contrary
to Eq. ( 6.7 ). This leads to the situation of panel (j) when
diagonalizing @xmath by an appropriate boost. In this case (j), the two
metrics @xmath and @xmath have opposite signatures in the @xmath
subspace, so that the field @xmath behaves as a ghost in this subspace,
and the model is unstable as soon as @xmath is somehow coupled to matter
(including indirectly, e.g., via gravity).

Let us now apply a boost to the case of panel (c) of Fig. 6.1 . If one
chooses @xmath , then one finds from Eq. ( 6.8 ) that @xmath (with
@xmath still positive), i.e., one obtains the situation of panel (d).
Here again, as described above, one finds that the contribution of the
field @xmath to the Hamiltonian density is no longer bounded from below
in this boosted frame, whereas it was positive in the initial frame
corresponding to panel (c). The fact that the first term of ( 6.3 ),
proportional to @xmath , becomes negative is related to the fact that
the null direction @xmath (with respect to @xmath ) can have a “wrong”
time-orientation in the boosted frame. Indeed, from panel (d), when this
null vector @xmath points towards positive values of @xmath , it seems
to go backwards with respect to time @xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 On the other hand, the
possible negative value of Hamiltonian ( 6.3 ) in the previous case of
panel (a) is less obvious, since the null vectors @xmath (with respect
to @xmath ) always remain future-oriented. In that case, negative values
are caused by the second term of ( 6.3 ) involving the spatial
derivative @xmath , i.e., by a specific spatial dependence of the
initial data. . As underlined above, the hypersurface @xmath cannot be
consistently used to specify initial data in this case, since it is not
spacelike with respect to @xmath . Therefore, the sign of the
Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ) at @xmath does not have much meaning anyway.
The conclusion is the same as before: the fact that the Hamiltonian
density is unbounded by below in the boosted frame of panel (d) is a
mere coordinate effect, without any physical meaning, and the model is
actually stable, as proven by the positive total Hamiltonian density in
the frame of panel (c).

###### Mixing of energy and momentum

It is also instructive to compute the energy of a system in a boosted
frame (still in flat spacetime, to simplify the discussion). Although it
differs from @xmath , the effective metric @xmath is a tensor.
Therefore, the Lagrangian @xmath , Eq. ( 6.1 ), is diffeomorphism
invariant, and this implies that four Noether currents are conserved.
They read [ Wald:1984rg ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the index @xmath specifies which of the four currents is
considered, @xmath denotes its components, and @xmath is the Kronecker
symbol. The current conservation reads as usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

When integrating this identity over a large spatial volume @xmath
containing the whole physical system under consideration, the spatial
derivatives become vanishing boundary terms, and one gets the standard
conservation laws for total energy and momentum, @xmath , with @xmath .
For @xmath , the energy density @xmath coincides with the on-shell value
of the Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ). As recalled above, if it is bounded
from below, then the lowest-energy state must be stable. But it should
be underlined that the three components of the total momentum @xmath are
also conserved, and that the components @xmath — with @xmath still given
by Eq. ( 6.2 ) — have no preferred sign, since there is no privileged
spatial direction. When changing coordinates, the total 4-momentum of
the system becomes @xmath , and in particular, the energy gets mixed
with the initial 3-momentum, @xmath , or simply @xmath for a mere boost
of velocity @xmath in the @xmath direction. Of course, @xmath (as well
as @xmath ) is a scalar quantity, and it remains thus invariant under
coordinate transformations. However, it is not always negative, contrary
to the standard “minus rest mass squared” in special relativity,
therefore the magnitude of the spatial components @xmath is not always
bounded by @xmath . For instance, in panels (c) or (d) of Fig. 6.1 ,
when @xmath propagates outside the solid grey cone, it obviously
corresponds to a positive @xmath , i.e., a spacelike @xmath with respect
to @xmath . It is thus clear that a negative value of @xmath is
reachable for a large enough boost velocity @xmath . The fact that
@xmath can also become negative in the case of panel (a) is much less
obvious, but it can be checked that it coincides with the spatial
integral of the on-shell expression of the Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 )
with the boosted effective metric ( 6.8 ). In such a case, a large
enough boost velocity @xmath generates a negative @xmath , and thereby a
possibly negative Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 ), when initial data on the
@xmath hypersurface are chosen with a large spatial gradient @xmath (but
a small @xmath ).

With this slightly different viewpoint of momentum and energy
conservation, one can also understand why situations like panels (a) or
(d) of Fig. 6.1 are stable in spite of their Hamiltonian density ( 6.3 )
which is unbounded from below. Indeed, not only their total energy
@xmath is conserved, but also their 3-momentum @xmath . Thus, for any
boost speed @xmath , @xmath is also conserved. In the case of panel (a),
a boost of speed @xmath such that @xmath brings us to panel (b), where
the energy @xmath is obviously bounded from below. Similarly, a boost of
speed @xmath such that @xmath maps panel (d) to panel (c), making the
energy positive in the new frame for the same reason. In other words,
stability is not ensured by the fact that the Hamiltonian density is
bounded from below in the case of panels (a) and (d), but by the fact
that the linear combination @xmath is positive.

In more general situations involving arbitrary coordinate
transformations, the initial energy @xmath which is bounded from below
is again a linear combination of conserved quantities in the new frame,
@xmath .

##### 6.1.3 Application to k-essence

The above discussion is very generic. The simplest example of a theory
with different causal cones for a spin-0 degree of freedom and matter is
k-essence [ Bekenstein:1984tv , ArmendarizPicon:1999rj , Chiba:1999ka ,
ArmendarizPicon:2000ah ] . Again, to simplify, we will consider a flat
spacetime, i.e., without any metric perturbation. In terms of the
parametrization of Horndeski theory that we used, k-essence corresponds
to a non-linear function @xmath of the standard kinetic term: @xmath ,
where as usual @xmath stands for @xmath . If one writes the scalar field
as @xmath , where @xmath denotes the background solution and @xmath a
small perturbation, one finds that the second-order expansion of this
Lagrangian reads [ ArmendarizPicon:1999rj , Babichev:2006vx ,
Bruneton:2006gf , Bruneton:2007si , Babichev:2007dw ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above equation, it should be noted that the differential operator
@xmath stands for @xmath . @xmath is not proportional to @xmath as soon
as @xmath and the background solution has a non-vanishing gradient
@xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath define different causal cones.

As an application of the discussion in the previous paragraphs, let us
re-derive the stability conditions of k-essence. These conditions have
been written several times in the literature [ Aharonov:1969vu ,
ArmendarizPicon:1999rj , Babichev:2006vx , Bruneton:2006gf ,
Bruneton:2007si , Babichev:2007dw ] . They read @xmath and @xmath . Note
that no condition is imposed on @xmath alone.

When the background scalar gradient @xmath is timelike with respect to
@xmath , the causal cones can be represented as panels (a), (b), (c) or
(d) of Fig. 6.1 , where the gray cone (with solid lines) is defined by
@xmath and the blue one (with dashed lines) by @xmath . Panel (a) is
actually transformed into (b), and (d) into (c), if one chooses a
coordinate system such that the spatial gradients @xmath vanish, the
vector @xmath pointing then exactly in the time direction. Panels (a)
and (b) correspond to @xmath , and mean that the spin-0 degree of
freedom @xmath propagates slower than light. Panels (c) and (d)
correspond to @xmath , and describe a superluminal scalar field, but
this does not lead to any causality problem as soon as this dashed cone
remains always a cone, with a non-empty exterior where one may define
Cauchy surfaces to specify initial data. This has already been discussed
in detail [ Aharonov:1969vu , Babichev:2006vx , Bruneton:2006gf ,
Bruneton:2007si , Babichev:2007dw ] . Paradoxes only occur when one
wants to specify initial data on the @xmath hypersurface in the
situation of panel (d): this is forbidden because this hypersurface is
not spacelike with respect to the dashed cone.

Let us choose some coordinates such that @xmath . Then, if @xmath is
timelike with respect to @xmath , it is always possible to boost this
coordinate system such that @xmath . One thus gets @xmath . To be in the
situation of panels (b) or (c) of Fig. 6.1 , it is necessary to have
@xmath and @xmath , therefore one needs @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath
in this specific coordinate system, the covariant expressions of these
conditions are necessarily @xmath and @xmath , and we recover the
correct result.

The result remains the same when the background scalar gradient @xmath
is spacelike (still with respect to @xmath ). Then one may choose the
@xmath coordinate in its direction, so that its only non-vanishing
component is @xmath . In this coordinate system, the components of the
effective metric read @xmath , while @xmath , therefore one recovers
strictly the same covariant inequalities.

Finally, when @xmath is a null vector (again with respect to @xmath ,
i.e., @xmath ), it is possible to choose a coordinate system in which
@xmath , and the non-vanishing components of the effective metric read
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then, one of the characteristics
defined by @xmath coincides with one of those defined by @xmath ,
corresponding to a velocity @xmath for spin-0 perturbations. This is
thus a limiting case of those plotted in Fig. 6.1 . But when @xmath ,
consistently with the same covariant inequalities as above, one finds
that the causal cones defined by @xmath and @xmath have both a common
interior and a common exterior, and the background solution is thus
stable.

#### 6.2 Stable black hole solutions in Horndeski theory

Let us now illustrate these findings with a specific example. We will
discuss some solutions of the shift and reflection symmetric action (
4.33 ), that we recall here for convenience:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Regarding stability, Appleby and Linder examined the action ( 6.13 )
with vanishing @xmath in a cosmological framework [ Appleby:2011aa ] .
From the study of scalar perturbations, they found that there always
exists either a gradient instability or a ghost. This pathology can
however be cured by the introduction of a bare cosmological constant
@xmath , as we will see below. The stability of the black hole solutions
with a static scalar field was discussed in [ Kobayashi:2012kh ,
Kobayashi:2014wsa , Ganguly:2017ort ] . Stable parameter regions were
exhibited. Then, Ogawa et al. tackled the case where the scalar field
acquires time-dependence [ Ogawa:2015pea ] . They claimed that the
solutions were always unstable, whatever the coupling parameters of the
theory. However, their argument made use of the fact that the
Hamiltonian is unbounded from below; as argued in Sec. 6.1 , this
criterion can lead to erroneous conclusions. We show in Paragraph 6.2.3
that there indeed exist stable black hole solutions for given
parameters. These are stable against simultaneous scalar, gravitational
and matter perturbations. We will first derive the effective metrics in
which spin-2 and scalar perturbations respectively propagate.

##### 6.2.1 The effective metrics for spin-2 and scalar perturbations

The analysis will be mostly focused on the spherically symmetric
Schwarzschild-de Sitter solutions presented in Paragraph 4.2.2 , Eqs. (
4.45 )–( 4.46 ). Let us recall this solution in a compact form:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath parametrizes the linear time-dependence of the scalar field
⁷ ⁷ 7 There actually exist two branches for the scalar field,
corresponding to a plus or minus sign in front of the @xmath integral.
We keep only the minus branch, so that this solution is mapped to a
homogeneous and expanding one in Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker
coordinates, see [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . . Again, the constant @xmath
plays the role of an effective cosmological constant, and is a priori
independent of the bare one @xmath , with the velocity @xmath playing
the role of a tuning integration constant to @xmath via Eq. ( 6.18 ).
For consistency, the right-hand side of Eq. ( 6.18 ) should be positive;
since @xmath is always positive, one must therefore have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for this solution. Since this solution is meant to describe the present
acceleration of the expansion of the Universe, @xmath should be
positive, which translates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now proceed with the perturbative analysis. We will actually
perform a mode analysis ⁸ ⁸ 8 A covariant analysis to find the effective
metrics would be more powerful, but it is a hard task to demix spin-0
and spin-2 perturbations without assuming any symmetry on the
background. This result has been obtained in the case of quadratic and
cubic Horndeski theory, but not for the quartic sector. More details are
given in Appendix C . . Indeed, one can exploit the spherical symmetry
of the background to decompose perturbations on the basis of spherical
harmonics @xmath . Since modes of given orbital numbers @xmath and
@xmath do not interact at linear level, one can study stability mode by
mode. This mode formalism was first developed by Regge and Wheeler [
Regge:1957td ] in the framework of general relativity. Their work was
completed by Vishveshwara [ Vishveshwara:1970cc ] and Zerilli [
Zerilli:1970se ] . The metric and scalar field are perturbed according
to:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where a bar denotes the background solution ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ). A priori,
@xmath and @xmath are arbitrary (small) functions of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . As shown in [ Regge:1957td ] , one can then
decompose these perturbations on the base of spherical harmonics:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
     @xmath               (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where indices @xmath and @xmath run over angular coordinates ( @xmath
and @xmath ), and @xmath with @xmath the two-dimensional metric on the
sphere and @xmath the totally antisymmetric symbol ( @xmath ). In the
above sums, @xmath runs from 0 to infinity, and @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath . There are then eleven free functions parametrizing a given
mode: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (corresponding to the ten components
of a two-by-two symmetric tensor, and to the scalar; of course, because
of gauge invariance, the number of free functions may be reduced). Each
of the terms in Eqs. ( 6.23 )–( 6.29 ) behaves in a specific way under
the parity transformation @xmath ; either it picks a @xmath or a @xmath
coefficient. In the former case, the perturbation is said to have even
parity and in the latter, odd parity. The terms associated with Gothic
letters @xmath correspond to the odd parity perturbations, while all
others are even parity perturbations.

At the same time, in scalar-tensor theories, a mode of given @xmath
should describe the two polarizations of the spin-2 degree of freedom
and the scalar degree of freedom. Generically, the odd part of some mode
corresponds to one polarization of the spin-2 degree of freedom, while
the even part corresponds to the other polarization and the scalar
degree of freedom (see [ Kobayashi:2012kh , Kobayashi:2014wsa ] for
instance). The cases @xmath and @xmath constitute exceptions however.
For instance, in the case of the monopole mode @xmath , the odd terms in
Eqs. ( 6.26 )–( 6.28 ) are simply absent. Indeed, it is a spherically
symmetric mode, and it is expected that the spin-2 degree of freedom
does not propagate with this symmetry. Thus, if the effective action
which describes this mode is non-trivial, it necessarily corresponds to
the spin-0 field. We will now use this fact in order to determine the
effective metric for the scalar degree of freedom, in the background
given by Eqs. ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ). Let us thus focus on a spherically
symmetric perturbation. In this case, Eqs. ( 6.23 )–( 6.28 ) boil down
to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with free functions @xmath and @xmath (which correspond to @xmath and
@xmath in the previous notations). Inserting these perturbations into
the action, one can isolate the terms which are quadratic in @xmath and
@xmath . This gives the second order perturbed action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factor @xmath corresponds to the trivial angular integration,
and @xmath is the Lagrangian density from which one can extract the
causal structure of the perturbations. The subscript “s” stands for
scalar, since only a spherically symmetric mode is excited. The
calculations can be simplified by using the diffeomorphism invariance
generated by an infinitesimal vector @xmath . In some new system of
coordinates @xmath , the metric and scalar transform according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With a well-chosen @xmath , one can in fact set @xmath and @xmath to
zero. This completely fixes the gauge. Explicitly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this gauge fixing is possible only when @xmath , i.e., the
scalar field is not static. In this gauge, @xmath reads, after numerous
integrations by parts and using the background field equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here a dot represents a time derivative, and all @xmath are background
coefficients with radial (but no time) dependence, the detailed
expression of which can be found in Appendix D . This three-field
Lagrangian should boil down to a Lagrangian depending on a single
dynamical variable. As a first step in this direction, it is easy to
eliminate @xmath since the associated field equation is algebraic in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting back this expression in @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath coefficients are again given in Appendix D in terms of
the @xmath . A trickier step is to trade @xmath and @xmath for a single
variable, since the associated field equations are differential
equations, not algebraic ones. To this end, let us introduce an
auxiliary field @xmath as a linear combination of @xmath , @xmath and
their first derivatives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with some @xmath coefficients to be determined soon. The idea is to
introduce @xmath at the level of the action, group all the derivatives
inside @xmath , and then to solve for the algebraic equations giving
@xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath . Therefore, let us rewrite the
Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Variation of ( 6.39 ) with respect to @xmath ensures Eq. ( 6.38 ). Now,
a simple identification with Lagrangian ( 6.37 ) allows one to determine
the @xmath in terms of the @xmath . Again, these coefficients are given
in Appendix D . Variation of ( 6.39 ) with respect to @xmath and @xmath
gives a system of two linear equations, which can be easily solved to
write these two fields in terms of @xmath and its derivatives. We do not
write down their expression here because of their consequent length, but
the procedure is straightforward ⁹ ⁹ 9 The same procedure for the
stealth Schwarzschild black hole ( 4.39 )-( 4.40 ) breaks down at this
point. Section D.2 of the corresponding appendix is devoted to this
particular case. . At this point, the Lagrangian density depends on a
single variable @xmath . We will examine its kinetic part only,
neglecting the potential associated to this degree of freedom and
thereby focusing on the causal structure. This kinetic part reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.43)
                          (6.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Alternatively, one can remark that the scalar mode propagates to linear
order in the given black hole background ( 6.14 ) with an effective
two-dimensional metric @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can read from Eq. ( 6.40 ) the inverse metric:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the metric itself:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this last object, one can determine the hyperbolicity condition,
the propagation speeds, and all the information needed for the causal
structure of the scalar mode. The hyperbolicity condition for instance
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The speed of a wave moving towards or away from the origin is then given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The hyperbolicity condition ensures that these propagation speeds are
well defined. At any given point, @xmath and @xmath generate the scalar
causal cone. Finally, one needs to know where the interior of the cone
is located. This can be easily determined by checking whether a given
direction (for instance the one generated by the vector @xmath ) is time
or space-like with respect to the metric @xmath .

A similar analysis must be carried out for the spin-2 mode. It was
actually already realized by Ogawa et al. in [ Ogawa:2015pea ] . They
studied odd-parity perturbations which, as we mentioned, generically
correspond to one of the spin-2 polarizations. These perturbations are
obtained by keeping only @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in Eqs. ( 6.23 )–(
6.28 ). For the solution ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ), the gravity perturbations
propagate in a two-dimensional effective metric @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The hyperbolicity condition coming from @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the speeds of inwards/outwards moving gravitational waves are given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a nutshell, we have found the effective metrics in which the spin-2
and scalar degrees of freedom propagate, and they are given by @xmath
and @xmath respectively.

##### 6.2.2 Homogeneous solutions: a stability window

We will first apply the above analysis to de Sitter solutions, that is
solution ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ) with @xmath . Of course, in this case, the
analysis presented above is not strictly necessary, but it allows us to
cross check our results with cosmological perturbation theory. In
particular, we arrive at the same conclusion as [ Appleby:2011aa ] for
the model ( 6.13 ) with vanishing @xmath : there is no stable
homogeneous configuration. However, switching on a non-trivial @xmath ,
the hyperbolicity conditions ( 6.48 ) and ( 6.53 ) read respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These two conditions must be supplemented with the fact that the spin-2,
matter and scalar cones have a non-empty intersection and a common
exterior. It is enough to check the orientation of the cones at @xmath ,
since the solution under analysis is homogeneous. If the cones have
compatible orientations at @xmath , this will remain true everywhere
else. The calculation is then particularly simple, since @xmath and
@xmath vanish at @xmath , meaning that the cones are either aligned (and
symmetric around the @xmath axis) or inclined at ninety degrees. The
@xmath axis is of course always in the interior of the matter causal
cone. Therefore, the spin-2 and scalar causal cones are compatible if
@xmath and @xmath . In terms of the parameters of the theory, this
translates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. Thus, there are in total six conditions to fulfill for
stability and existence of the solution: Eqs. ( 6.19 ), ( 6.20 ), ( 6.55
), ( 6.56 ), ( 6.57 ) and ( 6.58 ). They actually define an non-empty
subspace of the parameter space. The cosmological solution is stable if
and only if

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the following section, we give an example of parameters that fulfill
this criterion. Let us stress that the above restrictions prevent one
from using the theory ( 6.13 ) as a self-tuning model. Indeed, the above
equations tell us that the effective cosmological constant has to be of
same magnitude as the bare one. Thus, in the case of the model ( 6.13 ),
stability prevents the scalar field from absorbing a huge amount of
vacuum energy (present through a large @xmath here). In Chapter 7 , we
will see some models that allow for an actual self-tuning.

##### 6.2.3 Black holes in de Sitter: example of a stable configuration

The causal cone analysis is fully relevant when the solution no longer
describes a homogeneous cosmology, but rather a black hole embedded in
such a cosmology. The two conditions for the background solution to
exist and have de Sitter asymptotics, Eqs. ( 6.19 )-( 6.20 ), do not
depend on the presence of a mass @xmath . Therefore, they remain
identical when a black hole is present.

On the other hand, the expressions of @xmath and @xmath become very
complicated with a non-vanishing black hole mass. It is still possible
to prove that the hyperbolicity conditions for both @xmath and @xmath
are not modified with respect to the de Sitter case. They are again
given by Eqs. ( 6.55 )-( 6.56 ). To ensure the compatibility of
orientation between the scalar, matter and spin-2 cones is however more
tricky. We checked numerically that the conditions ( 6.57 ) and ( 6.58 )
for these three cones to be compatible in the de Sitter case lead to
compatible cones also when the mass parameter @xmath is switched on.
That is, for parameters in the range ( 6.59 )-( 6.60 ), the three cones
seem to have a compatible orientation even close to the black hole
horizon. This remains true for arbitrary mass of the black hole (as long
as the black hole horizon remains smaller than the cosmological
horizon). Figure 6.2 provides an illustrative example of this numerical
check, for a given set of parameters that falls in the range ( 6.59 ).

In this case, the cones have compatible orientations everywhere, meaning
that the background solution is stable against gravitational, scalar and
matter perturbations. Remarkably, the scalar causal cone entirely opens
up when approaching the black hole horizon, without becoming
pathological.

Let us stress here why Ref. [ Ogawa:2015pea ] would have claimed that
the situation exhibited in Fig. 6.2 is unstable, in the light of the
discussion of Sec. 6.1 . In this paper, the spin-2 effective metric
components @xmath and @xmath were required to be negative and positive
respectively. It was proven, however, that the product @xmath is always
positive in the vicinity of a horizon. Figure 6.2 shows that, indeed,
the @xmath axis “leaves” the causal cone of the spin-2 degree of freedom
(red cone), close to the event and cosmological horizon, while the
@xmath axis remains in the exterior of the cone. This makes the quantity
@xmath positive close to horizons, and the associated Hamiltonian
density unbounded from below. However, our analysis so far clearly shows
that it does not signal an instability in any way.

#### 6.3 Conclusions

In this chapter, we have studied stability criteria for solutions in
modified gravity theories, without particular restriction to
scalar-tensor theories. We then applied these criteria to establish the
stability of certain black holes with non-trivial scalar hair, that we
encountered in Chapter 4 .

The tools developed, as well as the stability criteria concerning
Hamiltonian densities, are generically applicable in modified gravity
theories. The starting ingredients for the applicability of these tools
are multiple gravitational degrees of freedom, a clear characteristic of
theories going beyond general relativity. In order to treat the problem
consistently, we used the notion of causal cone, each associated to a
healthy propagating degree of freedom. Indeed, the local existence of
well-defined causal cones allows to determine the healthy propagation of
modes about an effective background solution. We saw that, unlike
standard lore, the Hamiltonian densities associated to each of the modes
do not suffice to exhibit an instability. The failure of the Hamiltonian
criterion, in more complex background metrics, is due to the fact that
it is not a scalar quantity. Each Hamiltonian density, associated to a
propagating mode, depends on the particular coordinate system one is
using. So although a Hamiltonian density which is bounded from below
signals that the mode is stable, the converse is not true. Namely, a
Hamiltonian density found to be unbounded from below in some coordinate
system is inconclusive on instability. One may find a coordinate
transformation rendering the Hamiltonian bounded from below as we saw
explicitly in Sec. 6.1 .

Standard lore is recovered only for a class of “good” coordinate systems
that are defined with respect to all the causal cones present in the
system: scalar, spin-2, matter, etc. Namely, these “good” coordinate
systems exhibit a timelike coordinate common to all causal cones and
spacelike coordinates for all causal cone exteriors. If such a
coordinate system exists, then the Hamiltonian is indeed bounded from
below and the degrees of freedom are well behaved, propagating in a
timelike direction with a hyperbolic operator. If not, then indeed the
Hamiltonian for at least one of the degrees of freedom is always
unbounded from below, and it presents a ghost instability.

The subtlety arises due to the complexity of the background solution.
Indeed, the key point for the examples here is that the background
scalar is space and time dependent. Then the causal cones can tilt and
open up when approaching the horizon (event or cosmological). As a
result, the original time (space) coordinate of the background metric
may “leave” the interior (exterior) of a causal cone associated to some
degree of freedom. This can lead to a misinterpretation of the
Hamiltonian density associated to the initial coordinates, which “leave”
the causal cone of the degree of freedom in question. It should be
emphasized that the failing Hamiltonian stability criterion is not due
to the mixing of degrees of freedom, as illustrated by the simple
k-essence example of Sec. 6.1 . One may also consider the case of a
theory including a @xmath Horndeski term, as in Sec. 4.3 , where the
de-mixing of modes has been achieved [ Babichev:2012re ] for an
arbitrary background ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This result is not known for @xmath
theories, as discussed in Appendix C . We saw in Sec. 4.3 that in such a
model were found self-accelerating vacua. In a standard
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker coordinate system, where the dark
energy scalar depends purely on cosmological time, such
self-accelerating solutions generically give (depending on the coupling
constants of the theory) a stable vacuum [ Babichev:2012re ] , with an
associated Hamiltonian which is bounded from below. When one considers
the precise same stable vacua in a spherical coordinate system, where
the metric is static but the scalar field now depends both on space and
time, the same Hamiltonian density can be found to be unbounded from
below. This, as we emphasized, is an artifact of a bad use of a
coordinate system (here static) whereas the
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker coordinates are indeed “good”
(satisfying the causal cone criteria, its cosmological time remaining
notably within the causal cones). This example demonstrates that
misinterpretations related to Hamiltonian densities are not due to
mixing of degrees of freedom but, crucially, to the background depending
(or not) on multiple coordinates. It is for this reason that one does
not encounter problems with the Hamiltonian in
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker coordinates for example or when the
scalar field is static, as in Chapter 5 . The analysis presented in this
chapter is therefore relevant for backgrounds with lesser symmetry, for
example stationary backgrounds involving rotating black holes. For
stationary backgrounds, the @xmath and @xmath dependent effective
metrics may again tilt and open up as one approaches a horizon. Clearly,
the analysis can also be used in vector-tensor theories, where black
holes similar to the one studied here have been found [ Chagoya:2016aar
, Minamitsuji:2016ydr , Babichev:2017rti ] . In any case, let us
emphasize that there always exist “bad” coordinates in which the
Hamiltonian density of a stable solution appears unbounded from below.
It suffices that its time direction is outside at least one of the
causal cones, or that some spatial direction is inside one of them. For
instance, a mere exchange of @xmath and @xmath creates such a spurious
pathology, whereas the physics is obviously unchanged. As usual in
general relativity, one should never trust coordinate-dependent
quantities.

We also underlined that, when there exists a “good” coordinate system in
which the total Hamiltonian density is bounded from below, then it may
also be computed in other coordinate systems, but it no longer
corresponds to the mere energy. It becomes a linear combination of the
energy and momentum densities, whose spatial integrals over the whole
system are all conserved. In other words, the stability of the solution
is still guaranteed by the bounded from below character of a conserved
quantity, but it is no longer the Hamiltonian which plays this role.

Using the above tools, we have corrected a misinterpretation [
Ogawa:2015pea , Takahashi:2015pad , Takahashi:2016dnv , Kase:2018voo ]
in the literature about the said instability of a class of hairy black
holes. It is true, as stated in [ Ogawa:2015pea ] , that the Hamiltonian
density for the spin-2 degree of freedom is always unbounded from below
in Schwarzschild coordinates when approaching a horizon. However, at the
same time, the spin-2 causal cone remains compatible with the matter
causal cone under some conditions on the parameters defining the model.
In other words, there exist coordinate systems where the Hamiltonian
density for the spin-2 degree of freedom is bounded from below. We
completed this stability analysis by computing the scalar causal cone,
thanks to the study of @xmath perturbations. Again, there exists a
domain of parameters where the three causal cones share a common time
and a common spacelike hypersurface. Hence, the class of hairy black
holes studied here is free of ghost and gradient instabilities for a
given range of parameters of the model. This is an important result
considering the rarity of stable hairy black holes in gravitational
physics (see for example [ Bronnikov:1978mx , Harper:2003wt ] and [
Volkov:1998cc ] for the instability of two celebrated cases).

However, the reader might be aware that the model ( 6.13 ) (as well as
most of the quartic and quintic Horndeski sector) were recently ruled
out as dark energy candidates, by a single gravitational event,
GW170817. We are going to see however, that the work presented in this
chapter is not vain, and that both stability and consistency with
GW170817 can be fulfilled easily.

### Chapter 7 The speed of gravitational waves

On August 17, 2017 were detected almost simultaneously gravitational
waves and a gamma-ray burst, as well as an electromagnetic signal in
more or less all possible observation channels [
TheLIGOScientific:2017qsa , Monitor:2017mdv , GBM:2017lvd ] . This
event, baptized with the beautiful name of GW170817, was interpreted as
the merger of two neutron stars. The gravitational wave signal before
the merger is clean and corresponds to general relativistic expectations
for the final inspiral of two neutron stars. It also allows to estimate
roughly the masses of the two components, which were between 0.86 and
2.26 @xmath . Although it was possible to detect the signal
approximately 100 s before the merger, the post-merger phase did not
provide much information, and the properties of the remnant object
remain elusive. This experiment provides priceless information on the
strong field regime of gravity. At the same time, it also constitutes an
entirely new cosmological test. First, it provides an independent
measurement of the current Hubble rate @xmath (it is found to be @xmath
km.s @xmath .Mpc @xmath ). This might help to reconcile the values
obtained from supernovae data and cosmic microwave background, for which
a discrepancy has been observed.

Second, and this is what is the most constraining for generalized
scalar-tensor theories, this event proves that light and gravitational
waves propagate at the same speed in the intergalactic medium (we will
note their respective speeds as @xmath and @xmath in the rest of this
chapter). Indeed, these waves traveled over a distance of around 40 Mpc,
and arrived with a delay of 1.7 s. This constrains the speeds of light
and gravity to differ by no more than a few parts in @xmath . The
constraint is probably even stronger, since the delay might be due to
the time that is necessary for a jet to form during the merger and emit
the electromagnetic radiation ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the absence of
gravitational Cherenkov radiation for high-energy astroparticles already
imposed an indirect lower bound on the speed of gravitational waves,
@xmath [ Moore:2001bv ] . . On the other hand, most Horndeski and beyond
theories predict that, if the scalar field plays a significant role in
cosmology, especially in the late Universe, its presence should affect
the speed of propagation of gravitational waves (pretty much as the
presence of matter slows down the propagation of light in material
media).

References [ Creminelli:2017sry , Ezquiaga:2017ekz ] (see also [
Lombriser:2015sxa , Lombriser:2016yzn , Bartolo:2017ibw , Baker:2017hug
, Sakstein:2017xjx ] ) have characterized which Horndeski models and
their generalizations satisfy exactly @xmath in a homogeneous Universe.
This chapter will focus on this particular subclass of the Horndeski and
beyond theory. In order to ensure @xmath , no quintic Horndeski or
beyond term is allowed. For example, interactions involving the
Gauss-Bonnet term, like the model ( 5.36 ), are excluded ² ² 2 By
excluded, throughout this chapter, we refer to the cases where the extra
mode is a dark energy field, giving an effective acceleration to the
Universe at late times. If the extra mode, say a scalar, is not varying
at cosmological scales, but only locally, it may not influence
gravitational waves in their 40 Mpc journey to Earth detectors. [
Ezquiaga:2017ekz , Creminelli:2017sry ] . Furthermore, the function
@xmath must be related to @xmath by [ Creminelli:2017sry ,
Ezquiaga:2017ekz ] ³ ³ 3 Note that there is a sign mistake in Eq. (11)
of Ref. [ Creminelli:2017sry ] , and that Ref. [ Ezquiaga:2017ekz ]
defines @xmath with a sign oppposite to Eq. ( 20 ).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is however easy to map some quartic Horndeski model into a Horndeski
and beyond one that fulfills the condition ( 7.1 ), through a disformal
transformation that depends only on @xmath , i.e., by writing the
initial Horndeski action in terms of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a suitably chosen @xmath . This is a subcase of the generic
disformal transformation, Eq. ( 19 ). Then, at least in homogeneous
backgrounds, the new theory fulfills @xmath . Note that such a
transformation cannot be operated on quintic Horndeski theories. For
completeness, let us give the most general degenerate higher-order
scalar-tensor theory that passes the gravitational wave test (at least
at the cosmological level). Its Lagrangian reads [ Creminelli:2017sry ]
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are unchanged with respect to Eqs. ( 15 )-( 16
), and @xmath and @xmath are new free functions of @xmath and @xmath .

The condition ( 7.1 ) ensures that the speeds of gravitational and
electromagnetic waves coincide at least in a homogeneous cosmological
background. However, the waves of the GW170817 event did pass nearby
massive bodies during their 40 Mpc journey, and if their speeds slightly
differed in such inhomogeneous situations, this would a priori suffice
to increase the delay between their detections. It is thus important to
check that these speeds remain equal even in inhomogeneous backgrounds.
Actually, Ref. [ Ezquiaga:2017ekz ] claims that the condition ( 7.1 )
also suffices around arbitrary backgrounds, and we will confirm so below
for a specific exact solution. But this reference uses the results of [
Bettoni:2016mij ] , which needed to neglect scalar-spin-2 mixing terms
in order to extract the spin-2 propagation speed. Generically, the
separation of the spin-2 and spin-0 degrees of freedom is background
dependent and highly non-trivial, as shown in Appendix C . In the same
spirit, Ref. [ Creminelli:2017sry ] computed the Arnowitt-Deser-Misner
decomposition of the Lagrangian ( 7.3 ). In the unitary gauge, it is
very similar to general relativity (at least when @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the three dimensional Ricci scalar on constant @xmath
hypersurfaces, and @xmath the associated extrinsic curvature. However,
it is not completely obvious from this expression that spin-2
perturbations propagate at @xmath , because the Lagrangian contains for
instance mixing terms proportional to @xmath , in usual
Arnowitt-Deser-Misner notation; the shift @xmath cannot be eliminated as
in general relativity, because the gauge was already fixed in order to
absorb the scalar field (see also a related discussion in [
Langlois:2017dyl ] ). This decomposition might allow one to conclude
generically about the speed of gravitational waves, but a careful
justification is still needed.

The present chapter is based on our work [ Babichev:2017lmw ] , and its
aim is twofold. First, in Sec. 7.1 , we check that the speed equality
remains satisfied even in a very inhomogeneous situation, namely in the
vicinity of a black hole, where gradients are large and where the
separation of spin-2 and spin-0 degrees of freedom is difficult. This
will be done for an exact Schwarzschild-de Sitter solution of the
specific model ( 6.13 ) — more precisely for its disformally transformed
version, as in Eq. ( 7.2 ). We also report that this solution is
ghost-free and has no gradient instability for some ranges of the
parameters defining the theory. Then, in Sec. ( 7.2 ), we show that an
infinity of self-tuning cosmological models still exist while taking
into account the @xmath constraint. In such models, the energy-momentum
tensor of the scalar field almost perfectly counterbalances the very
large bare cosmological constant assumed to be present in the
Lagrangian, so that the observable accelerated expansion of the Universe
is consistent with a tiny effective cosmological constant.

#### 7.1 The speed of gravitational waves in strongly curved backgrounds

##### 7.1.1 From the Horndeski to the physical frame

The model ( 6.13 ) is a non-trivial quartic Horndeski model. Thus, as
such, it has @xmath in cosmological backgrounds. This is however true
only as long as matter is assumed to be minimally coupled to @xmath . As
mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, it suffices to couple
matter to a different metric @xmath , disformally related to @xmath , to
change the matter causal cone so that @xmath is ensured, at least in a
homogeneous Universe. In the present model ( 6.13 ), the disformal
transformations given in [ Bettoni:2013diz , Zumalacarregui:2013pma ,
Crisostomi:2016czh , Achour:2016rkg ] or the gravity speed derived in [
Bettoni:2016mij , Ezquiaga:2017ekz ] might be used to prove that this
physical metric must read:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course, any metric proportional to this @xmath would also be allowed,
since it would not change the causal cone, even if the conformal factor
depends on @xmath . In standard nomenclature for Brans-Dicke gravity,
the non-physical @xmath would be called the “Einstein frame” metric.
However, its perturbations do not describe a pure spin-2 degree of
freedom in the present case, because of the kinetic mixing introduced by
the @xmath term of action ( 6.13 ). Therefore, @xmath will be called the
“Horndeski frame” metric rather than the “Einstein frame” one. On the
other hand, @xmath is still called the “Jordan frame” metric, or
physical metric. As in standard Brans-Dicke, it is easier to work in the
non-physical frame because the metric sector is simpler there. One
should keep in mind that the analogy is to be taken with caution,
because the frames of the higher order theories are related disformally
( 7.2 ), and not conformally as in Brans-Dicke. One may also rewrite the
action ( 6.13 ) in terms of this @xmath , and one finds that it becomes
of the Horndeski and beyond form, Eqs. ( 15 )–( 18 ) and ( 20 )–( 21 ),
with rather complicated functions @xmath and @xmath (involving nested
square roots), which now do satisfy the constraint ( 7.1 ) in terms of
the variable @xmath ( @xmath denoting of course the inverse of @xmath ).
This guarantees that the speeds of light and gravity coincide at least
in the asymptotic homogeneous Universe, far away from any local massive
body.

Before proceeding to the causal cone analysis (which will inform us
about both the speed of propagation of spin-2 waves and stability), let
us find the form of the background solution ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ) in the
physical frame. For this family of solutions, the quantity @xmath is
constant, which simplifies the disformal transformation ( 7.5 ). To
simplify notation, let us set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the notations of Eqs. ( 6.13 ) and ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ). The disformed
metric @xmath acquires off-diagonal terms in the original @xmath
coordinates due to the @xmath and @xmath scalar field dependence. We
then diagonalize the physical metric using the following coordinate
redefinition ⁴ ⁴ 4 The sign in front of the @xmath integral can actually
be either a plus or minus, corresponding to the fact that two branches
exist for the scalar solution, Eq. ( 6.17 ). However, as in the previous
chapter, only the minus branch for the scalar field is mapped to a
homogeneous and expanding one in the Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker
coordinates of the physical frame. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that, for this coordinate transformation to be well defined, one
needs @xmath . For the solution ( 6.14 )–( 6.18 ), this bound reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This bound must be kept in mind for the upcoming stability analysis,
that will constrain the range of the parameters. The background solution
in the physical frame then recovers the same form as the original
background, namely:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the rescaled parameters of the solution are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

still with @xmath and @xmath fulfilling Eq. ( 6.18 ). The solution in
the physical frame is asymptotically de Sitter only for positive @xmath
. In terms of the Lagrangian parameters, this translates as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

to be combined with constraints ( 6.19 ) and ( 7.8 ). It is easy to
check that the three conditions together imply that the solution was
also asymptotically de Sitter in the original Horndeski frame, i.e.,
that @xmath . Note that the above transformation can be trivially
extended to the stealth solution ( 4.39 )-( 4.40 ). Hence, the physical
metrics are again black hole solutions. This is not a trivial result, as
a disformal transformation may change the nature of solutions, rendering
them even singular upon going from one frame to the other.

At this stage, it seems from Eq. ( 7.14 ) that a very small @xmath
remains possible, for instance if @xmath is chosen to almost compensate
@xmath . However, the field equations written in the physical frame
@xmath actually always imply @xmath [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . Moreover, we
will see below that the stability of the solution forces the observable
@xmath to be of the same order of magnitude as @xmath (or even larger).
Therefore, in the simple model ( 6.13 ), the small observed cosmological
constant cannot be explained by the self-tuning mechanism, and some
other reason must be invoked, like in standard general relativity. It
remains that this model is observationally consistent if the constant
@xmath entering ( 6.13 ) is small enough.

As mentionned in Chapter 6 , the odd-parity perturbations of solution (
7.9 )–( 7.14 ) have been analyzed in [ Ogawa:2015pea ] . The causal
structure carries through upon disformal field redefinitions ( 7.2 ), as
long as these are not singular. Thus, in the physical frame, spin-2
perturbations propagate in the effective metric @xmath , as given in
Eqs. ( 6.50 )–( 6.52 ). One can compare it with the metric @xmath ,
Eq. ( 7.5 ), to which matter (including photons) is assumed to be
coupled. The result is remarkably simple:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two metrics are related by a constant conformal factor. Therefore,
they have identical causal structure at any point of spacetime, provided
that the conformal factor is positive. When this is the case, matter and
spin-2 perturbations propagate exactly the same way (on the contrary, if
the above conformal factor is negative, the cone of the spin-2 degree of
freedom is exactly complementary to the matter one and they have no
overlap nor common exterior). One is therefore led to impose that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., in terms of the Lagrangian parameters:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this condition, even close to the black hole, the causal cones of
spin-2 and matter perturbations exactly coincide. In other words, the
universal coupling of matter to the disformal metric ( 7.5 ) suffices to
ensure @xmath even in a very inhomogeneous configuration.

##### 7.1.2 Stability of the solution

We are now going to study the stability of the above solution, based on
the results of Chapter 6 . We do so in the Horndeski frame because we
already know the causal structure of the spin-2 and scalar degrees of
freedom from Chapter 6 . In this chapter, three causal cones had to be
considered: the matter causal cone and the cones associated to scalar
and gravitational perturbations (with their associated effective
metrics). Now, if matter couples to the physical metric @xmath , the
effective metric for the spin-2 degree of freedom is identical to the
effective metric for light, provided Eq. ( 7.18 ) is fulfilled. This
effectively reduces the number of causal cones under scrutiny from three
to two. Stability can then be ensured only if the scalar causal cone
shares a common interior direction and a common exterior hypersurface
with that of @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ).

Again, an exact calculation is possible in the case of a homogeneous
spacetime, i.e., when @xmath . In comparison to the case of Chapter 6 ,
where matter was minimally coupled to @xmath , there is one more
condition to fulfill (corresponding to the fact that the change of frame
must be well-defined). Thus, there are in total seven conditions. These
include Eqs. ( 6.19 ), ( 7.8 ), ( 7.15 ) and ( 7.18 ), as well as two
hyperbolicity conditions and one orientation compatibility condition.
The two hyperbolicity conditions are actually unchanged, and are given
by Eqs. ( 6.55 )-( 6.56 ). Finally, the scalar and matter/spin-2 causal
cones have compatible orientations provided that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to check that this seven inequalities again define
the range of Eqs. ( 6.59 )-( 6.60 ). Rewriting these conditions in terms
of the observed @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, when setting @xmath , the interval of stability disappears. This
is more clearly seen using the ranges in the form ( 6.59 )-( 6.60 ). In
other words, it is the presence of vacuum energy which allows for a
window of stability for the black hole solution. As stressed below Eq. (
7.14 ) though, Eqs. ( 7.20 )-( 7.21 ) mean that self-tuning is
impossible in this specific model, since the observed cosmological
constant must always be larger than the bare one.

Taking @xmath again makes the stability analysis very difficult
technically, but the results are essentially unchanged with respect to
Paragraph 6.2.3 . Indeed, the effect of coupling matter to @xmath rather
than @xmath is merely to transform the matter causal cone at @xmath into
the red causal cone of Fig. 6.2 . Thus, it even simplifies the analysis.
Again, for parameters that yield a stable cosmological configuration,
the black hole solutions seem to be always stable as well.

#### 7.2 Self-tuning models with unit speed for gravitational waves

Although the model ( 6.13 ) (considered as the Horndeski-frame theory)
is not able to self-tune a bare cosmological constant, there still
exists an infinite class of other Horndeski and beyond models which
provide self-tuning, as shown in Ref. [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . In this
section, we prove that a subclass of them also satisfies the @xmath
constraint. From now on, we will consider the physical frame only. Thus,
let us change notations slightly to avoid putting tildes everywhere.
Matter will be assumed to couple minimally to @xmath , and we no longer
consider any disformal transformation such as ( 7.5 ). Additionally, in
order to avoid hiding several different scales in the functions of
@xmath , it is convenient to work with the dimensionless quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the only mass scale entering the Lagrangian of the scalar
field @xmath , itself chosen dimensionless (beware not to confuse @xmath
with the Planck mass @xmath ). All the coefficients entering
dimensionless functions of @xmath will also be assumed to be of order 1.
Up to a total derivative, the shift-symmetric Horndeski and beyond
Lagrangian ⁵ ⁵ 5 The quintic sector is excluded here, because it cannot
play a cosmological role. The cubic sector is omitted, because it must
anyway be passive for the self-tuning solutions derived in [
Babichev:2016kdt ] . may then be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The full translation of the @xmath – @xmath functions in terms of the
@xmath – @xmath that we used so far is provided in Appendix A . The
action ( 7.23 ) is supplemented by a matter Lagrangian, minimally
coupled to the variable @xmath in terms of which Eq. ( 7.23 ) is
written. For instance, the model ( 6.13 ) corresponds to constant values
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In terms of these notations, the
@xmath constraint ( 7.1 ) becomes then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fixes @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary. For
monomials, this means that one needs

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless constants of
order 1. Note that negative exponents @xmath and @xmath are perfectly
allowed and consistent in this cosmological context, where the
background solution corresponds to a strictly positive value of @xmath .
Small perturbations are thus well-defined around such a background,
because the density @xmath will never cross 0 and thus will not run into
the pole of one the functions of the Lagrangian.

Particular self-tuning models respecting @xmath are thus easily obtained
from ( 7.25 ). However, we already mentioned in Paragraph 4.2.2 that one
cannot impose @xmath and be satisfied with this result. This is because
making @xmath very small in general has a side effect: it renormalizes
Newton’s constant to an accordingly small value, way to small to fit the
observed value [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . Luckily however, a subclass among
the models ( 7.25 ) is such that @xmath (or equivalently Newton’s
constant) remains unrenormalized, and it is thus possible to get @xmath
in a consistent way. The self-tuning @xmath is achieved by choosing an
appropriate value of @xmath . This subclass corresponds to the exponent
@xmath , i.e., @xmath and @xmath . In terms of the @xmath notation of
Eq. ( 14 ), this reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while @xmath is given by Eq. ( 7.1 ). One then finds that the
Schwarzschild-de Sitter equations of Ref. [ Babichev:2016kdt ] can be
solved provided @xmath and @xmath , and they imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hubble rate, defined as @xmath . The proportionality
factor depends on the dimensionless constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, and is thus itself of order 1. Therefore, if @xmath , it suffices to
choose @xmath appropriately to get @xmath equal to the observed value,
whatever the large @xmath entering the action. Note that all these
models (with @xmath and @xmath ) admit exact Schwarzschild-de Sitter
solutions such that @xmath is consistent with its small observed value,
and they also satisfy @xmath , at least in the asymptotic homogeneous
Universe.

As underlined at the very end of [ Babichev:2016kdt ] , if the bare
cosmological constant happens to take the huge value @xmath , then the
particular case @xmath needs a rather natural value of the scale @xmath
, similar to usual elementary particle masses.

Another interesting particular case is @xmath , for instance @xmath and
@xmath (choosing here @xmath to simplify, the signs being imposed by the
field equations). This corresponds to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, the exact version of Eq. ( 7.28 ) implies that one must choose
@xmath , i.e., the very small observed Hubble expansion rate @xmath must
actually be put by hand in the action via the scale @xmath . But this
drawback comes with the great bonus that this observed @xmath now
depends only on @xmath , and no longer on the bare vacuum energy density
@xmath . Therefore, even if @xmath happens to change because of a phase
transition during the cosmological evolution of the Universe, the
effective @xmath remains constant and small.

The important conclusion is that elegant self-tuning cosmological models
are still allowed, even when taking into account the experimental
constraint @xmath . Note that for these models, we did not prove that
the speed equality remains valid in the vicinity of massive bodies.
However, the result of Sec. 7.1 for the simple model ( 6.13 ) and the
argument of Refs. [ Ezquiaga:2017ekz , Langlois:2017dyl ] show that it
may remain true, at least for Schwarzschild-de Sitter black-hole
solutions. The stability of these self-tuning models should also be
analyzed, as we did above for the model ( 6.13 ). Aside of this, it
would be of great interest to study a more realistic cosmological
evolution for these self-tuning models, as in [ Martin-Moruno:2015lha ,
Starobinsky:2016kua ] , where certain branches of solutions were shown
to screen matter as well as the cosmological constant.

### Summary and outlook

#### Summary

Scalar-tensor theories (in a broad sense) have interesting cosmological
properties. Aside from this, it is important to know whether they can
accommodate compact objects, and if so, to what extent these objects are
similar to those encountered in general relativity. My thesis elaborated
on these questions. The first essential tools for this analysis are
no-hair theorems. We discussed a previously established no-hair theorem
in Horndeski theory, aimed at static, spherically symmetric and
asymptotically flat black holes. We extended it to star configurations
under very similar assumptions.

At the same time, Horndeski and beyond theory is complex and many
assumptions are required to prove the no-hair theorems. Accordingly,
there also exist many ways to arrive at solutions which do possess hair.
We explored these paths in the second part of the thesis. One of the
essential results of this part is that, when the scalar field plays the
role of dark energy, the black hole (or star) solutions generically
possess hair. We saw so by analyzing the effect of the simplest cubic
and quartic models in Horndeski theory. The quintic sector has no
interest in this context, since it is ruled out by gravitational wave
experiments. When a @xmath symmetry is imposed on the scalar field
(i.e., in the quadratic plus quartic case), exact solutions are easy to
find. Some reproduce exactly general relativistic solutions, including a
Schwarzschild-de Sitter spacetime that has simple self-tuning
properties. In the cubic case, one has to use numerical integration to
find black hole solutions, but there exist some with similar self-tuning
properties.

This part was also the occasion to study which models possess
asymptotically flat solutions with a non-trivial static scalar field (as
opposed to the case where its time evolution is imposed by cosmology).
It is more difficult to find solutions in this case, and actually only
few models circumvent the no-hair theorem. It is the presence (or
absence) of specific terms in the Lagrangian that allows for solutions
that deviate from general relativity. We examined in detail these terms
in the case of the quartic and quintic sector of Horndeski and beyond
theory. It is still legitimate to consider quintic models in this
framework, where the scalar field does not have to play a role at
cosmological scale. In the shift-symmetric case, the quintic Lagrangian
that forces a non-trivial scalar field amounts to a linear coupling
between the scalar field and the Gauss-Bonnet invariant. It does not
admit regular black hole solutions, unless one also allows the norm of
the current to diverge at the horizon.

Once background solutions with hair are known, a further step is to
study their stability (and eventually their formation through collapse).
It was the goal of the third part to study the stability of some
solutions with hair presented in the rest of the thesis. We focused on
the solutions where the scalar is a dark energy field. In this case, the
intricate time and space dependence makes it impossible to use some
standard stability criteria. In particular, we proved that when the
Hamiltonian is unbounded from below (which would usually correspond to a
ghost) in some coordinate system, the solution can still be stable.
Instead, we established the right stability criterion: the causal cones
associated to each degree of freedom (scalar, spin-2 and matter) must
share a common time and a common spacelike Cauchy hypersurface. This
result is not limited to a specific scalar-tensor theory, and might
prove interesting in various modified gravity models. As an example, we
applied this criterion to the self-tuned Schwarzschild-de Sitter
solution presented earlier in the thesis. There exists a window of
stability for the parameters of the theory (which does not seem to
depend on the presence of a black hole). The stability conditions
actually prevent one from downgrading a large bare cosmological constant
to a small effective value compatible with observation.

As a by-product of the linear stability analysis, we were able to
compute the speed of gravitational waves in a strongly curved
spherically symmetric background (as opposed to weakly curved
cosmological backgrounds, where the result was already known). When the
speed of light and of gravitational waves is the same over large
cosmological scales, this remains true in the strongly curved
environment of a black hole. We finally gave a class of Horndeski and
beyond models that pass gravitational wave tests as well as local tests,
and provide an actual self-tuning of the cosmological constant.

#### Outlook

Further developments in the field of scalar-tensor theories can arise
either from observation, or from yet unsolved theoretical questions. As
to observations, gravitational wave interferometers will bring one the
most important contributions in the forthcoming years ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that
the large-scale structure at low redshifts will also soon be scrutinized
by various experiments [ Bose:2018orj ] , while other projects are
proposed to increase the precision of the local tests in the Solar
System [ Sakstein:2017pqi ] . . Concerning black holes, the accumulation
of events will statistically allow us to put very narrow bounds on the
post-Newtonian parameters and to check general relativistic predictions
(as illustrated by Figs. 7 and 8 of Ref. [ TheLIGOScientific:2016pea ]
). On the other hand, we will learn a lot about the equation of state
and core structure of neutron stars, for instance through their tidal
deformability (see Fig. 5 of Ref. [ TheLIGOScientific:2017qsa ] for
instance). It would be extremely useful to have at hand viable modified
gravity models, as benchmarks in the alternative theory space. Of
course, modeling a binary merger in modified gravity is an
extraordinarily difficult task. An interesting and fairly unexplored
starting point would be the study of gravitational collapse in Horndeski
and beyond theory, in a spherically symmetric situation. It would be
worth extending the numerical code of Ref. [ OConnor:2009iuz ] to
investigate such situations.

On the cosmological side, another crucial issue is the effect of
self-tuning on matter or radiation. Indeed, the aim of self-tuning
mechanisms is to tune away a huge bare cosmological constant, but matter
and radiation should not be equally suppressed by this mechanism (for
instance, the existence of a radiation dominated era is necessary for
Big Bang nucleosynthesis). At least for some specific self-tuning
models, it is impossible to have both a coherent cosmological history
and stability at all epochs [ Linder:2013zoa ] . References [
Martin-Moruno:2015lha ] and [ Starobinsky:2016kua ] went further on this
topic, but it is not clear yet whether some models can have a sensible
cosmological history, together with self-tuning and stability. It would
be particularly interesting to study the self-tuning Horndeski and
beyond models that pass the gravitational wave test from this
perspective. As we saw in this thesis, stability seems to compete with
self-tuning. If this is also true in the case of the models presented in
Sec. 7.2 , the ability of scalar-tensor theories to provide a realistic
self-tuning would be seriously jeopardized.

Finally, a theoretical issue that was raised recently is the well-posed
character of the field equations. References [ Papallo:2017qvl ,
Papallo:2017ddx ] proved that quartic and quintic Horndeski theory are
not “strongly hyperbolic” — a stronger requirement than the “weak”
hyperbolicity we used in this thesis — around a flat background in any
harmonic gauge. This can be interpreted as the impossibility to
determine an estimate of the energy at a given time after the moment
when initial conditions were specified. Deciding whether this
constitutes an actual flaw of the theory requires further study.

### Appendix A Alternative parametrizations of Horndeski and beyond
theory

In this appendix, we provide and discuss other parametrizations of
Horndeski theory. In the literature, @xmath often stands for @xmath , as
well as @xmath for @xmath . Using these notations, let us define the
following building blocks:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
              @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath               (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath               (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These definitions are those of Ref. [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . Horndeski and
beyond theories are obtained by multiplying the above building blocks by
arbitrary functions of @xmath and @xmath . However, these functions
differ from the @xmath and @xmath we used in the body of the thesis,
although they are of course related. Before introducing these functions,
let us stress that the kinetic density of the scalar field is designated
by many different notations, each author having its own preference in
the literature. In the body of this thesis, we stuck to the notation
@xmath . We also used the notation @xmath in the last chapter to
designate the same quantity with a different normalization, in terms of
a mass scale @xmath , @xmath , see Eq. ( 7.22 ). This quantity was also
designated by the letter @xmath in [ Babichev:2016kdt , Babichev:2017lmw
] . At the same time, the authors of [ Gleyzes:2014dya , Gleyzes:2014qga
, Langlois:2015cwa , Langlois:2015skt , Achour:2016rkg ,
BenAchour:2016fzp , Crisostomi:2016tcp , Crisostomi:2016czh ] use the
letter @xmath to designate @xmath .

The Horndeski and beyond functions that are used in Chapter 7 are more
easily defined in terms of @xmath . This is the quantity we will use to
define alternatively the Horndeski and beyond action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangians @xmath are related to the @xmath ones by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can then relate the two formulations of Horndeski and beyond theory,
and for instance translate the @xmath and @xmath functions in term of
the @xmath and @xmath . Packing @xmath and @xmath together, as well as
@xmath and @xmath , one can show that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.18)
     @xmath               (A.19)
     @xmath               (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath and @xmath are related to the new functions by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

References [ Gleyzes:2014dya , Gleyzes:2014qga , Lin:2014jga ,
Crisostomi:2016tcp ] used yet another notation, with functions @xmath
and @xmath ; they relate to the functions @xmath and @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

assuming that the gradient of @xmath is timelike. This should be true on
cosmological backgrounds, where the spatial variations of @xmath are
neglected with respect to cosmic time evolution.

### Appendix B Horndeski and beyond field equations in spherical
symmetry

In this appendix, we provide the useful field equations to treat
Horndeski and beyond theory in spherical symmetry. The equations given
hereafter assume the parametrization of Eqs. ( 14 ) and ( 20 )-( 21 ),
together with shift symmetry, Eq. ( 2.13 ). The ansatz for the metric is
given by Eq. ( 1.1 ), and the scalar field is assumed to be static too ¹
¹ 1 The same equations including the time dependence of the scalar
field, i.e., @xmath , can be found in [ Babichev:2016kdt ] in the
parametrization of Eqs. ( A.11 )–( A.16 ). , Eq. ( 2.5 ). In general, it
is sufficient to make use of two of the mertic field equations of
motion, the @xmath and @xmath ones, together with the fact that the
radial component of the Noether current @xmath vanishes. First, the
@xmath equation reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us recall that, when @xmath depends on @xmath only, @xmath . Then,
the radial component of the current @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression should be equated to zero whenever assuming that @xmath
does not diverge. Finally, to be precise, rather than the @xmath metric
equation itself, we use a linear combination of it with the @xmath
equation, in the fashion described in [ Babichev:2016kdt ] . Namely, if
@xmath stands for the @xmath metric field equation, we write @xmath .
The result gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Interestingly, the cubic Horndeski term @xmath disappears from this
combination.

### Appendix C De-mixing spin-2 and spin-0 degrees of freedom

In this appendix, we summarize the progresses that have been made in the
(covariant) decomposition of the spin-2 and scalar degrees of freedom.

#### c.1 The case of general relativity

Let us start by describing what happens in usual general relativity
(with or without a cosmological constant @xmath , because we will only
focus on the kinetic part of the effective action). Of course, in this
case, there is no spin-0 degree of freedom, and thus no de-mixing to
achieve; but this will illustrate the generic procedure from which one
can extract the effective metric for the spin-2 degree of freedom,
@xmath . The metric is assumed to be perturbed according to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, one can expand the Einstein-Hilbert action @xmath at second order
(in terms of @xmath ). One gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantity @xmath provides the background field equations, while
@xmath can be used to determine the propagation of perturbations over a
given background. One obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

meaning that the background field equations for the metric are
Einstein’s equations, @xmath . The kinetic part (i.e., highest
derivatives terms only) of the second-order perturbed Einstein-Hilbert
action reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Unless specified otherwise, the geometric quantities such as Einstein’s
tensor or the covariant derivative are the ones associated with the
background metric @xmath . The variation of @xmath with respect to
@xmath yields a linear second-order differential equation on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, this equation is valid only when neglecting lower derivative
terms, but it suffices for instance in order to determine the causal
structure and characteristics on some given background. Defining @xmath
, and imposing the transverse gauge @xmath , Eq. ( C.5 ) reads @xmath ,
showing that spin-2 excitations propagate in the effective metric @xmath
in general relativity.

#### c.2 Quadratic and cubic Horndeski sectors

The case of quadratic Horndeski theory (supplemented with the usual
Ricci scalar) is equally simple to that of general relativity. Namely,
considering the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

if one perturbs the metric according to Eq. ( C.1 ) and the scalar
according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

one finds that spin-2 and scalar perturbations do not mix (at least at
kinetic level). Thus, the spin-2 excitations are identical to those of
general relativity, and propagate in @xmath . The scalar perturbations
can be shown to propagate in the effective metric described in Paragraph
6.1.3 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Things get more complicated already for the cubic Horndeski action.
Reference [ Babichev:2012re ] managed to diagonalize spin-2 and spin-0
perturbations for the simple following cubic term which corresponds to
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath a constant ¹ ¹ 1 Let us note that Ref. [ Babichev:2012re ]
had also included a standard kinetic term @xmath in its analysis. The
full analysis for arbitrary functions @xmath and @xmath should not be
too difficult to obtain using the same procedure. . One may guess that
the spin-2 sector should be unaffected by the presence of the cubic
term, but this is not obvious at first. With the same notations as above
for the perturbations, one finds the following second-order Lagrangian
(keeping again only highest-order derivatives):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the first terms are identical to general relativity, one
immediately sees that the second part of the action (proportional to
@xmath ) mixes the kinetic terms of @xmath and @xmath . Thus, one cannot
call @xmath the spin-2 and @xmath the spin-0 perturbations respectively.
One first has to diagonalize the above kinetic structure. This is
achieved [ Babichev:2012re ] by the following change of variables:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the kinetic part of @xmath reads, in terms of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.12)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( C.12 ) yields the desired result: @xmath and @xmath do not
talk to each other, and propagate in their own effective metric
(respectively @xmath and @xmath ).

#### c.3 Quartic Horndeski sector

For the goals of Chapter 6 , we tried to carry out a similar analysis
and diagonalize the scalar and spin-2 perturbations for the quartic
Horndeski action. However, it was not possible to arrive at a conclusion
this way. We had to resort to the mode analysis presented in Sec. 6.2 ,
with the drawback that it is only valid over a spherically symmetric
background. In passing, Ref. [ Bettoni:2016mij ] tried to do the same
calculation with in mind the speed of gravitational waves, but could
conclude only by neglecting the mixing terms between spin-0 and spin-2
degrees of freedom. We summarize here the point at which we arrived in
this calculation. We analyzed the following action (which corresponds to
@xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using again the same notations for perturbations, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The part which is quadratic in @xmath is much more involved than in the
previous case. Indeed, because of the presence of Einstein’s tensor in
the action, one does not expect to recover that spin-2 perturbations
simply propagate in the effective metric @xmath . The last five terms in
the above expression are kinetic mixing terms between @xmath and @xmath
. They are the terms one would like to get rid of, in order to
diagonalize the perturbations. However, we found indications that no
linear change of variables — in the fashion of Eq. ( C.11 ) — allows to
eliminate these terms.

The second-order kinetic action is much simplified in the transverse
traceless gauge, @xmath and @xmath . In this gauge, it boils down to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with Ref. [ Bettoni:2016mij ] . Even in this gauge,
however, it is not possible to diagonalize the perturbations by a mere
linear transformation of the variables.

### Appendix D Monopole perturbation of some Horndeski black holes

#### d.1 Coefficients for the Schwarzschild-de Sitter solution

The aim of this appendix is to display the explicit expressions of the
various coefficients used in the analysis of Sec. 6.2.1 . Those entering
Eq. ( 6.35 ) and subsequent read

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.5)
     @xmath               (D.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The coefficients entering Eq. ( 6.37 ) and subsequent read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, the coefficients entering Eq. ( D.31 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### d.2 Analysis of the stealth Schwarzschild solution

As mentioned above, there exists an exact asymptotically flat
Schwarzschild solution when @xmath and @xmath vanish, with a non-trivial
scalar profile ( 4.39 )-( 4.40 ). In this case, the parameter @xmath is
no longer related to the coupling constants of the action and is in fact
a free parameter. It should also be emphasized that the solution ( 4.39
)-( 4.40 ) is the unique static and spherically symmetric solution with
a linearly time dependent scalar field and @xmath . The procedure for
determining the effective metric of scalar perturbations, described in
Sec. 6.2.1 , breaks down for this background. It is not possible to
carry on after Eq. ( 6.37 ), and to express the fields @xmath and @xmath
in terms of @xmath . The reason is that for the stealth Schwarzschild
solution @xmath and @xmath cannot be simultaneously expressed in terms
of the master variable @xmath from the Lagrangian introduced in ( 6.39
). Therefore, one needs to find another way of extracting the scalar
mode from the second-order Lagrangian ( 6.35 ) which now reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath for the relevant background. The equation of motion for @xmath
following from ( 6.35 ) is algebraic in terms of @xmath , so as before
one can find @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( D.30 ) in ( D.29 ) and rearranging terms, one can write (
D.29 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath are given above, in Sec. D.1 . Let us now
introduce new variables @xmath and @xmath grouping together the time and
space derivatives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed the Lagrangian ( D.31 ) then takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Variation of ( D.33 ) with respect to @xmath yields the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above constraint ( D.36 ) contains @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and it
may be seen as an equation which determines @xmath in terms of @xmath
and its derivatives. To find @xmath from ( D.36 ), the use of nonlocal
(in space) operators is in general required. Since we are only
interested in the absence of ghost and gradient instabilities, however,
we do not need to know the exact expression of @xmath in terms of @xmath
. This means that we focus on higher derivative terms, i.e., we neglect
terms proportional to @xmath ( @xmath ) with respect to those
proportional to @xmath or @xmath ( @xmath ). With this approximation in
mind, Eq. ( D.36 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which after integration over @xmath and setting to zero the integration
constant yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the same token, Eq. ( D.36 ) shows that the term @xmath in ( D.33 )
is of lower order in derivatives in comparison with the last three
terms, because from ( D.36 ) one can see that @xmath is of lower order
compared to @xmath and @xmath . As a consequence, to the leading order
in derivatives, the Lagrangian ( D.33 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript “Kin” stresses that only higher order terms (kinetic
part) are left in the Lagrangian. Let us then introduce @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( D.38 ), one easily obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integration constant is set to zero. Finally, substituting (
D.40 ) and ( D.41 ) in ( D.39 ), one can find the kinetic part of the
Lagrangian for the scalar perturbations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.43)
  -- -- -- --------

One can obtain the same result for the de Sitter black hole by following
the above method rather than ( 6.40 ). Indeed, first of all, the
hyperbolicity condition for ( D.42 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The explicit expression for @xmath in terms of @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.45)
  -- -- -- --------

One can also verify that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 6.44 ). In terms of @xmath , the
hyperbolicity condition found in ( 6.48 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as @xmath , i.e., the hyperbolicity condition ( D.44 ) is
satisfied for @xmath , the hyperbolicity condition is also satisfied for
@xmath . Moreover, for @xmath , the variables @xmath and @xmath and the
kinetic matrices for @xmath and @xmath are related as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where indices @xmath and @xmath are either @xmath or @xmath .

The advantage of the Lagrangian ( D.42 ) obtained here is that it also
allows to treat the case of the stealth Schwarzschild black hole, for
which the method of Sec. 6.2.1 fails. Indeed, for the stealth solution
it turns out that @xmath (in other words, @xmath and @xmath are linearly
dependent). However, the kinetic matrix @xmath remains finite, see (
D.43 ), while the kinetic matrix @xmath diverges, as can be seen from (
D.48 ).

For the Lagrangian ( D.42 ), the vanishing determinant of the kinetic
matrix means that the equation of motion is parabolic (for all @xmath ).
Per se, this fact does not necessarily mean that the perturbations are
pathological on the considered background. For instance, in the case of
the k-essence Lagrangian @xmath , for solutions where @xmath with
timelike @xmath , the perturbations behave as dust, i.e., they are
governed by a wave equation with @xmath . The determinant of the kinetic
matrix in this case is also zero, since only the ( @xmath ) component of
the kinetic matrix is non-vanishing. For the stealth solution, the
kinetic matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that, for @xmath , all the terms of ( D.49 ) apart from @xmath
tend to zero. The global factor of Eq. ( D.49 ) may have any sign,
depending on the parameters of the model and the (arbitrary) value of
@xmath . When this global factor is negative, the dynamics of the
perturbations indeed corresponds to dust (i.e., a vanishing velocity,
similarly to the example of k-essence described above), but the
infinitely thin cone of propagation tends towards the @xmath axis. This,
together with the fact that the spin-2 cone has a “usual” behavior at
@xmath , makes the stealth solution pathological. It corresponds to a
limit of panels (i) and (j) of Fig. 6.1 when the dashed (blue) cone is
infinitely thin. On the other hand, for a positive global factor in
Eq. ( D.49 ), the scalar dynamics corresponds to the limit of panels (c)
and (d) of Fig. 6.1 when the dashed (blue) cone totally opens, i.e., its
sound velocity is infinite. In that case, the scalar field is no longer
a propagating degree of freedom.