This thesis considers channel estimation and multiuser (MU) data
transmission for time division duplex (TDD) massive multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) systems with fully digital/hybrid structures in
millimeter wave (mmWave) channels. The work reported in this thesis
contains novel mmWave transmission schemes and performance analysis,
which provides insights into the design of hybrid mmWave networks. It
contains three main contributions.

In this thesis, we first propose a tone-based linear search algorithm to
facilitate the estimation of angle-of-arrivals (AoAs) of the strongest
line-of-sight channel components as well as scattering components of the
users at the base station (BS) with fully digital structure. Our results
show that the proposed maximum-ratio transmission (MRT) based on the
strongest components can achieve a higher data rate than that of the
conventional MRT, under the same mean squared errors (MSE) of channel
estimation. In addition, we quantify the achievable rate degradation due
to phase quantization errors and propose an angular domain user
scheduling algorithm for mmWave systems to improve the usersâ€™ receive
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR).

Second, we develop a low-complexity channel estimation and beamformer
/precoder design scheme for hybrid mmWave systems, which utilizes tone
signals and orthogonal pilots for the design of analog beamforming
matrices and digital precoding matrices, respectively. In addition, the
proposed scheme applies to both non-sparse and sparse mmWave channel
environments. We then leverage the proposed scheme to investigate the
downlink achievable rate performance. The results show that the proposed
scheme obtains a considerable achievable rate of fully digital systems.
Taking into account the effect of various types of errors, we
investigate the achievable rate performance degradation of the
considered scheme.

Third, we extend our proposed scheme to a multi-cell MU mmWave MIMO
network. We derive the closed-form approximation of the normalized MSE
of channel estimation under pilot contamination over Rician fading
channels. Furthermore, we derive a tight closed-form approximation and
the scaling law of the average achievable rate. Our results unveil that
channel estimation errors, the intra-cell interference, and the
inter-cell interference caused by pilot contamination over Rician fading
channels can be efficiently mitigated by simply increasing the number of
antennas equipped at the desired BS.
