## 1 Introduction

In this paper, and its followup [ Mo ] , we address the general problem
of constructing “interesting” examples of higher-dimensional contact
manifolds, and developing techniques in order to compute SFT-type
holomorphic curve invariants.

We will construct examples of contact manifolds in every odd dimension,
presenting a geometric structure which is a higher-dimensional version
of that of a spinal open book decomposition or SOBD, as defined in [
L-VHM-W ] in dimension @xmath . The type of SOBD present in our
examples, which one could call partially planar , mimics the notion of
planar @xmath -torsion domains as defined in [ Wen2 ] . Indeed, it
consists of two surface fibrations over a higher-dimensional contact
base, one of them having genus zero fibers, glued together along a
contact fibration over a Liouville domain. This geometric structure can
be “detected” algebraically by algebraic torsion, a holomorphic-curve
contact invariant. For suitable data, the surface fibers become
holomorphic, and are leaves of a finite energy foliation of the
symplectization @xmath . The isolated ones may be counted in a suitable
way, and the result is an invariant which “recovers” the number @xmath .
This is the idea inspiring algebraic @xmath -torsion.

We exhibit a detailed construction of an isotopy class of contact forms,
which is “supported” by the SOBD, so that one may view these contact
forms as “Giroux” forms. We will estimate the algebraic torsion of these
examples, which we show is finite, and, in certain cases, non-zero. In
those cases, the contact manifolds are tight and admit no strong
symplectic fillings.

We will also relate algebraic torsion with a geometric condition, Giroux
torsion . While this is a classical notion in dimension 3, the
higher-dimensional version was introduced in [ MNW13 ] . We will show
that the geometric presence of certain torsion domains inside a contact
manifold can be detected algebraically by SFT. More concretely, Giroux
torsion implies algebraic @xmath -torsion, in any odd dimension. This
proves a conjecture in [ MNW13 ] .

The proof of this result is carried out by interpreting the Giroux
torsion domains as being supported by a suitable SOBD, which we call a
Giroux SOBD , for which we give a notion of a “Giroux form”. The result
follows by adapting our computations for the above partially planar
model contact manifolds.

In order to carry out our computations, we need a very detailed
understanding of holomorphic curves in the symplectization of our model
contact manifolds, and the SOBD structures, together with the associated
finite energy foliations, are crucial towards this end. The key
technical inputs are: transversality of the genus zero curves in the
foliation, and a uniqueness result for holomorphic curves (Theorem 2.10
). Proving transversality is needed so that indeed one has a space of
isolated curves to count, whereas uniqueness is necessary to know
precisely what to count. For transversality, a standard technique in
dimension three is the automatic transversality criterion of [ Wen1 ] ,
which consists in checking a fairly straightforward numerical inequality
involving topological data associated to a given curve. For uniqueness,
one can sometimes resort to Siefring’s intersection theory for punctured
holomorphic curves in dimension four [ Sie11 ] . In higher dimensions,
things become cumbersome. To prove transversality, we resorted to a
“hands-on” analytical approach of computing precisely the kernel of the
linearization of the Cauchy-Riemann operator, and check that its
dimension coincides with its Fredholm index, from which transversality
follows. For uniqueness, we resorted to a combination of energy
estimates, holomorphic cascades and geometric arguments.

###### On the invariant.

The invariant we will use, algebraic torsion, was defined in [ LW11 ] ,
and is a contact invariant taking values in @xmath . It was introduced,
using the machinery of Symplectic Field Theory , as a quantitative way
of measuring non-fillability, giving rise to a “hierarchy of fillability
obstructions”, cf. [ Wen2 ] . At least morally, @xmath -torsion should
correspond to overtwistedness, whereas @xmath -torsion is implied by
Giroux torsion (the converse is not true). Having @xmath -torsion is
actually equivalent to being algebraically overtwisted , which means
that the contact homology, or equivalently its SFT, vanishes
(Proposition 2.9 in [ LW11 ] ). This is well-known to be implied by
overtwistedness, but the converse is still wide open.

The key fact about this invariant is that it behaves well under exact
symplectic cobordisms, which implies that the concave end inherits any
order of algebraic torsion that the convex end has. Thus, algebraic
torsion may be also thought of as an obstruction to the existence of
exact symplectic cobordisms. In particular, it serves as an obstruction
to symplectic fillability. Moreover, there are connections to dynamics:
any contact manifold with finite torsion satisfies the Weinstein
conjecture (i.e. there exist closed Reeb orbits for every contact form).

One should mention that there are other notions of algebraic torsion in
the literature which do not use SFT, but which are only 3-dimensional
(see [ KM-VHM-W ] for the version using Heegard Floer homology, or the
appendix in [ LW11 ] by Hutchings, using ECH).

###### Statement of results.

For the SFT setup, we follow [ LW11 ] , where we refer the reader for
more details. We will take the SFT of a contact manifold @xmath (with
coefficients) to be the homology @xmath of a @xmath -graded unital
@xmath -algebra @xmath over the group ring @xmath , for some linear
subspace @xmath . Here, @xmath has generators @xmath for each good
closed Reeb orbit @xmath with respect to some nondegenerate contact form
@xmath for @xmath , @xmath is an even variable, and the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined by counting rigid solutions to a suitable abstract
perturbation of a @xmath -holomorphic curve equation in the
symplectization of @xmath . It satisfies

-   @xmath is odd and squares to zero,

-   @xmath , and

-   @xmath

where @xmath is a differential operator of order @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sum ranges over all non-negative integers @xmath , homology classes
@xmath and ordered (possibly empty) collections of good closed Reeb
orbits @xmath such that @xmath . After a choice of spanning surfaces as
in [ EGH00 ] (p. 566, see also p. 651), the projection to @xmath of each
finite energy holomorphic curve @xmath can be capped off to a 2-cycle in
@xmath , and so it gives rise to a homology class @xmath , which we
project to define @xmath . The number @xmath denotes the count of
(suitably perturbed) holomorphic curves of genus @xmath with positive
asymptotics @xmath and negative asymptotics @xmath in the homology class
@xmath , including asymptotic markers as explained in [ EGH00 ] , or [
Wen3 ] , and including rational weights arising from automorphisms.
@xmath is a combinatorial factor defined as @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the covering multiplicity of the Reeb orbit @xmath .

The most important special cases for our choice of linear subspace
@xmath are @xmath and @xmath , called the untwisted and fully twisted
cases respectively, and @xmath with @xmath a closed 2-form on @xmath .
We shall abbreviate the latter case as @xmath , and the untwisted case
simply by @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.

Let @xmath be a closed manifold of dimension @xmath with a positive,
co-oriented contact structure. For any integer @xmath , we say that
@xmath has @xmath -twisted algebraic torsion of order @xmath (or @xmath
-twisted @xmath -torsion) if @xmath in @xmath . If this is true for all
@xmath , or equivalently, if @xmath in @xmath , then we say that @xmath
has fully twisted algebraic @xmath -torsion.

We will refer to untwisted @xmath -torsion to the case @xmath , in which
case @xmath and we do not keep track of homology classes. Whenever we
refer to torsion without mention to coefficients we will mean the
untwisted version. We will say that, if a contact manifold has algebraic
@xmath -torsion for every choice of coefficient ring, then it is
algebraically overtwisted , which is equivalent to the vanishing of the
SFT, or its contact homology. By definition, @xmath -torsion implies
@xmath -torsion, so we may define its algebraic torsion to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we set @xmath . We denote it by @xmath , in the untwisted case.

This construction is well-behaved under symplectic cobordisms: Any exact
symplectic cobordism @xmath with positive end @xmath and negative end
@xmath gives rise to a natural @xmath -module morphism on the untwisted
SFT,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a cobordism map . This implies that if @xmath has @xmath -torsion, then
so does @xmath . There is also a version with coefficients for the case
of non-exact cobordisms and fillings [ LW11 , Prop. 2.4] .

Examples of 3-dimensional contact manifolds with any given order of
torsion @xmath , but not @xmath , were constructed in [ LW11 ] . The
underlying manifold is the product manifold @xmath , for @xmath a
surface of genus @xmath which is divided into two pieces @xmath and
@xmath along some dividing set of simple closed curves @xmath of
cardinality @xmath , where the latter has genus @xmath , and the former
has genus @xmath . The contact structure @xmath is @xmath -invariant and
may be obtained, for instance, by a construction originally due to Lutz
(see [ Lutz77 ] ). Its isotopy class is characterized by the fact that
every section @xmath is a convex surface with dividing set @xmath . The
behaviour of algebraic torsion under cobordisms then implies that there
is no exact symplectic cobordisms having @xmath and @xmath as convex and
concave ends, respectively, if @xmath .

The existence of the analogue higher dimensional contact manifolds was
conjectured in [ LW11 ] . We will consider a modified version of their
examples. The modification we do here consists in taking the @xmath
-factor and replacing it by a closed @xmath -manifold @xmath , having
the special property that @xmath admits the structure of a Liouville
domain (here, @xmath denotes the interval @xmath ). This means that it
comes with an exact symplectic form @xmath , and has disconnected
contact-type boundary @xmath , where @xmath coincide with @xmath as
manifolds, but @xmath are not contactomorphic to each other. In fact,
@xmath have different orientations, and so they might not even be
homeomorphic to each other (not every manifold admits an
orientation-reversing homeomorphism). A Liouville domain of the form
@xmath is what we will call a cylindrical Liouville semi-filling (or
simply a cylindrical semi-filling). Their existence in every odd
dimension was established in [ MNW13 ] . We immediately see that this
generalizes the previous 3-dimensional example, since @xmath admits the
Liouville pair @xmath , which means that the 1-form @xmath is Liouville
in @xmath . We prove that the manifold @xmath indeed achieves @xmath
-torsion (Theorem 1.3 ), for a suitable contact structure which we now
describe.

First, for once and for good, we will fix the following notation:

###### Notation.

Throughout this paper, the symbol @xmath will be reserved for the
interval @xmath .

We can adapt the construction of the contact structures in [ LW11 ] to
our models. The starting idea is to decompose the manifold @xmath into
three pieces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and @xmath (see Figure 1 ). We have natural fibrations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with fibers @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and they are compatible in
the sense that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

While @xmath has a Liouville domain as base, and a contact manifold as
fiber, the situation is reversed for @xmath , which has contact base,
and Liouville fibers. This is a prototypical example of a spinal open
book decomposition , or SOBD. While we will not give a general
definition of such a notion, we refer the reader to [ Mo2 ] for a
tentative one.

Using this decomposition, we can construct a contact structure @xmath
which is a small perturbation of the stable Hamiltonian structure @xmath
along @xmath , and is a contactization for the Liouville domain @xmath
along @xmath , for some small @xmath . This means that it coincides with
@xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -coordinate. We will do this in
detail in Section 2 .

###### Remark 1.2.

Let us remark that, since the fibrations above are trivial, one can
always reverse their roles. More precisely, we could consider instead
the “dual” SOBD:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For these fibrations, we may also construct a contact form which is
“supported” by the SOBD. The resulting contact structure is isotopic to
@xmath , which is what we expect from the point of view of a “Giroux
correspondence” (in this more general setting). This is actually used
for the results in [ Mo ] .

For the contact manifolds @xmath , we can estimate their algebraic
torsion. First, recall that a contact structure is hypertight if it
admits a contact form without contractible Reeb orbits (which we call a
hypertight contact form). In particular, there are no holomorphic disks
in their symplectization, which implies that there is no 0-torsion. By a
well-known theorem by Hofer and its generalization to higher dimensions
by Albers–Hofer (in combination with [ BEM ] ), hypertight contact
manifolds are tight.

###### Theorem 1.3.

For any @xmath , and @xmath , the @xmath -dimensional contact manifolds
@xmath satisfy @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath are hypertight, and @xmath ,
the corresponding contact manifold @xmath is also hypertight. In
particular, @xmath , and it is tight.

In fact, the examples of Theorem 1.3 admit @xmath -twisted @xmath
-torsion, for @xmath defining a cohomology class in @xmath , the
annihilator of @xmath . Here, we take the homology of the subregion
@xmath , lying along the region @xmath where @xmath glue together. Using
[ LW11 , Prop. 2.4] , we obtain:

###### Corollary 1.4.

The examples of Theorem 1.3 do not admit weak fillings @xmath for which
@xmath is rational and lies in @xmath . In particular, they are not
strongly fillable.

###### Remark 1.5.

-   [wide, labelwidth=!, labelindent=0pt] @xmath

-   By a result of Mitsumatsu in [ Mit95 ] , any 3-manifold @xmath which
    admits a smooth Anosov flow preserving a smooth volume form
    satisfies that @xmath can be enriched with a cylindrical Liouville
    semi-filling structure. Therefore any of these @xmath -manifolds can
    be used in the construction of @xmath -dimensional contact models
    with @xmath , for any @xmath .

-   The examples of Liouville cylindrical semi-fillings of [ MNW13 ]
    satisfy the hypertightness condition. Then we have a doubly-infinite
    family of contact manifolds with @xmath , in any dimension. These
    are then an instance of higher-dimensional tight but not strongly
    fillable contact manifolds, since they have non-zero and finite
    algebraic torsion. For @xmath , this precisely computes the
    algebraic torsion.

The authors of [ MNW13 ] define a generalized higher-dimensional version
of the notion of Giroux torsion. This notion is defined as follows:
consider @xmath a Liouville pair on a closed manifold @xmath , which
means that the @xmath -form @xmath is Liouville in @xmath . Consider
also the Giroux @xmath -torsion domain modeled on @xmath given by the
contact manifold @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

and the coordinates are @xmath . Say that a contact manifold @xmath has
Giroux torsion whenever it admits a contact embedding of @xmath . In
this situation, denote by @xmath the annihilator of @xmath , viewed as a
subspace of @xmath . The following was conjectured in [ MNW13 ] :

###### Theorem 1.6.

If a contact manifold @xmath has Giroux torsion, then it has @xmath
-twisted algebraic 1-torsion, for every @xmath , where @xmath is a
Giroux @xmath -torsion domain embedded in @xmath .

The proof uses the same techniques as Theorem 1.3 , and the main idea is
to interpret Giroux torsion domains in terms of a specially simple kind
of SOBD, which we call Giroux SOBD .

A natural corollary is the following:

###### Corollary 1.7.

If a contact manifold @xmath has Giroux torsion, then it does not admit
weak fillings @xmath with @xmath and rational, where @xmath is a Giroux
@xmath -torsion domain embedded in @xmath . In particular, it is not
strongly fillable.

This is essentially corollary 8.2 in [ MNW13 ] , which was obtained with
different methods. Observe that if @xmath then @xmath does not admit
weak fillings at all. This is in fact the condition used in [ MNW13 ] to
obstruct weak fillability.

###### Further work: a synopsis.

We now state a series of results, to be proven in the followup paper [
Mo ] (see also [ Mo2 ] ). In the following, we use the fact that the
unit cotangent bundle of a hyperbolic surface fits into a cylindrical
semi-filling [ McD91 ] .

###### Theorem 1.8.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional contact manifold with Giroux
torsion, and let @xmath be the unit cotangent bundle of a hyperbolic
surface. If @xmath is the corresponding @xmath -dimensional contact
manifold of Theorem 1.3 with @xmath , then there is no exact symplectic
cobordism having @xmath as the convex end, and @xmath as the concave
end.

In particular, we obtain

###### Corollary 1.9.

If @xmath is the unit cotangent bundle of a hyperbolic surface, and
@xmath is the corresponding @xmath -dimensional contact manifold of
Theorem 1.3 with @xmath , then @xmath does not have Giroux torsion.

Moreover, we have reasons, coming from string topology [ CL09 ] , to
believe that the examples of Corollary 1.9 have untwisted algebraic
1-torsion (for any @xmath ).

Putting Theorem 1.3 (and Remark 1.5 ), together with Corollaries 1.4 and
1.9 , we obtain the following:

###### Corollary 1.10.

There exist infinitely many non-diffeomorphic @xmath -dimensional
contact manifolds @xmath which are tight, not strongly fillable, and
which do not have Giroux torsion.

To our knowledge, there are no other known examples of
higher-dimensional contact manifolds as in Corollary 1.10 . Also, we
expect the above examples to have algebraic 1-torsion.

One can twist the contact structure of Theorem 1.3 close to the dividing
set, by performing the @xmath -fold Lutz–Mori twist along a hypersurface
@xmath lying in @xmath . This notion was defined in [ MNW13 ] , and
builds on ideas by Mori in dimension 5 [ Mori09 ] . The resulting
contact structures are, in general, all homotopic as almost contact
structures, but in our case they are distinguishable by a suitable
version of cylindrical contact homology. By construction, all of these
have Giroux torsion, so by Theorem 1.6 they have @xmath -twisted @xmath
-torsion, for @xmath .

As a corollary of Theorem 1.8 , we get:

###### Corollary 1.11.

Let @xmath be the unit cotangent bundle of a hyperbolic surface, and let
@xmath be the corresponding @xmath -dimensional contact manifold of
Theorem 1.3 , with @xmath . If @xmath denotes the contact manifold
obtained by an @xmath -fold Lutz–Mori twist of @xmath , then there is no
exact symplectic cobordism having @xmath as the convex end, and @xmath
as the concave end (even though the underlying manifolds are
diffeomorphic, and the contact structures are homotopic as almost
contact structures).

The results from [ Mo ] stated above make use of Richard Siefring’s
intersection theory for holomorphic curves and hypersurfaces, as
outlined in an appendix in [ Mo2 ] written in coauthorship with
Siefring, as a prequel of his upcoming work [ Sie ] , and to appear as
an independent article [ MS19 ] . Another technical input is the
obstruction bundle technique as in Hutchings-Taubes [ HT1 , HT2 ] . The
SOBD is “dualized” in the sense of Remark 1.2 , and the finite energy
foliation is replaced by a foliation by holomorphic hypersurfaces.
Siefring’s intersection theory then implies that holomorphic curves with
suitable asymptotic behaviour lie in the leaves of the foliation. This,
combined with symmetries in the setup and the obstruction bundle
technique, allows us to obtain our results, as well as information on
the SFT of our contact manifolds.

###### Disclaimer 1.12.

Since the statements of our results make use of machinery from
Symplectic Field Theory, they come with the standard disclaimer that
they assume that its analytic foundations are in place. They depend on
the abstract perturbation scheme promised by the polyfold theory of
Hofer–Wysocki–Zehnder. We shall assume that it is possible to achieve
transversality by introducing an arbitrarily small abstract perturbation
to the Cauchy-Riemann equation, and that the analogue of the SFT
compactness theorem still holds as the perturbation is turned off. In
practice, this means that, in order to study curves for the perturbed
data, we need to also study holomorphic building configurations for the
unperturbed one. However, we have taken special care in that the
approach taken not only provides results that will be fully rigorous
after the polyfold machinery is complete, but also gives several direct
results that are already rigorous.

###### Acknowledgements.

First of all, my thanks go to my PhD supervisor, Chris Wendl, for
introducing me to this project and for his support and patience
throughout its duration. To Richard Siefring, for very helpful
conversations and for co-authoring an appendix in [ Mo2 ] . To Janko
Latschev and Kai Cieliebak, for going through the long process of
reading [ Mo2 ] . To Patrick Massot, Sam Lisi, and Momchil Konstantinov,
for helpful conversations/correspondence on different topics.

This research, forming part of the author’s PhD thesis, has been partly
carried out in (and funded by) University College London (UCL) in the
UK, and by the Berlin Mathematical School (BMS) in Germany.

## Guide to the document

The main construction is dealt with in Section 2 . We show Fredholm
regularity in Section 2.5 , and uniqueness (Theorem 2.10 ) in Section
2.7 . Theorem 1.3 is proved in Section 2.9 .

The proof of Theorem 1.6 is dealt with in Section 3 , which is basically
a reformulation of the previous sections, with the key input being an
adaptation of the uniqueness Theorem 2.10 .

##### Basic notions

A contact form in a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is a @xmath
-form @xmath such that @xmath is a volume form, and the associated
contact structure is @xmath (we will assume all our contact structures
are co-oriented). The Reeb vector field associated to @xmath is the
unique vector field @xmath on @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A @xmath -periodic Reeb orbit is @xmath where @xmath is such that @xmath
, @xmath . We will often just talk about a Reeb orbit @xmath without
mention to @xmath , called its period, or action. If @xmath is the
minimal number for which @xmath , and @xmath is such that @xmath , we
say that the covering multiplicity of @xmath is @xmath . If @xmath ,
then @xmath is said to be simply covered (otherwise it is multiply
covered). A periodic orbit @xmath is said to be non-degenerate if the
restriction of the time @xmath linearised Reeb flow @xmath to @xmath
does not have @xmath as an eigenvalue. More generally, a Morse–Bott
submanifold of @xmath -periodic Reeb orbits is a closed submanifold
@xmath invariant under @xmath such that @xmath , and @xmath is
Morse–Bott whenever it lies in a Morse–Bott submanifold, and its minimal
period agrees with the nearby orbits in the submanifold. The vector
field @xmath is non-degenerate/Morse–Bott if all of its closed orbits
are non-degenerate/Morse–Bott.

A stable Hamiltonian structure (SHS) on @xmath is a pair @xmath
consisting of a closed @xmath -form @xmath and a @xmath -form @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, @xmath is a SHS whenever @xmath is a contact form. The
Reeb vector field associated to @xmath is the unique vector field on
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are analogous notions of non-degeneracy/Morse–Bottness for SHS.

A symplectic form in a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is a @xmath
-form @xmath which is closed and non-degenerate. A Liouville manifold
(or an exact symplectic manifold) is a symplectic manifold with an exact
symplectic form @xmath , and the associated Liouville vector field
@xmath is defined by the equation @xmath . Any Liouville manifold is
necessarily open. A boundary component @xmath of a Liouville manifold
(endowed with the boundary orientation) is convex if the Liouville
vector field is positively transverse to @xmath , and is concave, if it
is so negatively. An exact cobordism from a (co-oriented) contact
manifold @xmath to @xmath is a compact Liouville manifold @xmath with
boundary @xmath , where @xmath is convex, @xmath is concave, and @xmath
. Therefore, the boundary orientation induced by @xmath agrees with the
contact orientation on @xmath , and differs on @xmath . A Liouville
filling (or a Liouville domain) of a –possibly disconnected– contact
manifold @xmath is a compact Liouville cobordism from @xmath to the
empty set. A strong symplectic cobordism and a strong filling are
defined in the same way, with the difference that @xmath is exact only
in a neighbourhood of the boundary of @xmath (so that the Liouville
vector field is defined in this neighbourhood, but not necessarily in
its complement).

The symplectization of a contact manifold @xmath is the symplectic
manifold @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -coordinate. In particular,
it is a non-compact Liouville manifold. Similarly, the symplectization
of a stable Hamiltonian manifold @xmath is the symplectic manifold
@xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath is an element of the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is chosen small enough so that @xmath is indeed symplectic.
An @xmath -compatible (or simply cylindrical) almost complex structure
on a symplectization @xmath is @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last condition means that @xmath defines a @xmath -invariant
Riemannian metric on @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -compatible, then it
is easy to check that it is @xmath -compatible, which means that @xmath
is a @xmath -invariant Riemannian metric on @xmath .

To any closed @xmath -periodic Reeb orbit @xmath one can associate an
asymptotic operator @xmath . To write it down, choose a symmetric
connection @xmath on @xmath , and a @xmath -compatible almost complex
structure @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Alternatively, one has the expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , where @xmath again is the time- @xmath Reeb flow.

Morally, this is the Hessian of a certain action functional on the loop
space of @xmath whose critical points correspond to closed Reeb orbits.
It is symmetric with respect to a suitable @xmath -product. A periodic
orbit @xmath is non-degenerate if and only if @xmath does not lie in the
spectrum of @xmath , and more generally, if @xmath is Morse–Bott and
lies in a Morse–Bott submanifold @xmath , then @xmath . Under a choice
of unitary trivialization @xmath of @xmath , this operator looks like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a smooth loop of symmetric matrices (the coordinate
representation of @xmath ), which comes associated to a trivialization
of @xmath . When @xmath is non-degenerate, its Conley–Zehnder index with
respect to @xmath is defined to be the Conley–Zehnder index of the path
of symplectic matrices @xmath satisfying @xmath , @xmath . We denote
this by @xmath .

We will consider, for cylindrical @xmath , punctured @xmath -holomorphic
curves @xmath in the symplectization of a stable Hamiltonian manifold
@xmath , where @xmath , @xmath is a compact connected Riemann surface,
and @xmath satisfies the nonlinear Cauchy–Riemann equation @xmath . We
will also assume that @xmath is asymptotically cylindrical, which means
the following. Partition the punctures into positive and negative
subsets @xmath , and at each @xmath , choose a biholomorphic
identification of a punctured neighborhood of @xmath with the
half-cylinder @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Then writing @xmath
near the puncture in cylindrical coordinates @xmath , for @xmath
sufficiently large, it satisfies an asymptotic formula of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a constant, @xmath is a @xmath -periodic Reeb orbit, the
exponential map is defined with respect to any @xmath -invariant metric
on @xmath , @xmath goes to @xmath uniformly in @xmath as @xmath and
@xmath is a smooth embedding such that @xmath as @xmath for some
constants @xmath , @xmath . We will refer to punctured asymptotically
cylindrical @xmath -holomorphic curves simply as @xmath -holomorphic
curves.

Observe that, for any closed Reeb orbit @xmath and cylindrical @xmath ,
the trivial cylinder over @xmath , defined as @xmath , is @xmath
-holomorphic.

The Fredholm index of a punctured holomorphic curve @xmath which is
asymptotic to non-degenerate Reeb orbits in a @xmath -dimensional
symplectization @xmath is given by the formula

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Here, @xmath is the domain of @xmath , @xmath denotes a choice of
trivializations for each of the bundles @xmath , where @xmath , at which
@xmath approximates the Reeb orbit @xmath . The term @xmath is the
relative first Chern number of the bundle @xmath . In the case @xmath is
@xmath -dimensional, this is defined as the algebraic count of zeroes of
a generic section of @xmath which is asymptotically constant with
respect to @xmath . For higher-rank bundles, one determines @xmath by
imposing that @xmath is invariant under bundle isomorphisms, and
satisfies the Whitney sum formula (see e.g. [ Wen5 ] ). The term @xmath
is the total Conley–Zehnder index of @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a @xmath -compatible @xmath , and a @xmath -holomorphic curve
@xmath in @xmath , the expression @xmath is a non-negative integrand,
and one can define its @xmath -energy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is non-negative, and vanishes if and only if @xmath is a (multiple
cover of) a trivial cylinder.

## 2 Algebraic torsion computations

### 2.1 Construction of the model contact manifolds

In this section, we construct the contact manifolds @xmath of Theorem
1.3 , making use of a cylindrical semi-filling @xmath . We will use the
“double completion” construction, originally appearing in [ L-VHM-W ] .
While very geometrically flavoured, this construction has the effect of
endowing @xmath with a contact structure and an explicit deformation to
a SHS, by viewing it as a contact-type hypersurface in a non-compact
Liouville manifold. The contact form thus obtained will be degenerate,
and a standard Morse function technique as in [ Bo02 ] will be
necessary.

Let @xmath be a closed @xmath -manifold such that @xmath is a Liouville
domain, for some exact symplectic form @xmath (recall that throughout
this paper, @xmath will denote the interval @xmath ). See Figure 2 for a
qualitative description. We will assume that the Liouville form @xmath
is given by a 1-parameter family of @xmath -forms in @xmath , which is
the case for all known examples of cylindrical semi-fillings. In
particular, we get that @xmath . We can write the symplectic form as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Liouville vector field @xmath , defined to be @xmath -dual to @xmath
, points outwards at each boundary component, and hence, using its flow,
we can choose our coordinate @xmath so that @xmath agrees with @xmath
near the boundary @xmath . Therefore, we can assume that @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, for some small @xmath . Then @xmath
carries a contact structure @xmath , where @xmath . The behaviour of
@xmath near the ends necessarily implies that there are values @xmath
such that @xmath lies in @xmath , and hence @xmath is not a contact type
hypersurface. The slices @xmath which are of contact type inherit a
contact structure @xmath and the resulting Reeb vector field @xmath
satisfies @xmath in the respective components of @xmath , where @xmath
is the Reeb vector field of @xmath . We shall assume throughout that the
only non-contact type slice is @xmath , so that @xmath is a contact form
for every @xmath . Also, we shall make the convention that whenever we
deal with equations involving @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, one has to
interpret them as to having a different sign according to the region
(the “upper” sign denotes the “plus” region, and the “lower”, the
“minus” region).

Let now @xmath be a product @xmath -manifold, where @xmath is the
orientable genus @xmath surface obtained by gluing a connected genus
@xmath surface with @xmath boundary components @xmath , to a connected
genus @xmath surface with @xmath boundary components @xmath along the
boundary, by an orientation preserving map. The surface @xmath then
inherits the orientation of @xmath , which is opposite to the one in
@xmath . On each boundary component of @xmath , choose collar
neighbourhoods @xmath (for the same @xmath as before), and coordinates
@xmath , so that @xmath .

We will consider @xmath and @xmath to be attached at each of the @xmath
boundary components by a cylinder @xmath , so that @xmath at this region
is the disjoint union of @xmath copies of @xmath , with the @xmath
identified with the Liouville domain above. We write the points of
@xmath here as @xmath , where the @xmath coordinate can be chosen to
coincide with @xmath where the gluing takes place. We shall therefore
drop the subscript @xmath when talking about the @xmath coordinate.
Denote also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the above identification.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a region gluing @xmath together (recall Figure 1 ). We
shall refer to them as the spine or cylindrical region , and the
positive/negative paper , respectively. We have fibrations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with fibers @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and hence can be given the
structure of a SOBD (see [ Mo2 ] for a definition).

We now construct an open manifold containing @xmath as a contact-type
hypersurface. Denote by @xmath the open manifolds obtained from @xmath
by attaching cylindrical ends of the form @xmath at each boundary
component, where the subset @xmath coincides with the collar
neighbourhoods chosen above. The coordinates @xmath and @xmath extend to
these ends in the obvious way, and we shall refer to the cylindrical
ends as @xmath . We also consider the cylinder @xmath obtained by
enlarging the cylindrical region @xmath we had above. Denote then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the double completion of @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we identify @xmath with @xmath if and only if @xmath , and @xmath
with @xmath if and only if @xmath (see Figure 4 ). By definition, the
@xmath coordinate coincides with the @xmath coordinates, where these are
defined, so we shall again drop the @xmath subscripts from the variables
@xmath . Note also that the @xmath coordinate is globally defined,
whereas @xmath is not. Denote then by @xmath the region of @xmath where
the coordinate @xmath is defined.

Choose now @xmath to be Liouville forms on the Liouville domains @xmath
, such that @xmath on @xmath . This last expression makes sense in the
region of @xmath where both @xmath and @xmath are defined, and where
they are not, the form @xmath makes sense. So this yields a globally
defined 1-form @xmath which coincides with @xmath where these are
defined. Also, the same argument works for @xmath , so that we get a
global @xmath .

For @xmath a big constant, @xmath a small one, and @xmath , choose a
smooth function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfying

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath , for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath .

We have that the 1-form @xmath is Liouville on @xmath . Indeed, if
@xmath is a positive volume form in @xmath with respect to the @xmath
-orientation, we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last equation defines a self-linking function @xmath , whose
sign is opposite to that of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Tracking the signs, one checks that the above expression is positive.

The associated Liouville vector field is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Observe that @xmath is everywhere positively colinear with @xmath .

After extending the form @xmath to @xmath in the natural way, one checks
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Liouville form on @xmath . Denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is symplectic. Denote by @xmath the associated Liouville vector
field.

If @xmath denotes the Liouville vector field on @xmath which is @xmath
-dual to @xmath , coinciding with @xmath in @xmath , we can define a
smooth vector field on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and @xmath . We have its “horizontal” and “vertical”
boundaries

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is then a manifold with corners

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the corresponding components of the region @xmath . This means that
@xmath will be transverse to the smoothening of @xmath that we shall now
construct.

Choose smooth functions @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See Figure 3 .

We now smoothen the corner @xmath by substituting the region

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which contains the corners, with the smooth manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The smoothened boundary can then be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Liouville vector field @xmath is transverse to this manifold, so
that we get a contact structure on @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath is canonically diffeomorphic to @xmath . So, this
actually yields a contact structure on @xmath . By construction, we have
non-empty intersections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall construct a stable Hamiltonian structure on @xmath which arises
as a deformation of the above contact structure, such that both coincide
on @xmath , as follows.

Choose a smooth function @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath , and @xmath . Set

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

which yields a smooth vector field on @xmath , a deformation of @xmath .
Then @xmath is still transverse to @xmath and is stabilizing, so that
the pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields a stable Hamiltonian structure on @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath
can be seen as the contactization of the Liouville domain @xmath .

Along @xmath the Reeb vector field is given by @xmath which is
degenerate, and the space of Reeb orbits is identified with @xmath . We
consider two perturbation approaches: Morse, and Morse-Bott. In the
first approach we choose @xmath to be Morse, depending only in @xmath
near @xmath , satisfying @xmath near @xmath , @xmath near @xmath , and
vanishing as one approaches @xmath . In the second approach, we choose
@xmath to depend only on @xmath globally , with respect to which it is a
Morse function.

If @xmath denotes the flow of @xmath , choose @xmath sufficiently small
so that the manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is still transverse to @xmath . We have a stable Hamiltonian structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each component is the perturbation of the corresponding component
of @xmath .

Along the region @xmath the new coordinates are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the time @xmath flow of @xmath .

We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can similarly write down @xmath explicitly.

The Reeb vector field @xmath associated to this stable Hamiltonian
structure is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Hamiltonian vector field on @xmath associated to
@xmath , defined by @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

One can check that @xmath has sign which is opposite to its subscript.
Observe that critical points @xmath of @xmath give rise to closed Reeb
orbits of the form @xmath . If we are taking the Morse approach, we have
only a finite number of such orbits, and they are non-degenerate.
Choosing @xmath to be @xmath -small has the effect of making the vector
field @xmath also small, so that the closed orbits which do not arise
from critical points of @xmath have large period, including the ones not
contained in @xmath . So, taking any large (but fixed) @xmath , we can
choose @xmath small enough so that all the periodic Reeb orbits up to
period @xmath are of the form @xmath , for @xmath , and @xmath , for
some covering threshold @xmath depending on @xmath . For the Morse–Bott
case, we obtain @xmath -families of Morse-Bott orbits for each critical
point of @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.

1.  [wide, labelwidth=!, labelindent=0pt] @xmath

2.  One can check that @xmath (recall that @xmath is the primitive of
    @xmath ). Therefore, for compatible almost complex structure @xmath
    and an asymptotically cylindrical @xmath -holomorphic curve @xmath
    with positive/negative punctures @xmath , the @xmath -energy of
    @xmath is

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (7)
      -- -------- -- -----

    where @xmath is the action of the Reeb orbit corresponding to the
    puncture @xmath . In particular, if the positive punctures
    correspond to critical points of @xmath , then so will the negative
    ones.

3.  By inspecting the expressions of the Reeb vector field we see that
    there are no contractible closed Reeb orbits for the SHS, if we
    assume this same condition for @xmath . Moreover, the direction of
    the Reeb vector field does not change after perturbing back to
    sufficiently close contact data (cf. Section 2.8 below), and so this
    also holds for the latter data. It follows that the isotopy class
    defined by the resulting contact structure is hypertight, and this
    shows the hypertightness condition of Theorem 1.3 .

### 2.2 Compatible almost complex structure

##### Construction

We set @xmath , and @xmath , and drop the superscripts @xmath and @xmath
from all of the notation. We now define a suitable, though non-generic,
almost complex structure @xmath on the symplectization @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It will be compatible with the stable Hamiltonian structure @xmath , and
the fibers @xmath of our fibration @xmath , the “pages”, will lift as
holomorphic curves. We will blur the distinction between @xmath and its
diffeomorphic perturbed copy @xmath (as well as for @xmath and @xmath ),
so that we are actually working on a fixed @xmath with a SHS which
depends on @xmath .

Denote by @xmath . We will define @xmath on @xmath , in an @xmath
-invariant way, and then simply set @xmath .

Choose a @xmath -compatible almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath ,
which is cylindrical in the cylindrical ends of @xmath , so that, along
these, it coincides with a @xmath -compatible almost complex structure
@xmath on @xmath , and maps the Liouville vector field @xmath to @xmath
. Observe that the vector field @xmath is transverse to @xmath along
@xmath . Therefore, we may then define @xmath on @xmath .

Along the regions @xmath , and @xmath , the restriction of the
projection @xmath induces an isomorphism @xmath . Choose @xmath to be a
@xmath -compatible almost complex structures on @xmath , so that @xmath
in @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath .

In @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

Here,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in ( 6 ). In the overlaps @xmath , one computes
that @xmath where @xmath , which is always positive. Similarly, in
@xmath , we have @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are both positive, we
can now take any smooth positive functions @xmath which coincide with
@xmath near @xmath and with @xmath near @xmath . We glue the two
definitions by setting

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

and we make @xmath agree with @xmath on @xmath .

This gives a well-defined cylindrical @xmath in @xmath .

##### Compatibility.

One can check that @xmath is @xmath -compatible by straightforward
computations [ Mo2 ] .

###### Remark 2.2.

@xmath We observe that over @xmath , where @xmath , we have @xmath ,
with equality if and only if @xmath , so that the projection to @xmath
of @xmath lies in the span of @xmath .

### 2.3 Finite energy foliation

We will now consider the symplectization of our stable Hamiltonian
manifold @xmath , given by @xmath , where @xmath . We will construct a
finite-energy foliation of @xmath by @xmath -holomorphic curves,
consisting of three distinct types, which we describe in the next
theorem. This is an adaptation of the construction in [ Wen4 ] .

###### Theorem 2.3.

There exists a finite energy foliation of the symplectization @xmath by
simple @xmath -holomorphic curves of the following types:

-    trivial cylinders @xmath , corresponding to Reeb orbits of the form
    @xmath for @xmath crit @xmath , and which may be parametrized by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    flow-line cylinders @xmath , parametrized by

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (10)
      -- -------- -- ------

    for a proper function @xmath , a function @xmath , and a map @xmath
    satisfying

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (11)
      -- -------- -- ------

    Here, the gradient is computed with respect to the metric @xmath .

    They have for positive/negative asymptotics the Reeb orbits
    corresponding to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    positive/negative page-like holomorphic curves @xmath , which
    consist of a trivial lift at symplectization level @xmath of a page
    @xmath , for @xmath , glued to @xmath cylindrical ends which lift
    the smoothened corners and then enter the symplectization of @xmath
    , asymptotically becoming a flow-line cylinder. They have @xmath
    positive asymptotics at Reeb orbits of the form @xmath , exactly one
    for each component of @xmath . The positive curves have genus @xmath
    and @xmath punctures, whereas the negative curves have genus @xmath
    , and also @xmath punctures.

###### Remark 2.4.

In the Morse-Bott case, one can show that @xmath for a suitable metric
on @xmath ( [ Mo2 ] , Remark 2.8), so that the function @xmath vanishes
identically.

Figure 5 summarizes the situation. We shall not distinguish the curves
@xmath and @xmath from the simple holomorphic curves that they
parametrize, and we will drop the @xmath for the notation whenever we
wish to refer to the equivalence class of the curves under @xmath
-translation. A short computation shows that the flow-line cylinders are
indeed holomorphic (see e.g. [ Mo2 , Sie16 ] ). We now construct the
page-like curves.

The pages @xmath , @xmath , clearly lift to a holomorphic foliation of
the region @xmath , which takes the form @xmath . We now glue
cylindrical ends to these lifts.

We have that @xmath and @xmath are both linear combinations of the
vector fields @xmath and @xmath along @xmath , with the coefficients
only depending on @xmath . Since these are not colinear, we have smooth
functions @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can in fact compute that the following expressions hold:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

We have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

We conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the distribution above has integral submanifolds which
are unparametrized holomorphic curves. We can actually find holomorphic
parametrizations given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some fixed @xmath , and functions @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The curve @xmath is indeed holomorphic.

The curves @xmath glue with curves @xmath , which look like @xmath for
some @xmath such that @xmath near @xmath and @xmath , and some @xmath
with @xmath , so that @xmath . We may then define a @xmath -holomorphic
curve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which asympote @xmath Reeb orbits @xmath , where @xmath , for @xmath ,
and which have genus @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.4 Index computations

In this section, we compute the Fredholm index of the curves in the
foliation.

###### Theorem 2.5.

@xmath

1.   [wide, labelwidth=!, labelindent=0pt]

2.   After a sufficiently small Morse perturbation making Reeb orbits
    along @xmath non-degenerate, we can find a natural trivialization
    @xmath of the contact structure along @xmath (inducing a
    trivialization @xmath along all of its covers @xmath ), and @xmath ,
    which depends on @xmath and grows as @xmath gets smaller, such that
    the Conley–Zehnder index of @xmath is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath .

3.   In the Morse approach, the Fredholm indexes of the curves in our
    finite energy foliation are given by

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (14)
      -- -------- -- ------

###### Proof.

See [ Mo2 ] . ∎

###### Remark 2.6.

Since @xmath for every @xmath , then @xmath , since @xmath . This means
these curves cannot possibly achieve transversality, and, after a
perturbation making @xmath generic, they will disappear.

### 2.5 Fredholm regularity

In this section, we shall prove that the curves we have constructed are
Fredholm regular.

In the Morse case, regularity of unbranched covers of flow-line
cylinders can be reduced to the Morse–Smale condition for @xmath . This
fact is known to experts, and we shall omit the details (see [ Mo2 ] ).

For regularity of the other curves, we will assume the Morse–Bott
situation, and prove regularity of the genus zero curves in the
foliation. We will use the fact from [ Wen1 ] that Fredholm regularity
is equivalent to the surjectivity of the normal component of the
linearized Cauchy-Riemann operator, which is again a Fredholm operator.
After some assumptions on our choice of coordinates and the Morse-Bott
function @xmath (which we can always assume hold), and a suitable choice
of normal bundle, we will explicitly write down an expression for this
operator. We will obtain a set of PDEs whose solutions are precisely the
elements in its kernel, for which we can check that curves in the
foliation which are nearby a fixed leaf correspond to solutions. By
splitting the operator, and using automatic transversality [ Wen1 ] , we
show that these are all possible solutions. This will imply that the
index of the normal operator coincides with the dimension of its kernel,
from which surjectivity follows. From the implicit function theorem, we
also obtain regularity for Morse data chosen sufficiently close to
Morse-Bott data, which is enough for our purposes.

In order to do computations with linearized operators, we will choose a
suitable connection on @xmath . It will be given by the Levi–Civita
connection of a suitable metric @xmath and hence symmetric.

##### Constructing a symmetric connection

Given an almost complex structure @xmath which is compatible with a
symplectic form @xmath , we will denote by @xmath the associated
Riemannian metric.

Define, in the regions @xmath , the metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we are using the splitting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We extend it to @xmath by replacing @xmath by the identity in the basis
@xmath in the above matrix. Along @xmath , set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we use the splitting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We set @xmath its Levi–Civita connection, which shall be the connection
we will use to write down all our linearised Cauchy–Riemann operators.

#### 2.5.1 Regularity for genus zero page-like curves in the Morse–Bott
case

In this section, we fix a genus zero curve @xmath in the foliation, and
denote by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We will show that @xmath ,
where @xmath is the normal component of the linearized Cauchy-Riemann
operator.

We will deal with the Morse–Bott case, where @xmath depends only on
@xmath . In this case, the operator we need to look at is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is a small weight making the operator Fredholm, @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional vector space of smooth sections asymptotic to
constant linear combinations of @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional vector space of smooth sections which are supported
along @xmath (a disjoint union of its cylindrical ends, which we denote
@xmath , @xmath ), and are constant equal to a vector in @xmath along
@xmath . We also have the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a Teichmüller slice through @xmath (see e.g. [ Wen1 ]
for a definition of this). The curve @xmath is said to be regular
whenever @xmath is surjective. By a result in [ Wen1 ] , this is
equivalent to the surjectivity of its normal component. In this case,
this operator is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the orthogonal projection to the normal bundle @xmath .
Recall that the latter is any choice of @xmath -invariant complement to
the tangent space to @xmath , which coincides with the contact structure
at infinity. Riemann-Roch gives @xmath .

The operator @xmath and @xmath are of Cauchy-Riemann type, which means
in particular that they satisfy the Leibnitz rule

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

###### Splitting over the paper

We will think of the punctured surface @xmath as being obtained
abstractly from the surface with boundary @xmath by attaching
cylindrical ends. Over the region @xmath , we have a splitting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath preserves this splitting, this gives an identification
@xmath of the normal bundle of @xmath along this region. Using that
constant vectors in @xmath give holomorphic push-offs of @xmath in the
foliation, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the normal Cauchy–Riemann operator @xmath splits as @xmath .

###### Some technical assumptions

In order to be able to write down a manageable expression for @xmath
over the rest of the regions, we will assume, without loss of
generality, that:

###### Assumptions 2.7.

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath has a unique critical point away from a neighbourhood @xmath
    where @xmath is non-cylindrical. Choose, say, @xmath .

3.  Choose our coordinate @xmath so that the Liouville vector field
    @xmath coincides with @xmath on the complement of @xmath .

These assumptions are only used in this section to show regularity, and
do not affect other sections. Therefore we will, for simplicity, lift
them in the rest of the sections.

###### Choosing a suitable normal bundle.

We now specify how we will extend our normal bundle @xmath to @xmath
along its cylindrical ends.

Since @xmath was chosen on @xmath so that the identification @xmath is
holomorphic, where @xmath may be any @xmath -compatible almost complex
structure in @xmath which is cylindrical at the ends, we may identify
the bundles. Observe that @xmath is always @xmath -independent. And here
we use assumptions A and B: we can choose @xmath so that it is
cylindrical in the complement of @xmath , so that @xmath is @xmath
-independent ( @xmath is the Liouville coordinate).

We then choose @xmath by the global expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath along the corner @xmath , interpolating between @xmath and
@xmath . Observe that @xmath is a trivial @xmath -complex bundle.

###### Writing down the normal Cauchy-Riemann operator globally.

We now compute an asymptotic expression for @xmath . In the Morse-Bott
case, one shows that @xmath can be written asymptotically (i.e in the
cylindrical coordinates @xmath along @xmath ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a symmetric matrix such that @xmath as @xmath ,
uniformly in the second variable.

By construction, @xmath and @xmath are both independent of the
coordinates @xmath and @xmath along @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the matrix with a @xmath at the @xmath -entry, and
zero everywhere else, and @xmath . As we traverse the smoothened corner
@xmath , we pick up a smooth path @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Computing the kernel.

We write any section of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . We denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are the orthogonal projections with respect to the metric @xmath . Then
we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath .

Then, @xmath if and only if @xmath , which in holomorphic coordinates
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Observe that the @xmath terms all disappear away from @xmath . It is
straightforward to check that all the nearby holomorphic curves in the
foliation satisfy the above equations. We will show that these are
indeed the unique solutions.

We have shown that the operator @xmath splits into a direct sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that both operators @xmath and @xmath are surjective, and
this finishes the proof.

The first summand has kernel the @xmath -dimensional space of constant
sections along @xmath . Its index is @xmath , and it follows that it is
surjective. The second summand satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to show that it is surjective, we use automatic transversality
[ Wen1 ] . We need to check that @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
adjusted first Chern number , defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the genus, and @xmath is the set of punctures with even
Conley-Zehnder index.

The Conley-Zehnder index of @xmath at each puncture is @xmath , and
therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, the adjusted first Chern number is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This finishes the proof of regularity.

### 2.6 From Morse–Bott to Morse

In this section, we fix a Morse perturbation scheme. First, choose
@xmath to be given by @xmath where @xmath is a sufficiently small and
positive Morse function on @xmath and has a unique critical point at 0
with Morse index 1 (which yields the Morse–Bott situation). And then,
choose a sufficiently small positive Morse function @xmath on @xmath and
extend it to a neighbourhood of @xmath to make a further perturbation
(obtaining the Morse case). Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a smooth bump function satisfying @xmath in the region
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

We view the Morse case as a deformation of the Morse–Bott one, via
@xmath for @xmath . We obtain a corresponding 1-parameter families of
SHS’s and compatible almost complex structures @xmath . In the case
where @xmath is chosen small, from the implicit function theorem we
obtain:

###### Theorem 2.8 (Fredholm regularity in the nearby Morse case).

For Morse data sufficiently close to Morse-Bott data, all the genus zero
curves in the finite energy foliation are Fredholm regular.

In order to simplify the torsion computation of Section 2.9 , we will
choose @xmath to have a unique maximum @xmath and minimum @xmath . Both
scenarios are depicted in Figure 6 in the case of @xmath .

### 2.7 Uniqueness of the curves in the Morse/Morse–Bott case

In this section, we prove that the family of curves we constructed above
are the unique curves (up to reparametrization and multiple covers) that
asymptote Reeb orbits of the family @xmath , and with positive
asymptotics in different components of @xmath . We do this in both the
Morse/Morse–Bott situations. We assume that @xmath has a unique critical
point in the interval direction, at @xmath (and perhaps other critical
points contained in @xmath , in the Morse case). In the Morse–Bott case,
we denote by @xmath the simply covered Reeb orbit corresponding to
@xmath .

###### Lemma 2.9.

Assume either the Morse or Morse–Bott cases. Let @xmath , and let @xmath
be a @xmath -holomorphic curve with positive asympotics of the form
@xmath , for which the number of positive punctures is bounded above by
@xmath . Then, we can find sufficiently small @xmath (depending only on
@xmath ), such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the set of positive/negative punctures of @xmath .
Here, we count punctures with the covering multiplicity of their
corresponding asymptotic.

###### Proof.

This follows easily from Remark 2.1 , and by computing the @xmath
-energy [ Mo2 ] . ∎

###### Theorem 2.10.

Assume either the Morse or Morse–Bott scenario.

Let @xmath be a (not necessarily regular) @xmath -holomorphic curve
defined on some punctured Riemann surface @xmath which is asymptotically
cylindrical, and asymptotes simply covered Reeb orbits of the form
@xmath at its positive ends. Assume that any two of the positive ends of
@xmath lie in distinct components of @xmath .

Then, for sufficiently small and uniform @xmath , we have that, if
@xmath is not a trivial cylinder over one of the @xmath ’s, then @xmath
is a curve of the form @xmath for some @xmath , or a flow-line cylinder
@xmath (in the Morse scenario).

###### Proof.

We will consider two cases: either @xmath is completely contained in the
region @xmath (case A), or it is not (case B).

Case A. This case is easily dealt with in the Morse–Bott scenario. By
assumption, we have that @xmath has a unique positive end. Since the
@xmath ’s are not contractible/nullhomologous inside @xmath , Lemma 2.9
implies that @xmath is has one positive and one negative end, both
simply covered, corresponding to Reeb orbits @xmath . But then the
@xmath -energy of @xmath vanishes, and @xmath is necessarily is a cover
of a trivial cylinder.

In the Morse case, we show that @xmath is a flow line cylinder. Again,
Lemma 2.9 implies that @xmath is has one positive and one negative end,
both simply covered, corresponding to Reeb orbits @xmath . Observe that,
a priori, @xmath is not even necessarily a cylinder, since it may have
positive genus.

In the degenerate case when @xmath , we the projection @xmath is
holomorphic. Then, if @xmath is a holomorphic curve for this data, then
so is @xmath . Since the asymptotics of @xmath are covers of the @xmath
-fibers of @xmath , the map @xmath extends to a holomorphic curve in the
closed surface @xmath . But @xmath is exact, so that @xmath has to be
constant by Stokes’ theorem. This means that @xmath is necessarily a
multiple cover of a trivial cylinder.

We then see that the space of stable holomorphic cascades [ Bo02 ] in
@xmath , the objects one obtains as limits of honest curves when one
turns off the function @xmath , consists of finite collections of
flow-line segments and covers of trivial cylinders. If we take @xmath ,
and we assume we have a sequence @xmath of @xmath -holomorphic maps with
@xmath (where @xmath is the almost complex structure corresponding to
@xmath ), with one positive and negative simply covered orbits
corresponding to critical points @xmath , then we obtain a stable
holomorphic cascade @xmath as a limiting object. Since the positive end
of @xmath is simply covered, Lemma 2.9 applied to @xmath implies that
every Reeb orbit appearing in @xmath is simply covered, and therefore
every of its holomorphic map components cannot be multiply covered.
These can then only be trivial cylinders, but stability of the cascade
means that it does not have trivial cylinder components. We conclude
that the space of holomorphic cascades which glue to curves as in our
hypothesis consists solely of flow-lines, which are regular by the
Morse–Smale condition, and come in a @xmath -dimensional family. The
gluing results in [ Bo02 ] give a 1-1 correspondence between index
@xmath Morse families of curves for the non-degenerate perturbation and
index @xmath regular holomorphic cascades, which in our situation is
exactly what proves that our curve @xmath is a flow-line cylinder.

Case B. We first assume the Morse–Bott case, and deal with the Morse
case via the gluing results in [ Bo02 ] . The approach in this situation
is to estimate the @xmath -energy of @xmath , and to use a suitable
branched cover argument. The details are as follows.

Assume the Morse–Bott case. Since every positive puncture of @xmath
corresponds to a critical point, Remark 2.1 implies that so does every
negative one. Let us denote by @xmath the set of positive/negative
punctures of @xmath , and for @xmath , let @xmath be the Reeb orbit
corresponding to @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath
. By assumption, we have that @xmath , the number of components of
@xmath .

The @xmath -energy then has the following upper bound:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

By construction, we have that over the region @xmath , the almost
complex structure @xmath splits. This implies that the projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is holomorphic. Moreover, this is still true if we extend this region by
adding a small collar @xmath , as one can check. Denote by @xmath .

For each @xmath , the hypersurface @xmath is @xmath -holomorphic, and
@xmath has @xmath as fiber over @xmath . Since the asymptotics of @xmath
are away from @xmath , the intersection of @xmath with any of the @xmath
is necessarily a finite set of points, since they are restricted to lie
in a compact part of the domain of @xmath .

Assuming WLOG that @xmath indeed has a non-empty portion lying over the
“plus” region @xmath , by positivity of intersections we have that
@xmath necessarily intersects every @xmath for @xmath . By Sard’s
theorem, we may then find a @xmath , so that @xmath is transverse to the
circle @xmath (over all @xmath components of the collar). If we denote
@xmath , we have that @xmath is a surface with boundary @xmath . The
upshot of the discussion above is that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a holomorphic branched cover , having as degree the (positive)
algebraic intersection number of @xmath with any of the @xmath (which is
independent of @xmath ). Call this degree @xmath . We wish to show that
@xmath , and so this map will be actually a biholomorphism.

Let us write @xmath , where @xmath is a simple closed curve whose image
under @xmath wraps around one of the circles @xmath , with winding
number @xmath . By holomorphicity of @xmath , we have @xmath . Observe
that necessarily one has that @xmath , since @xmath intersects every
@xmath at least once, and in particular for every @xmath on the @xmath
circles @xmath .

By counting preimages under this projection of a point in each the
@xmath circles @xmath , we obtain that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using expression @xmath , equation ( 18 ), the fact that @xmath , @xmath
, and Stokes’ theorem, we have the following energy estimate:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we combine this with the inequality ( 17 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now, since we have the freedom to choose @xmath and @xmath as close to
zero as wished, one can easily see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves that @xmath has no negative ends and precisely @xmath
positive ends, and that @xmath gives a biholomorphism between @xmath and
@xmath . It also follows from our energy estimates that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the integrand is non-negative, we get that @xmath , so that @xmath
lies entirely in the almost complex 4-manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a (not necessarily closed) @xmath -Reeb orbit.

Choose now a point @xmath in the projection of @xmath to @xmath , in
this region. We shall prove that the projection of @xmath to @xmath
consists of just the point @xmath , using the Morse–Bott assumption.

Using the Reeb flow along @xmath we have a local coordinate @xmath ,
such that @xmath . Assume by contradiction that there is some @xmath
such that @xmath belongs to the projection of @xmath to @xmath , and
consider the family of curves @xmath . By choosing a suitable @xmath ,
we obtain an intersection of @xmath and @xmath , and, by positivity of
intersections, we may assume that @xmath is such that @xmath is not an
asymptotic orbit of @xmath . Then the total intersection of these curves
in @xmath is at least 1.

On the other hand, the set @xmath , where @xmath is the projection to
@xmath of @xmath , must be bounded in the @xmath -direction, since the
corresponding Reeb orbits are bounded away from each other. This means
that the standard intersection pairing is homotopy invariant (there are
no contributions coming from infinity), but a priori the intersection
points might move along with a given homotopy. If we choose to homotope
by translating in the @xmath -direction, this can only happen if the
projection of both curves to @xmath intersect the asymptotics of each
other. Since the projection of the curve @xmath to @xmath does not
intersect the asymptotics of @xmath , we can homotope the intersections
away, a contradiction. This proves the claim that @xmath is constant in
@xmath .

We have obtained that the portion of @xmath which lies in the over
@xmath is actually contained in the 3-manifold @xmath , as is the
corresponding portion of the curve @xmath . But for dimensional reasons,
this manifold has a unique 2-dimensional @xmath -invariant distribution,
given by @xmath . Therefore the tangent space to @xmath must coincide
with the tangent space of some @xmath at every point in this region. The
unique continuation theorem finally yields @xmath .

This proves the theorem in the Morse–Bott situation. The proof in the
Morse case follows from uniqueness in the Morse–Bott one, and the gluing
results in [ Bo02 ] .

∎

### 2.8 From the SHS to a sufficiently non-degenerate contact structure

For computations in SFT we need non-degenerate Reeb orbits and contact
data. Therefore, we need to perturb the SHS @xmath to a nearby contact
structure.

###### Perturbation to contact data

Recall that we have defined an exact symplectic form @xmath on the
double completion, and we denote by @xmath its associated Liouville
vector field. We also have the “vertical” Liouville vector field @xmath
associated to @xmath , defined by expression ( 4 ), and the stabilizing
vector field @xmath for the SHS @xmath , defined by ( 5 ).

For @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that @xmath is the Liouville vector field associated to @xmath
and @xmath . This yields a family of SHS’s given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can see that @xmath is a contact form for @xmath . By Gray’s
stability, as long as @xmath and @xmath are positive and sufficiently
close to zero, the isotopy class of @xmath is independent on parameters.

###### Holomorphic curves for the contact data

Since we have shown that the genus zero holomorphic curves are regular
for the SHS data, the implicit function theorem implies that they will
survive a small perturbation to contact data, and will still be regular.

### 2.9 Proof of Theorem 1.3

Once all the technical tools are in place, we will prove Theorem 1.3 .
We fix the parameters @xmath and @xmath , so that we work in the SFT
algebra @xmath whose homology is @xmath (which is independent on
parameters). We take coefficients in @xmath , where @xmath defines an
element in the annihilator @xmath Ann @xmath . Here, we view @xmath as
sitting in @xmath . We will show that @xmath has @xmath -twisted @xmath
-torsion for every @xmath , so that in particular it has @xmath -torsion
for untwisted version of the SFT algebra.

Let us recall that for SFT to be defined, we need to introduce an
abstract perturbation of the Cauchy–Riemann equation. We shall be doing
our computation prior to introducing this perturbation, and prove by the
end the section that this is a reasonable thing to do. See the end of
this section for more details.

###### Computation of algebraic torsion

The index formula ( 2 ) implies that curves @xmath which asymptote index
@xmath critical points (maxima) at @xmath of the @xmath positive ends,
and one index @xmath critical point at the remaining one, have index
@xmath .

Given @xmath maxima and @xmath an index @xmath critical point, denote by
@xmath and @xmath the corresponding non-degenerate Reeb orbits. Consider
the moduli space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath -translation classes of @xmath -punctured genus zero @xmath
-holomorphic curves in @xmath , which have no negative asymptotics, and
have @xmath as positive asymptotics. The uniqueness Theorem 2.10 implies
that every element in @xmath is a genus zero curve in our foliation.
Since every such curve is regular, after a choice of coherent
orientations as in [ BoMon04 ] , this moduli space is an oriented zero
dimensional manifold, which can therefore be counted with appropiate
signs. Now, a choice of coherent orientations for the moduli space of
Morse flow lines induces a coherent orientation for the moduli space
containing the curves @xmath , and we fix such a choice here onwards. We
choose our function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as made explicit in Section 2.6 . In particular, there are no index zero
critical points, and the only index 1 critical point is given by @xmath
, where @xmath is the unique minimum of @xmath . We shall denote by
@xmath the moduli space of positive unparametrized flow lines @xmath
connecting @xmath to @xmath . Assuming the Morse–Smale condition for
@xmath , we have then that the zero dimensional moduli spaces correspond
to critical points satisfying @xmath .

We then fix @xmath as above, and we let @xmath and @xmath be the
generators in SFT corresponding to the Reeb orbits associated to these
critical points. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is an element of @xmath . In order to compute its differential, we
need to count all of the rigid holomorphic curves which asymptote at its
positive ends any of the Reeb orbits appearing in @xmath .

Claim . The holomorphic curves contributing to the differential of
@xmath are of either the two following types:

-   A holomorphic sphere @xmath , which is in fact unique.

-   A holomorphic cylinder @xmath inside @xmath , connecting an index
    @xmath critical point to one of the maxima @xmath .

Indeed, using Theorem 2.10 , it follows that only the somewhere
injective curves in our foliation are involved in the computation of
this differential (see Proposition 2.11 below). Using that there are no
index zero critical points, we see that there are only two possible ways
to approach the critical point @xmath , entering through the two
different boundary components of @xmath , and that there is a unique
@xmath -class of the form @xmath which has @xmath as a positive
asymptotic (see Figure 6 ). Moreover, by observing that the generic
behaviour is hitting a maxima, by a generic and small perturbation of
the Morse function @xmath along different components of the spine, we
can arrange that this curve actually defines an element of @xmath . The
uniqueness Theorem 2.10 above shows that in fact this is the only
element in @xmath . Finally, ruling out the curves coming from the
positive side (which have the wrong index and hence are not counted by
SFT), we are left only with the curves listed in our claim.

In order to count the curves of type @xmath , we observe that positive
flow lines going from an index @xmath critical point @xmath to an index
@xmath critical point @xmath come in “evil twins” pairs @xmath : by
definition of the Morse index, we have only one positive eigendirection
for the Hessian of the Morse function at @xmath , and the flow lines
approach this point on either side of this direction. Since @xmath (
@xmath being a @xmath -manifold), we only have one generator of the top
Morse homology chain group, which is necessarily closed under the Morse
differential. Therefore, after choosing a coherent orientation of the
moduli spaces of curves, the evil twins cancel each other out, and hence
@xmath .

Fix @xmath a closed @xmath -form so that @xmath . For @xmath , we denote
by @xmath the class it induces, by @xmath the unique @xmath -translation
class in @xmath , and, for a rigid holomorphic curve @xmath , we denote
by @xmath the sign of @xmath assigned by our choice of coherent
orientations. In particular, we know that @xmath .

Observe that, for the @xmath -th component of @xmath , Reeb orbits
corresponding to critical points all define the same homology class
@xmath . We take as canonical representative of this class the @xmath
-cycle given by the Reeb orbit @xmath over the unique maxima @xmath .
For every index @xmath critical point @xmath lying in the @xmath -th
component, fix @xmath an index @xmath flow line joining @xmath to the
maxima @xmath . Choose the spanning surface of @xmath to be @xmath ,
satisfying @xmath . Then, for this choice of spanning surfaces, the
homology class associated to the holomorphic cylinder @xmath is @xmath .
One thinks of @xmath as being attached to @xmath at the negative end,
corresponding to @xmath . Let @xmath denote the @xmath -torus @xmath .
Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we have @xmath .

According to Proposition 2.11 below, the image of @xmath under the
differential @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

which proves that our model has @xmath -torsion with coefficients in
@xmath . We have used that all orbits are simply covered, so no
combinatorial factors appear, and we need not worry about asymptotic
markers.

###### Why the computation works

We now justify the computation above. Let us recall first the fact that
the abstract polyfold machinery for SFT requires the introduction of an
abstract perturbation to the Cauchy–Riemann equation making every
holomorphic curve of positive index regular. The basic facts about this
perturbation scheme, which comes from the polyfold theory of
Hofer–Wysocki–Zehnder, are that

-   Every Fredholm regular index 1 holomorphic curve gives rise to a
    unique solution to the perturbed problem, if the perturbation is
    sufficiently small.

-   If solutions to the perturbed problem with given asymptotic
    behaviour exist for small perturbations, then as the perturbation is
    switched off they give rise to a subsequence of curves which
    converge to a holomorphic building with the same asymptotic
    behaviour.

Therefore, the index 1 curves in our foliation survive and are counted,
but we need to make sure there are no extra curves which need to be
taken into the count. In what follows, @xmath will denote the original
@xmath we constructed in the Morse case.

###### Proposition 2.11.

The space of connected @xmath -holomorphic stable buildings of index 1
which may become curves contributing to the differential of @xmath after
introducing an abstract perturbation, or after perturbing the SHS to a
sufficiently nearby contact structure, have only one level, no nodes,
and are somewhere injective and regular: they actually consist exactly
of either an index 1 curve @xmath for some positive flow line @xmath ,
or a curve @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows by inductively applying Theorem 2.10 [ Mo2 ] . ∎

## 3 Giroux torsion implies algebraic 1-torsion in higher dimensions

In this section, we address a conjecture in the paper [ MNW13 ]
(Conjecture 4.14).

###### Definition 3.1 (Giroux).

Let @xmath be a compact @xmath -manifold with boundary, @xmath a
symplectic form on the interior @xmath of @xmath , and @xmath a contact
structure on @xmath . The triple @xmath is an ideal Liouville domain if
there exists an auxiliary 1-form @xmath on @xmath such that

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   For any smooth function @xmath with regular level set @xmath , the
    1-form @xmath extends smoothly to @xmath such that its restriction
    to @xmath is a contact form for @xmath .

The 1-form @xmath is called a Liouville form for @xmath .

In [ MNW13 ] -terminology, we say that an oriented hypersurface @xmath
in a contact manifold @xmath is a @xmath -round hypersurface modeled on
some closed contact manifold @xmath if it is transverse to @xmath and
admits an orientation preserving identification with @xmath such that
@xmath .

Given an ideal Liouville domain @xmath , the Giroux domain associated to
it is the contact manifold @xmath endowed with the contact structure
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are as before, and @xmath is the @xmath
-coordinate. Away from @xmath , the vanishing locus of @xmath , this
contact structure coincides with the contactization @xmath . Over @xmath
it is just given by @xmath , so that @xmath is a @xmath -round
hypersurface modeled on @xmath .

One may find a collar neighbourhood of the form @xmath , on which @xmath
is given by the kernel of a contact form @xmath , where @xmath is the
coordinate on the interval, where @xmath corresponds to @xmath , @xmath
the coordinate in @xmath , and @xmath a contact form for @xmath [ MNW13
, Lemma 4.1] . Using these collar neighbourhoods, one has a well-defined
notion of gluing of two Giroux domains along boundary components modeled
on isomorphic contact manifolds (see Section 3.1 below).

We also have a blow-down operation for round hypersurfaces lying in the
boundary. If @xmath is a @xmath -round boundary component of @xmath ,
with orientation opposite the boundary orientation, consider the collar
neighborhood @xmath as before. Let @xmath be the disk of radius @xmath
in @xmath . The map @xmath is a diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
which pulls back @xmath to the contact form @xmath . Thus we can glue
@xmath to @xmath to get a new contact manifold in which @xmath has been
replaced by @xmath , and the @xmath -component of @xmath has been capped
off.

Given a contact embedding of the interior of a Giroux domain @xmath
inside a contact manifold @xmath , we shall denote by @xmath the
annihilator of @xmath , when the latter is viewed as a subspace of
@xmath . If @xmath is a subdomain resulting from gluing together a
collection of Giroux domains @xmath , we shall denote @xmath .

The following theorem implies Theorem 1.6 (see Example 3.3 below):

###### Theorem 3.2.

If a contact manifold @xmath admits a contact embedding of a subdomain
@xmath obtained by gluing two Giroux domains @xmath and @xmath , such
that @xmath has a boundary component not touching @xmath , then @xmath
has @xmath -twisted algebraic 1-torsion, for every @xmath . Moreover, it
is also algebraically overtwisted if @xmath contains any blown down
boundary components.

The motivating example of an explicit model of such subdomain is the
following:

###### Example 3.3.

Consider @xmath a Liouville pair on a closed manifold @xmath . As in the
introduction, consider the Giroux @xmath -torsion domain modeled on
@xmath , given by the contact manifold @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the coordinates are @xmath .

We may write @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is an orientation reversing diffeomorphism, whereas @xmath
is an orientation-preserving one, which is used to pull-back the
Liouville form @xmath defined on @xmath via a map of the form @xmath .

This means that we may view @xmath as being obtained by gluing two
Giroux domains of the form @xmath and @xmath , along their common
boundary, an @xmath -round hypersurface modeled on @xmath .

Therefore, from Theorem 3.2 we obtain Theorem 1.6 as a corollary.

### 3.1 Giroux SOBDs

We consider a specially simple kind of spinal open book decompositions
(SOBDs), which arise on manifolds which have been obtained by gluing a
family of Giroux domains along a collection of common boundary
components, each a round hypersurface modeled on some contact manifold.
Such is the case of the Giroux @xmath -torsion domains @xmath .
Basically, these SOBDs are obtained by declaring suitable collar
neighbourhoods of each gluing hypersurface to be paper components,
whereas the spine components are the complement of these neighbourhoods.
They have the desirable features that the fibrations are trivial, and
that they have 2-dimensional pages (see [ Mo2 ] for definitions).

##### Construction of the SOBD.

Let @xmath be two Giroux domains which one wishes to glue along a
round-hypersurface @xmath modeled on some contact manifold @xmath and
lying in their common boundaries. Fix choices of collar neighbourhoods
@xmath of @xmath inside @xmath , of the form @xmath . Take coordinates
@xmath so that @xmath , and @xmath , such that the contact structures
@xmath are given by the kernel of the contact forms @xmath . Here,
@xmath is a contact form for @xmath . In these coordinates, @xmath and
@xmath , and the corresponding ideal Liouville vector fields are @xmath
. We glue @xmath together in the natural way, by taking a coordinate
@xmath , so that @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath corresponds to @xmath .
We thus obtain a collar neighbourhood @xmath , where we denote by @xmath
the resulting gluing map. Doing this for each of the boundary components
that we glue together, we obtain a decomposition for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (the paper ) is the disjoint union of the collar
neighbourhoods of the form @xmath for each of the gluing
round-hypersurfaces @xmath , and @xmath (the spine ) is the closure of
its complement in @xmath . We have a natural fibration structure @xmath
on @xmath , which is the trivial fibration over the disjoint union of
the hypersurfaces @xmath , so that the pages (the fibers of @xmath ) are
identified with the annuli @xmath . We also have an @xmath -fibration
@xmath on @xmath , which is also trivial. It has as base the disjoint
union of @xmath and @xmath minus the collar neighbourhoods, which we
denote by @xmath . Let us assign a sign @xmath to each of the Giroux
subdomains @xmath .

We can also blow-down boundary components in the Giroux subdomains, and
in this case we may extend our SOBD by declaring the @xmath we glued in
the blow-down operation to be part of the paper @xmath (so that its
pages are disks). We declare the blown-down components to be part of the
paper.

We shall refer to the SOBDs obtained by the procedure described above as
Giroux SOBDs, where are also allowing the number of Giroux subdomains
involved (which is the same as the number of spine components) to be
arbitrary.

We will also fix collar neighbourhoods of the components of @xmath ,
which correspond to the non-glued hypersurfaces, in the very same way as
we did before for the glued ones. Their components look like @xmath ,
for some non-glued hypersurface @xmath . There is a coordinate @xmath ,
such that @xmath , and such that the contact structure on the
corresponding Giroux domain is given by @xmath , for some contact form
@xmath for @xmath . Denote by @xmath the disjoint union, over all
unglued @xmath ’s, of all of the @xmath ’s.

##### The Giroux form.

If we denote by @xmath , we can extend the expression @xmath , a priori
valid on @xmath , to @xmath , by the same formula. Observe that, by
choice of our coordinates, the resulting 1-form glues smoothly to @xmath
. Therefore, we may still think of the contact structure @xmath as a
contactization contact structure over the region @xmath , with the
caveat that we need to switch the orientation in the @xmath -direction.

Denote the resulting contact form by @xmath . We may globally write it
as @xmath Here, @xmath is a function which is either strictly positive
or strictly negative over the interior of the Giroux domains, and
vanishes precisely at the (glued and unglued) boundary components. The
@xmath -form @xmath coincides with the Liouville forms @xmath where
these are defined, and is undefined along said boundary components. In
the case of blown-down components, the contact form @xmath also extends
in a natural way.

From this construction, in @xmath , each of the subdomains @xmath used
in the gluing procedure carries a sign @xmath , which we define as the
sign of the function @xmath . Observe that @xmath coincides with @xmath
along every @xmath , the inner boundary components of the collar
neighbourhoods. Therefore, we may isotope it relative every collar
neighbourhood to a smooth function which is constant equal to @xmath
along @xmath (see Figure 7 ). Here, @xmath and @xmath denote small
@xmath -extensions in the interval direction of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, so that now @xmath . The regions @xmath play the role of
smoothened corners. Observe that isotoping @xmath as we just did does
not change the isotopy class of @xmath , by Gray stability (version with
boundary), and has the effect of transforming the Reeb vector field of
@xmath into @xmath along @xmath . Observe also that along the paper, we
have @xmath , where @xmath is a Liouville form for @xmath . Since this
manifold is trivially a cylindrical Liouville semi-filling, we may view
@xmath as a Giroux form, as we did with contact form constructed in
Section 2.1 .

##### @xmath-extension.

It will be convenient to consider an @xmath -extension of our SOBD,
which we call @xmath , by gluing small collars to the boundary. To each
component @xmath for @xmath lying in @xmath for a subdomain @xmath of
@xmath , we glue a collar neighbourhood of the form @xmath for some
small @xmath . We extend our function @xmath so that the extended
version coincides with @xmath near @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for
@xmath (see Figure 7 ). We will define the paper @xmath to be the union
of @xmath and the region @xmath , and the spine @xmath to be the union
of @xmath with @xmath . The point of this extension is that now the Reeb
vector field of the extended @xmath coincides with @xmath along the
boundary.

###### Remark 3.4.

Because of the above discussion on orientations, from which we gathered
that the @xmath -orientation that we need depends on the sign of the
Giroux domain, we rule out the case where we have a sequence @xmath of
Giroux subdomains of @xmath , where @xmath has been glued to @xmath
(modulo @xmath ) along some collection of boundary components, and
@xmath is odd. This condition is to be taken as part of the definition
of a Giroux SOBD.

### 3.2 Prequantization SOBDs (non-trivial case)

We can generalize the previous construction to the case where the @xmath
-bundles are not necessarily globally trivial, but trivial on the
boundary components which are glued together.

###### Definition 3.5.

[ DiGe12 ] Let @xmath be a compact @xmath -manifold with boundary,
@xmath a symplectic form on @xmath , @xmath a contact structure on
@xmath , and @xmath a cohomology class in @xmath . The tuple @xmath is
called an ideal Liouville domain if for some (and hence any) closed
2-form @xmath on @xmath with @xmath there exists a 1-form @xmath on
@xmath such that

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   For any smooth function @xmath with regular level set @xmath , the
    1-form @xmath extends smoothly to @xmath such that its restriction
    to @xmath is a contact form for @xmath .

An ideal Liouville domain @xmath is an ideal Liouville domain in the
sense of Giroux, where we may take @xmath . In the case where @xmath ,
so that we may take @xmath in any collar neighbourhood @xmath of the
boundary, we will call @xmath an ideal strong symplectic filling .

Now let @xmath be the principal @xmath -bundle over @xmath of (integral)
Euler class @xmath . Choose a connection 1-form @xmath with curvature
form @xmath on this bundle. As in the trivial case @xmath (where we may
take @xmath ), the 1-form @xmath defines a contact structure @xmath on
@xmath , and we call @xmath the contactization of @xmath . Observe that
@xmath , where we identify @xmath with @xmath , so that on @xmath ,
@xmath may be regarded as the prequantization contact structure
corresponding to @xmath .

###### Definition 3.6.

[ DiGe12 ] Let @xmath be a closed, oriented manifold of dimension @xmath
. An ideal Liouville splitting of class @xmath is a decomposition @xmath
along a two-sided (but not necessarily connected) hypersurface @xmath ,
oriented as the boundary of @xmath , together with a contact structure
@xmath on @xmath and symplectic forms @xmath on @xmath , such that
@xmath are ideal Liouville domains.

Proposition 3.6 in [ DiGe12 ] tells us that an @xmath -invariant contact
structure @xmath on the principal @xmath -bundle @xmath defined by
@xmath leads to an ideal Liouville splitting of @xmath of class @xmath ,
along the dividing set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we require that @xmath , so that @xmath , then the @xmath -principal
bundle @xmath is trivial in any collar neighbourhoods @xmath of @xmath ,
along which we may take @xmath , @xmath . In this situation, we may
regard the total space @xmath as carrying what we will call a
prequantization SOBD , which is obtained in the same way as we defined a
Giroux SOBD. That is, we declare suitable collar neighbourhoods of
@xmath to be paper components, which we can do by the triviality
assumption on @xmath along @xmath . The only difference now is that the
spine is no longer globally a trivial @xmath -bundle. Reciprocally, one
can glue prequantization spaces over ideal strong symplectic fillings to
obtain a manifold @xmath (possibly with non-empty boundary) carrying an
@xmath -invariant contact structure @xmath , and a prequantization SOBD.
The gluing construction is the same as for Giroux SOBDs, and is a
particular case of the gluing construction of Thm. 4.1 in [ DiGe12 ] .

Observe that, using the coordinates of the previous section, the contact
@xmath -form @xmath defining @xmath satisfies that @xmath is positive
along the pages @xmath , and, after isotoping @xmath in the same way as
for Giroux SOBDs, its Reeb vector field is tangent to the @xmath -fibers
of @xmath along @xmath . Moreover, along the boundary, it induces the
distribution @xmath , with characteristic foliation given by the @xmath
-direciton, and its Reeb vector field coincides with @xmath , the Reeb
vector field of @xmath . From this, and having the definition in [
L-VHM-W ] , and the standard one due to Giroux, both in mind, one can
define

###### Definition 3.7.

A Giroux form for a prequantization SOBD (in particular, for a Giroux
SOBD) is any contact form inducing a contact structure which is isotopic
to the @xmath -invariant contact structure @xmath .

With this definition, any @xmath -invariant contact form @xmath inducing
an @xmath -invariant contact structure in a principal bundle defined by
a cohomology class @xmath satisfying @xmath , where @xmath is a set of
dividing hypersurfaces for @xmath , is a Giroux form for the induced
prequantization SOBD.

### 3.3 Proof of Theorem 3.2

The proof of this theorem is a reinterpretation of what we did in the
construction of our contact manifold models of Section 2.1 .

###### Thm. (3.2).

Let @xmath be a subdomain as in the hypothesis, carrying a Giroux form
@xmath obtained by gluing. Since the contact embedding condition is
open, and we are assuming that there are boundary components of @xmath
not touching @xmath , we can find a small @xmath such that @xmath admits
a contact embedding of the @xmath -extension @xmath . Endow this
extension with a Giroux SOBD @xmath as in the previous section. On this
decomposition, add corners where spine and paper glue together as we
explained before. Also choose a small Morse/Morse–Bott function @xmath
in @xmath , which lies in the isotopy class of @xmath , and vanishes as
we get close to the paper. With this data, we then may construct a
Morse/Morse–Bott contact form @xmath on @xmath which lies in the isotopy
class of @xmath , along with a SHS deforming it, in the analogous way as
done in Section 2.1 .

Since in our situation we are allowing @xmath to be more general than a
semi-filling @xmath , we need to specify what we mean by the Morse–Bott
situation. We will take our Morse–Bott function @xmath so that it
depends only on the interval parameter along the collar neighbourhoods
@xmath close to the boundary and along a slightly bigger copy of @xmath
, and matches the function @xmath close to @xmath . In particular,
@xmath is a Morse–Bott submanifold. We also impose that @xmath is Morse
in the interior of the components of @xmath which are away from the
boundary. For simplicity, we will assume that, besides the boundary,
@xmath only has exactly one Morse–Bott submanifold close to each
boundary component of @xmath which is glued to a paper component, of the
form @xmath for some @xmath (see Figure 8 ). The Morse situation is then
obtained by a perturbation of this situation obtained by choosing Morse
functions along the Morse–Bott submanifolds. Observe that we may always
choose the interior Morse-Bott submanifolds so that they lie in the
cylindrical ends of the Liouville domains @xmath .

We have an almost complex structure @xmath compatible with the SHS, for
which we get a stable finite energy foliation by holomorphic cylinders,
which come in two types: either they are obtained by gluing constant
lifts of the cylindrical pages and flow-line cylinders over @xmath along
the corners (first kind); or they are flow-line cylinders completely
contained in @xmath (second kind). Both kinds have as asymptotics simply
covered Reeb orbits @xmath corresponding to critical points @xmath of
@xmath , either along the boundary, or at interior points of @xmath (see
Figure 9 ). These cylinders have two positive ends if its corresponding
critical points lie in Giroux subdomains with different sign, and one
positive and one negative end if these signs agree. The Fredholm index
formula is exactly as before.

One can adapt the proof of Fredholm regularity in the Morse-Bott case
(Section 2.5 ) to this particular situation, to obtain regularity for
cylinders of both kinds. There is no change in the proof for cylinders
of the second kind. For regularity for cylinders of the first kind, we
adapt the proof of Section 2.5.1 . For this, we observe that our choices
of interior Morse-Bott submanifolds imply that the cylindrical ends of
the cylinders of the first kind lie completely over cylindrical ends of
the Liouville domains @xmath (see Figure 8 ). This means that we may
assume that the obvious analogous version of Assumptions 2.7 hold, and
the rest of the proof is a routine adaptation. Fredholm regularity in
the sufficiently nearby Morse case follows from the implicit function
theorem.

We also have a version of the uniqueness Theorem 2.10 , adapted to this
situation. We have a few small changes, as follows. In the hypothesis we
require that the positive asymptotics are simply covered; correspond to
critical points all of which, in the Morse–Bott case, belong to a
Morse–Bott submanifold of the type already described; and any two lie in
distinct components of @xmath , both of which are away from the
boundary, separated by a paper component. The number @xmath is replaced
by @xmath in the proof. We have more than just one Morse–Bott
submanifold now, but, for case B where @xmath lies over some paper
component @xmath , we can still get a similar upper bound on the energy:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the action of the Reeb orbit corresponding to @xmath ,
which a priori might even lie in @xmath (but not a posteriori). Here,
the energy is computed with respect to a @xmath -form which is the
derivative of a contact form for @xmath outside of @xmath , and which
restricts to the @xmath -form of the fixed SHS on @xmath . Here we use
that we have chosen the SHS so that it is contact near @xmath .

Using that the number of boundary components of each paper component is
2, as before we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some small @xmath . Here, we denote by @xmath the covering degree of
the restriction to @xmath of the projection to @xmath , over the
component @xmath . The rest of the proof is the same. Observe that since
we are assuming that the critical points appearing in the positive
asymptotics are away from the boundary of @xmath , and the only way of
venturing into @xmath is to escape through the latter, any holomorphic
curve with these positive asymptotics which leaves @xmath would
necessarily need to go through a paper component, so is dealt with by
case B in the proof of 2.10 (which deliberately does not need to assume
that the whole curve stays over @xmath ).

Make all the necessary choices to have an SFT differential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which computes @xmath , where @xmath . Extend these choices to @xmath so
as to be able to compute @xmath .

Let @xmath be a maximum (index @xmath ) of @xmath in @xmath , and let
@xmath be an index @xmath critical point of @xmath in @xmath . We take
both to lie in the Morse–Bott manifolds of the Morse–Bott case, before
the Morse perturbation. Denote by @xmath , @xmath the corresponding SFT
generators. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an element of @xmath . There is a unique (perturbed) cylinder @xmath of
the first kind which has @xmath and @xmath as positive asymptotics, with
@xmath . If we choose @xmath so that it does not have any minimum, by
uniqueness any other holomorphic curve over @xmath which may contribute
to the differential of @xmath is a flow-line cylinder completely
contained in @xmath , connecting an index @xmath critical point @xmath
with @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the element in @xmath defined by any @xmath , by @xmath
the space of positive flow-lines connecting @xmath with @xmath , @xmath
the flow-line cylinder corresponding to a flow-line @xmath , and @xmath
the sign of the holomorphic curve @xmath assigned by a choice of
coherent orientations. Since @xmath , elements of @xmath come in evil
twins pairs @xmath such that @xmath . As in Section 2.9 , one can choose
suitable spanning surfaces such that @xmath .

Then,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

which proves that @xmath has @xmath -twisted 1-torsion. This implies
that @xmath has @xmath -twisted 1-torsion, since our uniqueness theorem
gives that there are no holomorphic curves with asymptotics in @xmath
which venture into @xmath , and therefore @xmath embeds into @xmath .
Here, we use that @xmath is isotopic to @xmath .

For the second statement, assume that we have a blown-down boundary
component, so that the corresponding @xmath is a paper component with
disk pages. As in Section 2.3 , we have that the disk pages lift as
finite-energy holomorphic planes with a single positive asymptotic
@xmath , corresponding to a critical point @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath
is such a plane, its index is @xmath . Take @xmath so that @xmath , and
let @xmath . Since there is no minima for @xmath , by our uniqueness
theorem we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the choice of coefficients is arbitrary, @xmath is algebraically
overtwisted, which implies that @xmath is.

∎

In view of the definition of a prequantization SOBD, and the fact that
we may still construct a foliation by flow-line holomorphic cylinders
over a non-trivial prequantization space [ Mo2 , Sie16 ] , one has the
following:

###### Theorem 3.8.

In dimension @xmath , consider a principal @xmath -bundle obtained by
gluing a collection of prequantization spaces over ideal strong
symplectic fillings, such that there are two of them, one with a
boundary component not touching the other after the gluing. Then the
resulting @xmath -invariant contact structure has (untwisted) algebraic
1-torsion.

In dimension at least @xmath , the only technical ingredient for the
above result that is missing is the regularity of the holomorphic
flow-line cylinders for sufficiently small @xmath .
