In this thesis, we study nearly finitary matroids by introducing new
definitions and prove various properties of nearly finitary matroids. In
2010, an axiom system for infinite matroids was proposed by Bruhn et al.
We use this axiom system for this thesis. In Chapter 2, we summarize our
main results after reviewing historical background and motivation. In
Chapter 3, we define a notion of spectrum for matroids. Moreover, we
show that the spectrum of a nearly finitary matroid can be larger than
any fixed finite size. We also give an example of a matroid with
infinitely large spectrum that is not nearly finitary. Assuming the
existence of a single matroid that is nearly finitary but not @xmath
-nearly finitary, we construct classes of matroids that are nearly
finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary. We also show that finite rank
matroids are unionable. In Chapter 4, we will introduce a notion of near
finitarization. We also give an example of a nearly finitary
independence system that is not @xmath -nearly finitary. This
independence system is not a matroid. In Chapter 5, we will talk about
Psi-matroids and introduce a possible generalization. Moreover, we study
these new matroids to search for an example of a nearly finitary matroid
that is not @xmath -nearly finitary. We have not yet found such an
example. In Chapter 6, we will discuss thin sums matroids and consider
our problem restricted to this class of matroids.

Our results are motivated by the open problem concerning whether every
nearly finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary for some @xmath .
