## 1 Introduction

Modern physics is resting on two main pillars: quantum physics and
Einstein’s theory of general relativity (GR). While quantum physics
generally describes physics at very small scales - usually at the atomic
and subatomic level, GR finds most of its applications on planetary
scales and beyond. Consequently, in most situations either one of the
two theories can be ignored since their respective regimes of importance
are so far apart from each other: on one hand, quantum physical effects
are not considered to be of importance for describing macroscopic
objects. This is because objects containing many quantum particles are
coarse grained such that they effectively look like classical entities
and therefore do generally not require a probabilistic description. On
the other hand, the gravitational force described by GR is so weak
compared to the other three confirmed forces of Nature that its impact
on processes at the quantum level can - usually - safely be ignored.
Nevertheless, some physical objects fall into the regimes of both
theories. Of those, black holes [ 6 , 7 ] are some of the most prominent
examples. GR predicts them to be spacetime singularities, i.e. as points
with an infinitely high mass density. Certainly, such an infinity can
only be of a mathematical nature and must hint at a limitation of the
theory ¹ ¹ 1 The problem with an infinitely large dimensionful quantity
is that it cannot be measured. Measuring a dimension is fundamentally a
process of comparing and counting. For example, for measuring the length
of an object the object is compared to a ruler and it is then counted
how many times the ruler fits into the object. If the object was
infinitely long, it would be practically impossible to confirm this
since infinitely many steps of counting (with a finite ruler) would be
required. . Removing this limitation could be achieved by a
UV-completion of GR, which is commonly assumed to be quantum gravity - a
theory that reconciles quantum physics with GR. There are several
candidate theories for quantum gravity that introduce novel fundamental
objects or concepts of spacetime (e.g. string theory [ 8 , 9 ] , loop
quantum gravity [ 10 ] , causal sets [ 11 ] , causal dynamical
triangulation [ 12 ] ,…), while others are proposed as classical
alternatives to GR which might have properties beneficial for
quantisation (e.g. shape dynamics [ 13 ] ,…). It has also been suggested
that a quantised version of GR is actually renormalisable and just
requires a better understanding of the mathematical structures behind
renormalisation [ 14 , 15 ] . However, to date no complete and fully
accepted theory of quantum gravity has been found and the search for it
remains one of physics’ greatest challenges.
Motivated by this and other challenges concerning gravity, modifications
of GR have been studied throughout history. One of the earliest was
Theodor Kaluza and Oskar Klein’s attempt to unify gravity with
electromagnetism by considering a fourth spatial but circular dimension
[ 16 , 17 ] . The principles of the resulting Kaluza-Klein theory
provide the basic ideas behind compactifications of modern higher
dimensional theories like string theory or supergravity [ 18 ] . Besides
trying to unify gravity with other forces of Nature, implementing Mach’s
principle ² ² 2 There are several ideas that are interpreted as Mach’s
principle (see e.g. Ref. [ 19 ] for an overview). All of them are based
on the experimental observation that inertial frames defined by local
physics coincide with the frame in which distant objects, e.g. galaxies,
are at rest [ 19 ] . [ 20 , 21 ] is another guiding theme of some
modified gravity theories, e.g. in the aforementioned shape dynamics or
in Brans-Dicke theory [ 22 ] . The latter is a so-called scalar-tensor
theory of gravitation [ 23 ] , comprising a scalar field and the
well-known metric tensor from GR that are coupled to each other. Such
scalar-tensor theories are among the most studied modifications of
gravity since, on one hand, adding an extra scalar field is one of the
simplest ways of extending GR, while on the other hand some other
modifications of gravity can be shown to be equivalent to a
scalar-tensor theory (e.g. @xmath -gravity [ 24 ] ) or give rise to
effective scalar degrees of freedom when higher dimensional spaces are
compactified, as is the case for theories following the spirit of
Kaluza-Klein theory.
Modifications of gravity gained even greater attention after the
accelerated expansion of the Universe was discovered [ 25 , 26 ] and the
puzzle of dark energy (DE) - the energy that supposedly drives this
expansion - arose. In this context, some scalar-tensor theories were
proposed as possible explanations for the nature of DE. An overview of
such models can, for instance, be found in Refs. [ 27 , 28 ] . Some of
these models have already been ruled out by various astrophysical and
cosmological observations but others are still viable theories. An
overview of currently allowed and excluded models can be gained from
Ref. [ 29 ] . Besides being possible explanations for DE, scalar-tensor
theories have also been proposed as possible solutions to the question
about the nature of dark matter (DM). Some recent ideas on this can be
found in Refs. [ 30 , 31 ] . The scalar-tensor theories that are still
viable candidates for successfully explaining DE or DM must be studied
further and tested experimentally. For this, the observation of
gravitational waves from a binary neutron star merger [ 32 ] provided
important constraints from a cosmological point of view [ 33 , 34 ] ,
including strong limits on the difference in photon and graviton speeds
predicted by some models.
In testing and constraining scalar-tensor theories, the involved scalar
degrees of freedom play an important role. Constraining the model
parameters of the associated scalar fields or even finding a new scalar
particle in Nature, besides the already known Higgs boson, would also
constrain the parameters of the theory or hint at its existence,
respectively. Many theories require some kind of interaction between
such a scalar field and ordinary matter, which provides a contact point
for different types of experiments. One prediction that such an
interaction leads to is that of an additional fundamental force - a long
ranged fifth force ³ ³ 3 It should be stressed that this force is
usually not considered to be an explanation of the accelerated expansion
of the Universe but rather a byproduct of theories that might be able to
explain DE. . A problem with such fifth forces is that, to date, they
have not been observed in Nature and there are tight constraints on them
from Solar System-based observations [ 35 ] . There are several ways of
explaining this apparent absence of a fifth force even when the
existence of an interaction between a novel scalar field and Standard
Model particles is assumed: the most obvious idea is that the field is
very weakly coupled to matter and hence the force is extremely feeble.
In particular, this force must be much weaker than gravity - the weakest
of all currently known fundamental forces [ 36 ] . This, however, would
make a fifth force very unappealing in the sense that it would be
extremely difficult to impossible to observe this force even in
astrophysical observations outside the Solar System. In addition, it
would be the result of fine tuning and not very interesting from a
theoretical point of view because it would be very challenging to assign
a significant role within any kind of phenomenologically interesting
physical theory to such a weak force.
A popular alternative to a very weak coupling to matter are screening
mechanisms. Such a mechanism leads to a suppression of the scalar field
and its force in environments of high mass density but allows them to
act with their full strength in vacuum. Scalar field models that have a
screening mechanism are known as screened scalar fields. Screened scalar
fields are non-linear theories, which means that their perturbations
couple to the background and results in fifth force screening. As a
consequence of screening, fifth forces sourced by screened scalar fields
are strongly suppressed in the Solar System, while on larger scales,
where the mass density is generally lower, the force can reach
phenomenologically interesting strengths that, in principle, can exceed
the one of the gravitational force.
Over time several types of screening mechanisms have been conceived,
which usually either modify the scalar field’s kinetics, mass, matter
coupling, or all three of them, in dependence of the surrounding
environment. They resulted in different types of screened scalar field
models. Testing these fields has been of great interest in recent years
and a large variety of experiments has been realised, involving both
astrophysical observations, and laboratory-based tests. A good review of
experiments and their conclusions for some popular screened scalar field
models can be found in Refs. [ 37 , 38 ] . Even though some of these
experiments led to impressive constraints, to date, none of them was
able to detect a new type of scalar field or cover all potentially
interesting regions of their parameter spaces. Therefore, novel ideas
are needed in the ongoing hunt for these fields.
In this thesis, two new tests of screened scalar fields will be
presented - one astrophysical, one quantum physical. For this, screened
scalar fields will be introduced in Section 2 . Afterwards, in Section 3
, it will be discussed whether a particular type of screened scalar
fields can cause a deviation from the GR prediction of gravitational
lensing by galaxies. This test will provide part of the answer to the
question whether the fifth force of a symmetron scalar field (see
Section 2.4.2 ) can be an alternative explanation for the galaxy
dynamics otherwise attributed to particle DM [ 39 ] , as was discussed
in Ref. [ 2 ] . Next, in Section 4 , the open dynamics of a quantum test
particle induced by conformally coupled scalar fields ⁴ ⁴ 4 Conformally
coupled scalar fields (see Section 2.2 for more details) are a larger
class of fields which comprises screened scalar fields. will be
investigated. The intention behind this investigation is to find novel
ways of constraining screened scalar fields with quantum physical
experiments like atom interferometry [ 40 ] . For this, a quantum master
equation will be derived in Section 4.3 and its predictions discussed in
Section 4.4 . The derivation of this equation will require the usage of
tools from non-equilibrium quantum field theory [ 41 ] , some of which
have to be newly developed. These novel tools and the derivation of the
master equation are the main results of Refs. [ 3 , 4 ] and will
therefore be presented here. Subsequently, closing remarks will be given
and an outlook dared in Section 5 . Supplementary material can be found
in the attached Appendices A - D .

## 2 Screened scalar fields

To date there is only one experimentally confirmed elementary scalar
field in Nature which, following a broad consensus, is considered to be
the Standard Model Higgs boson [ 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ] . However,
there is per se no reason why there should not be more fundamental
scalar fields to be found. In fact, there are several theories that
predict the existence of such fields. Amongst those theories are higher
dimensional ones like string theory [ 8 , 9 ] and supergravity [ 18 ]
but also generalisations of GR like @xmath -gravity [ 24 ] .
Even without having a concrete prediction for the existence of novel
scalar fields, they can be conceived from a model building standpoint in
which they are used for explaining phenomena relevant in different areas
of physics. For example, it is believed that there could be so-called
hidden sectors of the Standard Model of particle physics (SM) [ 47 ] in
which additional scalar fields reside. These extra fields are sometimes
considered as possible explanations for DM (see e.g. Ref. [ 48 ] for an
overview). The word hidden implies that particles that are housed in
this sector do not couple in the usual way to other SM particles,
i.e. they do not interact via the known gauge bosons, namely photons,
gluons, W- and Z-bosons. Instead they could, for instance, couple via a
so-called Higgs portal [ 49 , 50 ] , meaning that they actually interact
with the Higgs boson which in turn interacts with the other SM
particles.
As well as in enlargements of the SM, additional scalar fields commonly
appear in the context of theories of modified gravity, i.e. in
extensions or alterations of GR ⁵ ⁵ 5 SM extensions and modified gravity
theories can actually be intimately connected, see Ref. [ 51 ] , but are
still often considered separately. . Some of these modified gravity
theories are so-called scalar-tensor theories [ 23 ] in which the scalar
degree of freedom is in some way coupled to the gravitational metric
tensor. A common way of realising such a coupling between scalar field
@xmath and metric @xmath is via a conformal factor, e.g. @xmath .
Recently it has been shown [ 51 ] that there is an equivalence between
Higgs portal scalar extensions of the SM and conformally coupled
scalar-tensor modifications of gravity. This means that there is
actually an intimate relationship between these two areas of physics in
which additional scalar fields could appear.
In general, the interplay between scalar field and metric in
gravitational scalar-tensor theories, of which Brans-Dicke theory [ 22 ]
was one of the earliest, leads to a coupling between the scalar and the
trace of the energy-momentum tensor @xmath of other matter (see Appendix
A.1 ). This type of interaction gives rise to a gravity-like fifth force
of Nature. A problem with theories that predict fifth forces is that
their prediction has so far not been confirmed in any experiment or
observation. In fact, there are very tight constraints on gravity-like
fifth forces from Solar System-based tests [ 35 ] . Besides assuming
that theories predicting such fifth forces are plainly not accurate
descriptions of Nature, there are several ways of solving this problem.
For example, the force carrying scalar could be very heavy which would
result in a short ranged force, effectively rendering it to be weak. It
would also be possible to take the coupling between scalar and matter to
be always extremely weak. Both ideas would be sensible reasons for the
absence of an additional force of Nature. However, such fine tunings do
not provide any deeper explanation for why this would be the case.
Another option, that also leads to a more interesting phenomenology, is
given by so-called screening mechanisms. These are different methods of
suppressing a force in environments of high mass or energy density. They
arise from the non-linear nature of the scalar theories they appear in
and give a fifth force an environmental dependence, i.e. on the energy
momentum tensor @xmath or the curvature. More precisely, if @xmath is
sufficiently large, the force resulting from its coupling to the scalar
field is weak or even entirely vanishing due to a screening mechanism.
In situations where the trace of the energy-momentum tensor is smaller,
the force is less suppressed and can be strong enough to be of
phenomenological interest. For non-relativistic matter the assumption
@xmath (see e.g. Ref. [ 28 ] ), with @xmath being a mass density, is
made. Assuming that @xmath in the Solar System is large enough, a
screening mechanism makes it possible to circumvent the constraints on
fifth forces by Solar System-based tests and provides the associated
scalar fields with a rich phenomenology that can be tested in
experiments and observations ⁶ ⁶ 6 This of course requires that the
screening model parameters are such that the densities of the Sun and
the Solar System planets are large enough to suppress a fifth force
sufficiently much. . Such tests usually take place on beyond Solar
System scales or, for some models (see e.g. chameleons in Section 2.4.3
), under special laboratory conditions, e.g. in an artificial vacuum
within a vacuum chamber. Scalar fields that have a screening mechanism
are called screened scalar fields.
Screened scalar fields are the main subject of this thesis. Therefore,
they will be more extensively discussed in the current section. At
first, the reader will be reminded about scalar fields in general in
Section 2.1 . Then some aspects of scalar-tensor theories of gravity
will be discussed in Section 2.2 , more specifically, conformal and
disformal couplings will be introduced, and Einstein and Jordan frames
discussed. Subsequently, in Section 2.3 , it will be shown that a
generalisation of GR named @xmath -gravity is equivalent to a
scalar-tensor theory. Finally, three of the most prominent screened
scalar field models will be introduced, namely galileons, symmetrons,
and chameleons (confer Section 2.4 ).

### 2.1 Scalar fields

Scalar fields, here denoted by @xmath , are the most simple objects in
classical and quantum field theory (QFT). They represent Lorentz
invariant ⁷ ⁷ 7 Meaning that @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath as an
element of the Lorentz group [ 52 ] , both fulfil the same equation of
motion, which is reflected in their actions being equal. scalar degrees
of freedom ⁸ ⁸ 8 Here the term scalar means that this object is
represented by a single complex number. However, all scalar fields
considered here are assumed to be real. with, in @xmath -dimensional
spacetime, the dimension of an energy. Here some relevant facts about
scalar fields will be provided, and the notation that will be used in
this thesis will be introduced. For this, the @xmath -metric convention
will be used, and @xmath set.
A free scalar field fulfils its equation of motion, the
Schrödinger-Gordon or Klein-Gordon wave equation [ 53 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the d’Alembert operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath the mass associated to the scalar field @xmath . The
Lagrangian density ⁹ ⁹ 9 Later a Lagrangian density will often be just
referred to as a Lagrangian. of such a free field is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the resulting action is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

An interacting theory describing interactions of the scalar with itself
and other fields, represented by @xmath , is obtained by subtracting an
interaction potential density @xmath from the free Lagrangian in Eqn. (
2.3 ), which yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and an equation of motion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

following from the Euler-Lagrange equations [ 36 ] .
A QFT of scalars is usually obtained in either one of two ways: by
canonical quantisation [ 54 ] or by Feynman’s path integral formalism [
55 ] .
For the former a conjugate momentum density [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is defined. Both, @xmath and @xmath , are then promoted to operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which have to obey the equal time commutation relations (in the
Heisenberg picture [ 57 ] ) [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a commutator.
The scalar field operator can be decomposed in plane waves via [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are creation and annihilation operators,
respectively, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the energy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

are included.
The creation and annihilation operators fulfil [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With the help of the annihilation operator a vacuum state @xmath
fulfilling

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is defined. Computing the expectation value of two scalar fields in this
state,
@xmath , leads to the vacuum transition amplitude for a particle to go
from spacetime point @xmath to spacetime point @xmath given by the free
positive frequency Wightman propagator [ 56 , 41 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Complex conjugating Eqn. ( 2.19 ) or swapping @xmath and @xmath in its
arguments leads to the free negative frequency Wightman propagator
@xmath . Applying the time ordering operator @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

leads to the well-known free Feynman propagator in terms of the Wightman
propagators [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The complex conjugated version of Eqn. ( 2.21 ) is the
free Dyson propagator @xmath . More information on some useful
properties of those propagators can be found in Appendix C .
An alternative to canonical quantisation is Feynman’s path integral
formalism. In this formalism an integral is taken over all spacetime
paths that a classical particle could take, which effectively describes
the behaviour expected of a quantised object. Both, canonical
quantisation and the path integrals, lead to the same physical
predictions as they are equivalent [ 58 ] . For example, the vacuum
Feynman propagator in Eqn. ( 2.21 ) can be obtained from path integrals
as [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the denominator is a normalisation factor, @xmath is the free
action of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is an expression for all possible integration paths of @xmath . Since
such path integrals describe integrations over functions, they are also
known as functional integrals [ 54 ] .
Higher order correlation functions in general states are given by ¹⁰ ¹⁰
10 From now on and for the rest of this thesis the hat notation for
operators in correlation functions will be dropped for convenience. [ 59
]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If they are given by time-ordered products of fields in Gaussian states,
then they can be reduced to products of two-point functions with Wick’s
theorem [ 60 ] (see also e.g. Ref. [ 56 ] ).
Before ending this short overview of scalar fields, a useful feature
shall be discussed: it is often demanded that scalar fields and all
their derivatives vanish at infinity, which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Here the subscript @xmath indicates that this set
includes the number @xmath . @xmath denotes that @xmath is a multi-index
which here indicates derivatives with respect to different variables,
e.g. @xmath , @xmath . and @xmath is a function of @xmath .
This is, for example, physically required in order to ensure that the
total energy of the field is conserved. According to Ref. [ 61 ] , a
variation of the free scalar field Lagrangian leads to the continuity
equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

of the scalar field energy-momentum tensor [ 62 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

whose @xmath component corresponds to the spatial energy density of the
field. Energy conservation can then be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total energy of @xmath , meaning [ 61 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where denotes an infinite volume, @xmath its surface, @xmath a normal
unit vector on @xmath , and @xmath the spatial part of @xmath . In the
first line of Eqn. ( 2.31 ), Eqn. ( 2.28 ) was made use of, and in the
second line the divergence theorem [ 63 ] was applied. Since surface
terms at infinity are required to vanish, energy is conserved, resulting
in the third line.
One way of mathematically implementing that scalar fields vanish at
infinity is given by interpreting them as operator-valued distributions
acting on Schwartz functions (see e.g. Refs. [ 64 , 65 ] ). Besides
giving a formal justification for this particular behaviour of scalar
fields, this interpretation also provides a more realistic description
of them since in experiments the field strength is never measured at a
single spacetime point but instead in a particular region of space and
within a finite time interval [ 65 ] .
Now it will be explained how this interpretation is actually
implemented. In general, operator-valued distributions are maps from a
function space @xmath to a set of operators @xmath , which fulfil some
additional requirements (see e.g. Ref. [ 65 ] ). A function @xmath of
the real Schwartz space @xmath is simply speaking a rapidly decaying
function fulfilling [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any polynomial @xmath , and all its derivatives @xmath . Scalar
field operators can then be expressed as [ 67 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a translation operator in coordinate space and @xmath is
an operator-valued distribution acting on the Schwartz function @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath is here the “naive” scalar field operator that
locally depends on one spacetime point. Due to the convolution with the
Schwartz function, the scalar field is smeared out, in accordance with
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. In addition, the scalar field
satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which has to vanish at @xmath , as desired.

### 2.2 Scalar-tensor theories of gravity

In general, a scalar-tensor theory comprises at least one scalar degree
of freedom and at least one tensorial object, which are coupled to each
other in some way. In the case of a scalar-tensor theory of gravity [ 23
] , the scalar degrees of freedom are interacting with the gravitational
metric tensor @xmath . Such a theory provides a potential alternative to
GR and is therefore considered to be a modified gravity theory. Early
examples include Jordan’s theory [ 68 ] and Brans-Dicke theory [ 22 ] .
A motivation for modifying gravity in such a way can be found in string
theory and other higher dimensional theories like braneworld models.
There it is usually predicted that the metric tensor of 4-dimensional
gravity is accompanied by additional scalar fields effectively resulting
from compactifications of the higher dimensions [ 23 ] . Besides, a
generalisation of GR like @xmath -gravity [ 24 ] can be shown to be
equivalent to a scalar-tensor theory, as will be elaborated on in
Section 2.3 . In addition, scalar-tensor theories are used for attempts
to solve mysteries in modern cosmology, e.g. the question about the
nature of DE. For this particular example, quintessence models [ 69 ]
have been of great interest. Alternatively, part of the origin of the
cosmological constant could be explained by a scalar field with a
non-vanishing vacuum expectation value leading to constant terms in its
own Lagrangian that can be interpreted as contributions to the
cosmological constant and consequently DE.
The most common way of coupling the scalar @xmath to the metric tensor
is via a conformal factor @xmath . In fact, scalar-tensor theories of
gravity are only defined up to a conformal transformation leading from
one so-called conformal frame to another [ 23 ] . These conformal frames
are merely different mathematical formulations - some calculations are
maybe easier to perform in one frame than in another. Of course the
theoretical prediction for a physical measurement cannot be altered due
to a change in the mathematical formulation. However, the interpretation
of the physics can differ, as will become more apparent when considering
particular examples: the Einstein and the Jordan frame which are the two
most prominent conformal frames.
Considering a total action as a sum of a gravitational action and an
action that describes the dynamics of SM matter, then a theory of
gravity in the Jordan frame with metric @xmath and scalar field @xmath
may look schematically like

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Jordan frame Ricci scalar in the modified
Einstein-Hilbert action [ 70 ] , and @xmath is the matter action with
@xmath as a representative of any SM matter field. For simplicity, even
though they are also subject to conformal transformations, the kinetic
and potential terms of @xmath were not considered here since they are
not relevant for the current discussion. See Section 2.3 for an example
in which all terms are included.
It is clear that the scalar @xmath in Eqn. ( 2.36 ) only couples to the
gravitational sector but not to the SM particles. In contrast, the
Einstein frame formulation recovers the canonical Einstein-Hilbert
action but has a coupling between scalar field and ordinary matter:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here quantities without tilde @xmath belong to the Einstein frame. It
can be seen that Jordan frame action in Eqn. ( 2.36 ) and Einstein frame
action in Eqn. ( 2.37 ) lead to two distinct physical interpretations: a
test particle in the Jordan frame moves on a geodesic of @xmath that, as
a results of the presence of the scalar field in the gravitational
sector, differs from the one predicted by GR. However, the same test
particle in the Einstein frame would, if there was only gravity, move on
a GR geodesic. Though, its actual trajectory deviates from this geodesic
since the particle interacts with a scalar field which leads it to the
experience of a fifth force. In the former case gravity was modified, in
the latter case gravity was unchanged but a novel interaction
introduced. Nevertheless, in both cases the experimentally measured
trajectory of the test particle will be the same since a conformal frame
is only a mathematical concept and not part of an observable reality ¹²
¹² 12 Whether this is also true at the quantum level is still a subject
to debate. Some references [ 71 , 72 ] claim that there is no
equivalence between Jordan frame and Einstein frame in quantised
theories. However, more recent work, see Ref. [ 73 ] , shows that at
least for Brans-Dicke theory [ 22 ] , both frames are equivalent even at
the quantum level. .
In order to go from the Einstein to the Jordan frame, a conformal
transformation of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is applied. Extending this, there is a more general concept that also
includes a so-called disformal coupling. It was proposed by J.
Bekenstein in Ref. [ 74 ] . A disformal transformation, including also a
conformal coupling, is given by [ 75 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the last term is called the disformal coupling, @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath is a covariant derivative. Eqn. ( 2.39 ) is the most general
metric transformation that involves one scalar field, and preserves
causality and locality. Clearly, calculations with Eqn. ( 2.39 ) are
generally more involved than those with Eqn. ( 2.38 ) but disformal
couplings have the advantage that they allow the scalar field to couple
to massless fields like photons. Massless fields are conformally
invariant and can therefore not interact with the scalar via a conformal
coupling. Disformal couplings on the other hand allow for such
interactions. This makes them ideal candidates for modified gravity
theories that aim to predict deviations from the gravitational lensing
effects predicted by GR. Such deviations will be discussed in Section 3
.
Before ending this subsection it shall be noted that there is a most
general ¹³ ¹³ 13 In fact, there are actually even more general models
called beyond Horndeski theories, see e.g. Ref. [ 76 ] , but they will
not be discussed here. and healthy [ 77 ] scalar-tensor theory of
gravity, where healthy means that it avoids Ostrogradsky instabilities [
78 , 79 ] . It is called Horndeski theory [ 80 ] and defined by the
Lagrangian [ 81 , 77 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar, @xmath the Einstein tensor [ 82 ] ,
and @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath and @xmath . It is
straightforward to see that the Lagrangian in Eqn. ( 2.5 ) for a scalar
field with canonical kinetic term, mass @xmath , and potential @xmath is
a special case of Eqn. ( 2.40 ) and obtained from setting

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to have a scalar-tensor theory, however, @xmath must be
non-vanishing, such that the tensor field has a kinetic term. For this,
the minimal choice is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 Equivalence of @xmath gravity and scalar-tensor theories

As mentioned before, there are several reasons for motivating
gravitational scalar-tensor theories. One of them is @xmath -gravity
which will now be shown to be equivalent to such a theory. @xmath
-gravity was initially proposed in Ref. [ 83 ] as an attempt to avoid
the occurrence of empty or singular states in the evolution of the
Universe. It is a modified gravity theory that introduces a change to
the usual Einstein-Hilbert action [ 70 ] , such that a total action
containing a gravitational action and an action that describes the
dynamics of SM matter is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary analytic function of the Ricci scalar
@xmath ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The action in Eqn. ( 2.44 ) is in the Jordan frame and
therefore all quantities derived from the metric @xmath that it contains
are labelled with a tilde @xmath . . Einstein’s theory of gravity is
recovered by simply setting @xmath . Using an arbitrary function @xmath
instead of only @xmath in the gravitational action can be motivated by
the idea that the Ricci scalar in the original Einstein-Hilbert action
is only the first term in an expansion of the analytic function @xmath .
The additional terms of this expansion provide possible extensions of GR
that could potentially be tested in astrophysics and cosmology. An
overview and more details of @xmath -gravity can be gained from the
review in Ref. [ 24 ] . The following discussion is also partially based
on this article.
It shall now be shown that Eqn. ( 2.44 ) is equivalent to the action of
a scalar-tensor theory. For this, a new scalar field @xmath is
introduced, and with it an action defined:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, the aim is to show that Eqns. ( 2.44 ) and ( 2.45 ) are
dynamically equivalent, meaning that the equation of motion resulting
from varying one action should lead to a condition that recovers the
other one. Indeed, varying the action in Eqn. ( 2.45 ) with respect to
@xmath and requiring this variation to vanish, i.e. @xmath , yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This means that @xmath if @xmath , which then leads back to Eqn. ( 2.44
). Subsequently, after defining @xmath and @xmath , Eqn. ( 2.45 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition, the identification @xmath leads to @xmath and @xmath .
Next, following Ref. [ 84 ] , a conformal transformation from the Jordan
to the Einstein frame with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is applied to Eqn. ( 2.47 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.51)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath was used.
Substituting @xmath with @xmath and defining @xmath changes Eqn. ( 2.51
) into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where a term proportional to @xmath was dropped since it would vanish
after integrating over @xmath , as was explained in Section 2.1 . The
action in Eqn. ( 2.3 ) is now in a nice form and represents a Einstein
frame scalar-tensor theory. By this result it was shown that @xmath
-gravity can be expressed in terms of a scalar-tensor theory, which
means that it suffers from the same problems with being compatible with
experimental tests that were mentioned earlier.

### 2.4 Screened scalar field models

Screening mechanisms are means to circumvent Solar System constraints on
scalar fifth forces. They arise from the non-linearity of their
respective scalar field theories and lead to a suppression of a fifth
force in environments of high mass density. Over the years there have
been several different types of scalar field models emerging that
address the problem of strongly constrained fifth forces via a screening
mechanism. The most prominent models can be assigned to one of the
following categories of screening mechanisms:

-   kinetic screening and Vainshtein mechanism - the kinetic term is
    modified (or additional kinetic terms are added) and depends on the
    environmental mass density or curvature, such that the kinetics of
    the field is suppressed in dense or strongly curved regions and the
    resulting force has a short range;

-   varying coupling - the coupling to matter varies with the
    environmental density, such that it becomes very weak in dense
    regions;

-   varying mass - the effective mass of the field varies with the
    environmental density, such that it becomes large in dense regions
    and causes the fifth force to be short-ranged.

In what follows, an important example model for each of these three
categories will be given ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 For each example there are partial
text overlaps with Ref. [ 1 ] . . Some of them will be relevant in
subsequent sections and introduced in as much detail as necessary for
their later purpose.
Each model will be presented with the assumption of non-relativistic
matter as a source, meaning that the trace of the energy-momentum tensor
fulfils @xmath , where @xmath is the mass density of the source. This
assumption is made such that field profiles and forces around explicit
example sources can be given. Furthermore, the conformal factor @xmath
that was introduced in Section 2.2 is assumed to be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant with the dimension of a mass, and for all
models presented in this section @xmath or @xmath .
Assuming @xmath , Eqn. ( 2.53 ) can be expanded:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A fifth force experienced by a test particle with mass @xmath at
position @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

How this expression for a fifth force is derived from a conformal
transformation of the metric tensor is explained in Appendix A.2 . For
@xmath Eqn. 2.55 becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which can both often be found in the literature (see e.g. Refs. [ 2 , 85
] ).

#### 2.4.1 Galileons

Galileons are a well-known example of scalar fields with a screening
mechanism that falls into the first category, i.e. they are screened by
the Vainshtein mechanism [ 86 ] , which will be explained later in this
section. They were first described in the context of
Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati (DGP) braneworld models [ 87 ] , and are higher
derivative field theories with second order equations of motion. In a
conformal coupling a galileon @xmath appears as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and, following Ref. [ 88 ] , the most general galileon Lagrangian in
flat space is obtained by substituting

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

into the Horndeski Lagrangian in Eqn. ( 2.40 ), where @xmath and @xmath
due to the flat space metric. Here @xmath is a coupling constant with a
dimension of an energy, and @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless
couplings. In addition, there is a matter coupling term @xmath , coming
from the coupling between scalar field and SM matter in the Einstein
frame matter Lagrangian (see Eqn. ( 2.37 )), added to Eqn. ( 2.40 ). The
coupling constant @xmath has mass dimension @xmath .
The Lagrangian obtained from adding Eqns. ( 2.59 )-( 2.62 ) into Eqn. (
2.40 ) is invariant under the galilean shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are some constants. The matter coupling term
@xmath breaks this symmetry but if @xmath , then this breaking is mild
since in this case the matter coupling term is relatively small compared
to the non-canonical kinetic terms.
The screening of the galileon works by the Vainshtein mechanism [ 86 ] .
In short, within a certain radius - the Vainshtein radius @xmath -
around a massive object, the non-linear terms of the galileon Lagrangian
dominate over and consequently suppress the canonical kinetic term.
Since, in this case, the galileon is strongly self-coupled [ 89 ] , the
resulting force is much weaker than gravity even if the unscreened force
would be at least equally strong due to the assumption @xmath . In order
to illustrate the effect of this screening, the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

will be investigated. It describes the so-called cubic galileon for
which @xmath is assumed. As an example situation, a static point source
with mass density @xmath will be considered. In this spherically
symmetric scenario, the idea behind the Vainshtein mechanism becomes
more apparent: if the radial coordinate @xmath fulfils @xmath , then the
field must satisfy @xmath , such that the canonical kinetic term can be
neglected. When, on the other hand, @xmath , then the field must satisfy
@xmath , such that the non-canonical kinetic term can be neglected.
Following Ref. [ 90 ] , Eqn. ( 2.64 ) leads to an equation of motion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which in the considered scenario can be rewritten as [ 90 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where a prime @xmath indicates a derivative with respect to the radius
@xmath . In- and outside the Vainshtein radius, Eqn. ( 2.66 ) can be
approximately solved for @xmath by neglecting either one of the two
terms on the left-hand side, and yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the Vainshtein radius

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the radius at which both solutions in Eqn. ( 2.67 ) coincide.
Looking at the resulting screened fifth force described in Eqn. ( 2.55
), and comparing its magnitude @xmath to the magnitude of the
gravitational force on a test mass @xmath , [ 91 ] @xmath , leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Clearly, within in the Vainshtein radius the fifth force is strongly
suppressed, while outside this region it can be even stronger than
gravity. This illustrates the essence of the Vainshtein mechanism.
The consistency of the assumptions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

can be checked by using Eqn. ( 2.67 ) in order to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is in agreement with the assumptions of the Vainshtein mechanism.
Solving the equation of motion for galileons in more generality,
i.e. without distinguishing between solutions in- and outside the
Vainshtein radius is an intricate enterprise. Considering the seemingly
simple case of a cubic galileon around a static spherically symmetric
source with constant density @xmath and radius @xmath , already leads to
a solution for the field profile around the source that is of a rather
complicated form [ 91 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.73)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes a Gaussian hypergeometric function. However, if the
fifth force is of interest, only @xmath is required (see Eqn. ( 2.56 )),
which has a comparably simple solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Further solutions with different geometries can also be found in Ref. [
91 ] .

#### 2.4.2 Symmetrons

The symmetron is another commonly studied screened scalar field model.
It was first mentioned in Refs. [ 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 ] ,
described with its current name in Refs. [ 98 , 99 ] , and initially
introduced as a DE candidate. Its fifth force has recently been
considered as an explanation for the dynamics of galaxies which is
otherwise attributed to particle DM [ 31 , 100 , 2 ] . The symmetron
screening mechanism belongs to the varying coupling category, meaning
that the field’s coupling to matter is dependent on the environmental
density and changes accordingly.
The Lagrangian of a symmetron denoted by @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath determine the strength of self-interaction and
symmetron-matter coupling respectively ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 There is in principle no
restriction on the size of the coupling constant @xmath . However, for
perturbative treatments it has to be smaller than @xmath . There are
actually constraints on the symmetron model that even consider @xmath
(see e.g. Ref. [ 38 ] ). . @xmath has the dimension of a mass. The
effective potential ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 In this thesis, the term effective
potential refers to a sum of single potentials. For example, the
symmetron effective potential in Eqn. ( 2.76 ) is the sum of all
potential terms appearing in the Lagrangian in Eqn. ( 2.75 ). in this
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

has a @xmath symmetry (see Figure 1 ) which can be spontaneously broken
in environments of low mass density, i.e. where @xmath , such that the
symmetron obtains a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which leads to a mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

However, in regions of high density, i.e. where @xmath , the symmetry is
restored and @xmath can only take on a vanishing vacuum expectation
value, resulting in a mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is common practice to split a scalar field into a background value
@xmath and a small fluctuation @xmath , such that @xmath , where @xmath
is the actual carrier of the fifth force. At first order its interaction
to matter is approximately proportional to @xmath . This produces a
force @xmath . Consequently, the interaction to matter is turned off and
the force is suppressed when the @xmath symmetry is restored in
environments of large mass density, since @xmath there.
In order to ensure the @xmath symmetry, the conformal factor for a
transformation between Einstein and Jordan frame involving the symmetron
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The possible impact of symmetrons on gravitational lensing and the
consequences for attempts of explaining some effects otherwise
attributed to particle DM will be discussed in Section 3 . For this, it
will prove useful to have the field profile of the symmetron condensate
around a static spherically symmetric source with constant density
@xmath and radius @xmath . Therefore, the equation of motion is needed
which is derived from Eqn. ( 2.75 ) and reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which has as an obvious solution @xmath . The other solution for the
symmetron profile outside the source is given by Ref. [ 101 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where “in” and “out” denote quantities depending on the density in- and
outside the sphere, respectively.
Besides the symmetron, there is another, very similar scalar field whose
screening mechanism works with a vanishing coupling in dense
environments. It is the so-called environmentally dependent dilaton
which is commonly appearing in discussions of string theory
compactifications. In this context it was first elaborated on in Ref. [
94 ] , but a more modern discussion with implications for cosmology can
be found in Ref. [ 102 ] . Following Ref. [ 28 ] , the dilaton
Lagrangian can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant of mass dimension @xmath , @xmath is the
coupling to the matter density @xmath and @xmath is a critical constant
field value for which the dilaton decouples. This decoupling at @xmath
is the essence of the dilaton screening mechanism. Under the assumption
@xmath it can be shown that the dilaton profile has the same functional
form as the symmetron in Eqn. ( 2.4.2 ).

#### 2.4.3 Chameleons

The chameleon scalar field model was first introduced in Refs. [ 103 ,
104 ] and deals with a screened scalar field @xmath whose non-vanishing
effective mass @xmath is dependent on the environmental density. As its
animal counterpart is adaptive to the colour of its surrounding, the
chameleon field adapts its mass to the environment - a denser
environment leads to a heavier chameleon mass.
In a conformal coupling a chameleon appears as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and is described by the Lagrangian density [ 104 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath distinguishes between different chameleon models and @xmath
is the density of matter. @xmath and @xmath determine the strength of
the self-interaction and the chameleon-matter coupling, respectively.
The models @xmath and @xmath are not valid chameleons since the former
case has only a constant mass @xmath and the latter case leads to
imaginary vacuum expectation values.
In contrast to each of its summands, the effective potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

has a minimum (see Figure 2 ), which means that the chameleon can take
on a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and consequently a non-vanishing mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which has a dependence on the environmental density @xmath due to the
form of @xmath . It can easily be seen that, independent of the specific
chameleon model, @xmath increases with @xmath . This is the essential
quality of a chameleon scalar field model.

For gaining a better understanding of how the chameleon screening
mechanism works, it is useful to look at the example of a field profile
around a static and homogeneous sphere with density @xmath and radius
@xmath . The corresponding equation of motion is derived from Eqn. (
2.85 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is solved by [ 104 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with “in” and “out” denoting quantities depending on the density in- and
outside the sphere, respectively. If the source is screened, @xmath is
actually the minimum of the chameleon within the source. From this, the
fifth force on a test particle according to Eqn. ( 2.55 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that this force is suppressed in the same manner as a Yukawa
potential [ 105 ] (see also e.g. Ref. [ 56 ] ). As a consequence, a
heavy chameleon carries a shorter ranged force than a light one, which
effectively renders this force weaker.
This particular behaviour of the fifth force gives rise to the
thin-shell effect which allows only the thin outermost layer of mass of
a large object to effectively contribute to the chameleon force. More
precisely, the chameleon charges deep within the object also source the
force but since the force is so strongly suppressed and decays quickly
in dense environments, the force caused by these deep charges is very
weak in comparison with the one coming from the thin-shell and therefore
plays a negligible role. A comparison between gravity and a chameleon
fifth force is depicted in Figure 3 .
Due to the thin-shell effect, the chameleon fifth force coming from
objects in the Solar System is screened. Nevertheless, there have been
successful attempts to constrain the chameleon parameter space with
Earth-based experiments since it is possible to create situations in
which the field reaches its unscreened regime in the vacuum of a vacuum
chamber. An overview of the variety of experiments that have been
conducted may be gained from Refs. [ 37 , 38 ] . This is also made
possible by the thin-shell effect. More precisely, if the walls of a
vacuum chamber are sufficiently thick, anything outside the chamber will
not contribute to the fifth force which allows it to only be screened by
the chamber itself and the objects within it ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 A perfectly
unscreened situation could only be reached in an infinitely large vacuum
chamber. . This could be pictured as the chameleon becoming so heavy in
the chamber walls that it gets stuck there and cannot communicate with
the outside world.
In Section 4 the @xmath chameleon model will be used as an example for a
field that can induce open quantum dynamical effects on test particles
in a vacuum chamber.

## 3 Lensing with symmetron fields

Actually detecting screened scalar fields would equal a scientific
breakthrough. This is because the finding of additional scalar fields in
Nature would hint at physics beyond GR and the SM, and therefore start a
new exciting era in physics research - both in theory and experiments.
In order to find or at least constrain screened scalar fields, there
have been plenty of different types of tests conceived. Amongst those,
astrophysical and cosmological observations are perfect testing grounds
for modified gravity theories and in particular the phenomenology of
screend fields. On one hand, this is due to the fact that it is very
challenging to detect these fields on Solar System scales and therefore
larger distance scales with lower mass densities have to be considered,
which are subjects of astrophysics and cosmology. On the other hand,
some of the most interesting predictions for screened scalar fields, for
example, that they could at least partially explain the origin of DE
(see e.g. Refs. [ 106 , 107 , 108 ] ) or DM (e.g. Refs. [ 31 , 109 ] ),
concern phenomena which are most important on such large scales.
Rotation curve measurements [ 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 ] were the first to
strongly hint at the existence of a significant amount of non-baryonic
matter in the Universe [ 114 ] . This was recently confirmed by
measurements of the PLANCK collaboration [ 115 ] . Nevertheless, to
date, no DM particle has been directly detected, which motivates the
search for alternative explanations to particle DM. In Ref. [ 31 ] it
was shown that certain effects on galaxy dynamics usually attributed to
particle DM could actually be explained by the presence of a symmetron
scalar field, as introduced in Section 2.4.2 . More precisely, it turned
out that its fifth force may be able to explain the radial acceleration
for rotating galaxies [ 116 , 117 , 118 ] , and the energy stored in the
symmetron field could be sufficient to lead to a stabilisation of disk
galaxies [ 119 ] . All this would work without the presence of particle
DM. Further studies regarding the influence of symmetron fields on local
stars in the Milky Way were done in Ref. [ 100 ] and supported the idea
of using light scalar fields as alternatives to the established cold DM
models.
An important piece in answering whether a symmetron fifth force could be
a suitable replacement for particle DM is gravitational lensing. This
effect describes the deflection that light experiences when it passes a
gravitational source, and is important for indirect observations of DM [
120 ] and other objects that emit only little to no light, e.g. black
holes [ 121 ] . If a symmetron fifth force is supposed to entirely
replace particle DM, then it must be able to explain the gravitational
lensing that is observed due to the apparent presence of DM. For this,
as will be illustrated later in this section, it is absolutely crucial
that the symmetron not only couples conformally but also disformally to
matter. Ref. [ 122 ] provides first constraints on the strength of the
coupling between photons and an additional scalar field from modified
gravity theories, which is responsible for galactic dynamics in the
absence of particle DM.
In this section it will be discussed whether disformally coupling
symmetron fields can explain the discrepancy between the observed
baryonic mass of large astrophysical objects, like galaxies, and the
measured lensing mass, which would otherwise be explained by the
presence of particle DM. For this, a more detailed description of
gravitational lensing will be given in Section 3.1 before it will be
explained why it is necessary for scalar fields to not only be
conformally but also disformally coupled in order to see any effect (see
Section 3.2 ). Afterwards, the magnitude of the effect of a disformally
coupling symmetron field will be investigated in Section 3.3 .
Subsequently, the study will be repeated but with an additional scalar
field of potential cosmological relevance coupling to the symmetron 3.4
.
Sections 3.3 and 3.4 present the computational contributions of this
thesis’ author to article [ 2 ] .

### 3.1 Gravitational lensing

Although Einstein’s theory of gravity was already formulated more than
100 years ago [ 123 ] , some of its most prominent predictions are still
subjects of modern research. For example, gravitational waves have just
been directly detected for the first time in 2015 [ 124 ] , and the
first exemplar of a black hole has only recently been photographed [ 125
] . However, the first test that GR successfully passed was that of the
predicted bending of light due to the gravitational field of the sun [
126 ] . This first successful observation was actually an example of
gravitational lensing - an effect where a massive body deflects light
with its gravitational field. Since gravity is a rather weak force, the
object that acts as a lens needs to have a large mass in order to cause
any observable effect. Consequently, lensing by gravity is used in
astrophysical contexts, e.g. in the search for exoplanets [ 127 ] or
black holes [ 121 ] , but is not an effect that humans encounter in
their daily lives.
Figure 4 shows the schematics of the gravitational lensing effect. The
large white dot in the centre of the sketch is a very massive object,
for example, a black hole or a galaxy cluster, and called the lens.
Light coming from a star, the white dot in the top left of the figure
where the light rays start, is subject to the gravitational field of the
massive object. As a consequence, the trajectory of the light, depicted
by the white lines, is changed and bent towards the lens. An observer on
a planet, depicted by the black dot, sees the light arriving from a
direction different from the one he would see if the the starlight was
travelling in a straight line towards him. The angle under which the
observed trajectory of the light is changed due to the gravitational
lensing is determined by the mass of the lens, and the distances between
light source, lens and observer (see Figure 5 ).

In the following it will now be shown how this deflection angle is
derived in GR in a Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker (FLRW)
background, which describes an homogeneous, isotropic and expanding
universe [ 128 ] . For this, if not otherwise stated, the arguments of
the discussion in Ref. [ 128 ] will be made use of. The FLRW metric
without the presence of any matter is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scale factor that describes the expansion of the
universe, and @xmath is the conformal time given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

When there is actually a mass present that perturbs this background
metric, then the metric reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are Newtonian potentials that fulfil @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which can be derived from the perturbed FLRW Einstein equations.
The geodesic equation [ 129 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is the equation of motion of an uncharged particle in a gravitational
field, with @xmath being a Christoffel symbol, and @xmath an affine
parametrisation of the particle’s path. Christoffel symbols resulting
from Eqn. ( 3.3 ) can be found in Appendix B.1 . After defining the
photon momentum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eqn. ( 3.5 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It will be assumed that the observer and the lens are sufficiently far
away from each other in order to apply the so-called thin-lens
approximation. In this approximation the lens is assumed to have no
thickness and lie within a two-dimensional plane, the lens plane,
perpendicular to the line between light source and observer. This is
valid if the thickness of the lens is much smaller than the distance
between lens and observer, and the two angles parametrising the
deflection of the light with respect to the lens plane are very small.
The resulting coordinate system that will be used here is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a radial coordinate, and @xmath are the deflection
angles. This setup is visualised in Figure 5 .
The momentum vector @xmath can be split up into a background vector
@xmath and its perturbation @xmath arising from the presence of the lens
mass:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

When considering only the background, then the trajectory of photons can
only depend on @xmath and @xmath since there is no lensing mass that
could cause deflections of the light. Consequently, @xmath is fulfilled,
and the @xmath components of the background momentum have to vanish:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using this together with the on-shell mass condition @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to find the deflection angles @xmath , Eqn. ( 3.5 ) will now be
considered for the @xmath components. When using the Christoffel symbols
from Appendix B.1 and ignoring all terms higher than first order in the
momentum perturbations and the Newtonian potentials, this yields for
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the conformal Hubble parameter @xmath , with @xmath
denoting a derivative with respect to the conformal time @xmath , and
@xmath .
Next, using Eqns. ( 3.6 ) and ( 3.11 ), while taking into account Eqn. (
3.10 ), leads from Eqn. ( 3.12 ) to the deflection equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

of which there is an identical expression for @xmath .
Replacing the first term on the left-hand side of Eqn. ( 3.13 ) with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and making use of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which was derived from the geodesic equation ( 3.5 ), leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which can be rewritten as the force equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

by applying Eqn. ( 3.11 ). Substituting @xmath into Eqn. ( 3.17 ), and
assuming that the photons were emitted by a star at @xmath under an
original angle @xmath , then gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is the deflection angle in terms of the Newtonian potentials and
the distance between light source and observer. Obviously, @xmath
follows an equation of the same form.

### 3.2 Effect of conformal and disformal couplings on lensing

Before quantitatively discussing the effect of disformally coupled
fields it shall now be explained why it is actually necessary to
consider disformal instead of conformal couplings when investigating
effects of scalar fields on the lensing of light. Clearly, a conformal
coupling to photons has to vanish since they are conformally invariant [
130 ] , meaning that the conformally coupled scalar field cannot
influence the dynamics of light ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 There is, however, the
possibility that the energy stored in the conformally coupling field
causes a small perturbation to the gravitational potential of a massive
object and therefore indirectly influences the lensing effect. . In
addition, the trace of the electromagnetic energy-momentum tensor [ 129
]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is nil, meaning that a term @xmath appearing in a Lagrangian must vanish
²⁰ ²⁰ 20 The Lagrangians given in Section 2 are only considered for
non-relativistic matter with @xmath . The replacement @xmath gives
@xmath which is valid also for relativistic matter. .
Besides such arguments, it can also explicitly be shown that a
conformally coupled scalar field does not change the geodesic equation (
3.5 ) and can therefore not modify gravitational lensing. For this, the
following transformation between Jordan and Einstein frame is
considered:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the following arguments are based on those presented in Section 3.1
. A deviation of geodesics from those predicted in GR would be visible
in the Jordan frame due to a change in the Christoffel symbols, i.e. if
the Jordan frame Christoffel symbols do not equal those from GR. The
modified Christoffel symbols given in terms of the Einstein frame metric
@xmath and the scalar field @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Next, a coupling @xmath with @xmath is assumed ²¹ ²¹ 21 In order to give
a simplified presentation, a linear coupling is assumed here. Non-linear
conformal couplings lead to the same conclusion as linear ones,
i.e. they do not affect gravitational lensing. For the discussions that
actually involve the symmetron in Sections 3.3 and 3.4 the usual
quadratic coupling will be used. ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

defined, and only an @xmath -component (either @xmath or @xmath as given
in Eqn. ( 3.8 )) is considered since only it is relevant for the
deflection equation (compare with the derivation of Eqn. ( 3.13 )).
Doing this, yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This expression is then contracted with momentum vectors @xmath and
@xmath , in order to reproduce the second term on the left-hand side of
the geodesic equation ( 3.7 ), giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first two terms in Eqn. ( 3.25 ) are dropped since they must be of
second order due to @xmath . This only leaves

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which has to vanish due to the on-shell condition for photons.
Consequently, it is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and hence there is no change to the geodesic equation ( 3.7 ) due to the
presence of a conformally coupled scalar field.
Next, it will be shown that this does not happen for disformal
couplings, i.e. disformal couplings actually lead to a modification of
the geodesic equation. For this, a disformal transformation of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

will be considered, where @xmath is a constant of mass dimension @xmath
and
@xmath . The Jordan frame metric is here denoted by a bar @xmath in
order to distinguish it from the Jordan frame metric obtained from a
conformal transformation in Eqn. ( 3.20 ). From Eqn. ( 3.28 ) modified
Christoffel symbols are derived:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath was used, and the symmetrisation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

introduced.
Again assuming @xmath , and only working with the @xmath Christoffel
symbols leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.32)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the Christoffel symbol modified by the
conformal coupling as given in Eqn. ( 3.22 ).
Now defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and then contracting with @xmath and @xmath makes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is a non-vanishing modification of the geodesic equation ( 3.7 )
and therefore implies an influence of the scalar field on the lensing of
light.
With this, a force law in the spirit of Eqn. ( 3.17 ) shall now be
derived. When again using the FLRW metric given in Eqn. ( 3.1 ), the
corresponding Einstein frame Christoffel symbols can be found in
Appendix B.1 . Substituting Eqn. ( 3.34 ) into Eqn. ( 3.7 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .
The last two terms in the square brackets of Eqn. ( 3.2 ) will be
evaluated separately. Since the Christoffel symbols of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath differ only by the respective index, it is sufficient to
calculate only one addend of the last term in order to find an
expression for the whole sum.
Starting with the @xmath term gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, as a representative example, the @xmath term becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Consequently, the sum over @xmath adds up to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining Eqns. ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.38 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.39)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

was used.
Next, substituting the result Eqn. ( 3.39 ) into Eqn. ( 3.2 ), expanding
@xmath wherever it is reasonable, identifying @xmath , and using @xmath
leads to the deflection equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.41)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The force law is finally obtained by substituting Eqns. ( 3.14 ) and (
3.15 ) into Eqn. ( 3.41 ), and dividing the result by @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This result differs from Eqn. ( 3.17 ) by an additional term of second
order in @xmath , which causes a modification of the gravitational
lensing of light.
Only considering the case of a static lens reduces Eqn. ( 3.2 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .

### 3.3 Disformally coupled symmetron

The authors of Ref. [ 31 ] showed that the radial acceleration for
rotating galaxies [ 116 , 117 , 118 ] and the stabilisation of disk
galaxies [ 119 ] could be explained by the presence of a symmetron
scalar field (see Section 2.4.2 ). In Ref. [ 2 ] it was then
investigated whether symmetrons could also explain the enhancement of
gravitational lensing of galaxies that is usually attributed to particle
DM. Since conformally coupled fields cannot influence gravitational
lensing (as shown in Section 3.2 ), one considered idea was that a
disformal coupling of the type

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being constant at leading order,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

could be sufficient to explain the discrepancy between observed baryonic
mass and the lensing mass of galaxies. In fact, observations indicate
that the ratio between baryonic mass and DM in galaxies is roughly
@xmath [ 131 ] .
Here it will be checked whether a disformally coupling symmetron is
indeed a sufficient explanation for the observed DM content of galaxies.
For this, an analysis analogous to Section 3.2 shall be performed in
order to study the ratio between the GR contributions to the lensing
force equation and its corrections due to the disformal coupling.
Following the treatment in Section 3.2 , a force law in @xmath
-direction for a static lens under consideration of the transformation
in Eqn. ( 3.44 ) is obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .
This can be further simplified by assuming the @xmath , using the
no-slip condition in Eqn. ( 3.4 ), and only considering lensing in the
lens plane ( @xmath ) where derivatives @xmath are expected to vanish ²²
²² 22 Without the thin-lens approximation the lens plane is defined by
the plane that goes through the centre of the lens, and is orthogonal to
the line between the centres of lens and observer. The path of light
does then not have a kink as depicted in Figure 5 but is instead
differentiable in the lens plane. In this case, the function @xmath has
an extremum at @xmath , which requires @xmath . . As a result, this
gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Approximating a galaxy as a sphere with homogeneous, constant mass
density @xmath and radius @xmath , and using the shell theorem [ 132 ] ,
justifies the treatment of its gravitational potential as the Newtonian
potential of a point mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total source mass and @xmath is the radius
originating from the sphere’s centre. Within the lens plane, this radius
@xmath can be expressed in terms of the coordinates in Eqn. ( 3.8 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The symmetron field profile will be taken from Eqn. ( 2.4.2 ) but can be
simplified by making the reasonable assumption @xmath , and only
considering radii for which @xmath and @xmath , which is in agreement
with the explicit parameters chosen later. Here the label ‘‘in” denotes
objects inside a galaxy and ‘‘out” labels those objects which are in
vacuum outside this galaxy. The resulting profile around a spherically
symmetric galaxy is ²³ ²³ 23 It shall be noted that, at least in the
considered case, the disformal coupling term does not modify the field
profile. This is due to the fact that the considered field source is
static and non-relativistic, meaning that @xmath , and @xmath .
Consequently, a term @xmath in the symmetron Lagrangian cannot
contribute to the dynamics of the field.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where for convenience @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

were defined. This means in the coordinates originating at the
observer’s position:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

With all this at hand, the effect of symmetron scalar fields on
gravitational lensing of a galaxy can be studied. Since the galaxy is
assumed to be spherically symmetric, it is sufficient to investigate the
lensing only in one angular direction, meaning that @xmath can be
considered, and @xmath be defined. In this simplified situation, the
derivatives relevant for evaluating Eqn. ( 3.3 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the Newtonian potential, with @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for the field profile. Since no terms higher than first order are
considered, and @xmath is assumed, @xmath .
Now Eqn. ( 3.3 ) shall be expressed in terms of @xmath and @xmath , such
that a quantitative estimation is possible. For this, Eqn. ( 3.47 ) will
be considered first. In the lens plane it becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.61)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Next, the following terms are considered:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.62)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

With this, Eqn. ( 3.3 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.63)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the last term in the square brackets is not multiplied by @xmath
because this would otherwise be a term of second order in the Newtonian
potential.
In order to allow for an easy comparison between the GR contribution and
the term from the disformal coupling, the derivative of the Newtonian
potential is factorised out of Eqn. ( 3.63 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.64)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and a function

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined.
It shall now be tested for what value of @xmath the contribution from
the disformally coupled symmetron to gravitational lensing represented
by the function @xmath equals roughly @xmath since the ratio between
baryonic mass and DM in galaxies is approximately @xmath [ 131 ] . For
this, concrete values for the parameters appearing in Eqn. ( 3.3 ) have
to be considered. As an example, the galaxy parameters from Ref. [ 31 ]
will be used, i.e. a Milky Way-like galaxy with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the radius @xmath corresponds to the scale length [ 133 ] of the
Milky Way. Lensing with galaxies has been observed, for instance, at
redshifts of @xmath under an angle of @xmath [ 134 ] , leading to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath [ 135 ] was used with @xmath being the Hubble length. The
symmetron coupling to matter is given by Ref. [ 31 ] as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the tachyonic mass as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which means that the symmetron is screened within the galaxy but
unscreened in the vacuum outside ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 The radiative stability of a
model with such a small mass is a potential issue. However, in [ 136 ]
it was shown that a radiatively stable symmetron model can be
constructed. . The symmetron background value is chosen to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for which the appropriate value of @xmath is used. For completeness, the
gravitational constant is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and today’s Hubble parameter by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using all these values, it can be read off from Figure 6 that for

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the equation @xmath is fulfilled. This means, that for this particular
value of @xmath the DM contribution to gravitational lensing by the
considered example galaxy could be explained by an unscreened symmetron
fifth force. A numerical analysis shows that this is indeed the only
possible solution. This solution, however, is already excluded by
experiments, including collider, tabletop and astrophysical experiments,
from which @xmath is required [ 137 , 138 ] . Realistic variations of
the used galaxy parameters do not significantly change this result, and
varying the symmetron parameters too far away from those used in Ref. [
31 ] would potentially spoil the explanations for the radial
acceleration for rotating galaxies and the stabilisation of disk
galaxies by a symmetron field. In conclusion, a disformally coupled
symmetron scalar field is not able to explain the modification of
gravitational lensing that is otherwise attributed to particle DM while
simultaneously giving rise to the galactic dynamics effects described in
Ref. [ 31 ] .
Besides disformal couplings, Ref. [ 2 ] also investigated two other
ideas: having a small photon mass, which would allow for a conformally
coupling symmetron to modify gravitational lensing, and having an
axion-like coupling [ 139 ] between symmetrons and photons that is
generated from quantum corrections. However, also these two ideas turned
out to not allow for a relevant modification of gravitational lensing
due to symmetrons.

### 3.4 Disformal coupling to extended field content

Since considering only a disformally coupled symmetron was not
sufficient to explain the modification of galactic gravitational
lensing, it could be explored whether an altered model would be able to
deliver a positive result. One idea could be to extend the field
content, i.e. considering an additional scalar field besides a
symmetron. Introducing an extra field was an attempt made in Ref. [ 109
] in order to explain galactic dynamics similarly to Ref. [ 31 ] . The
scalar field that was introduced there has, in contrast to the other
fields considered in this thesis, the dimension of a length or inverse
mass, and fulfils

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being a derivative with respect to conformal time.
This field was adapted in Ref. [ 2 ] , and introduced by the following
transformation from the Jordan to the Einstein frame:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are placeholders for spatial coordinates, and the constant
@xmath with mass dimension @xmath describes the coupling between the
symmetron @xmath and the field @xmath . The conformal coupling @xmath is
again given by Eqn. ( 3.46 ). It is assumed that @xmath , and the
Christoffel symbols resulting from Eqn. ( 3.77 ) can be found in
Appendix B.2 .
Due to the transformation in Eqn. ( 3.77 ), the symmetron Lagrangian in
Eqn. ( 2.75 ) becomes modified to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which results in a modification of the symmetron mass in Eqn. ( 2.78 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the present day cosmological density [ 98 ] . The
background symmetron @xmath keeps the same form as given in Eqn. ( 2.77
) but is of course defined in terms of Eqn. ( 3.80 ).
Following the same procedure as in earlier discussions, a force law in
the static case can be derived from the geodesic equation ( 3.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the field @xmath has the same profile as in Eqn. ( 3.55 ), and, as
in Section 3.3 , the simplification @xmath together with the definition
@xmath can be done since the galaxy is assumed to be spherically
symmetric:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this into Eqn. ( 3.81 ), considering it in the lens plane
at @xmath , and assuming @xmath for the scale factor leaves

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the factor in front of the square brackets equals @xmath .
From Eqn. ( 3.83 ) a function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is defined. It describes the ratio between the contributions of the
disformal coupling and the Newtonian potential to the lensing by
galaxies. By choosing the same galaxy and symmetron parameters as in
Section 3.3 , the value of @xmath can be estimated for which @xmath , as
would be required in order to explain the modification of gravitational
lensing otherwise attributed to particle DM. Due to Eqn. ( 3.80 ),
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath -dependence, which has to be
taken into account.
In Figure 7 it can be seen that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

leads to the desired value of @xmath .
In conclusion, there are two values for @xmath that would allow the two
scalar field model presented here to explain the observed modification
of gravitational lensing by a symmetron fifth force. Future research in
the direction presented in Ref. [ 109 ] , including further developing
the theory and making falsifiable predictions that lead to model
constraints, might give more insight about the validity of this
approach. How the introduction of @xmath affects the galactic dynamics
discussed in Ref. [ 31 ] must also be further investigated.

## 4 Open quantum dynamics from conformally coupling scalar fields

Astrophysics and cosmology provide excellent testing grounds for
screened scalar field and fifth force models. However, conducting
experiments in those contexts can be quite costly and practically
challenging. Therefore, constraining screened scalar fields in
Earth-based experiments would, at least in general, be more practicable.
Though, there is a problem with doing this, namely that the effects of
these scalar fields should be strongly suppressed, i.e. screened, here
on Earth. This complication, however, can at least partially be avoided
by performing scalar field tests inside a vacuum chamber, e.g. with atom
interferometry [ 40 ] . Due to the low environmental density inside a
vacuum chamber, some scalar fields are much less screened than they
would be on Earth outside such a chamber. Especially, the chameleon
field is an ideal candidate for laboratory experiments in vacuum
chambers since its thin-shell effect (see Section 2.4.3 ) allows it to
be nearly unscreened if the chamber walls are sufficiently thick. This
is because the chameleon can become so heavy within the chamber walls
that it cannot communicate with the outside world. Consequently, there
have been many successful attempts to constrain chameleon and symmetron
fields with atom interferometry [ 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 101 , 144 ,
145 ] here on Earth. See Refs. [ 37 , 38 ] for a more comprehensive
overview including experiments besides atom interferometry.
To date quantum experiments like atom interferometry are amongst the
most powerful tools for constraining scalar fields in laboratory
experiments. Atom interferometry is an experiment in which the wave-like
nature of quantum mechanical atoms is used to create atom interference
patterns in a detector, similar to an optical interferometer. It allows
an experimentalist to perform very precise measurements of changes in
the paths on which the involved atoms travel. This can be used to
constrain fifth forces induced by scalar fields since they are expected
to cause modifications of the atomic trajectories in the experiment.
However, the change of a path length due to a fifth force is merely a
classical effect, meaning that quantum effects caused by the presence of
an additional quantum scalar field are not taken into account. With atom
interferometry it is also possible to observe quantum effects like
decoherence [ 146 ] which have the potential to provide new constraints
on screened scalar fields. Though, this has not been investigated in any
screened scalar field experiment yet.
The work in Ref. [ 3 ] , summarised in Ref. [ 4 ] , gives the first
predictions for quantum effects induced by conformally coupled scalar
fields on a test particle like an atom in interferometry. This helps to
get an understanding of the nature and magnitude of quantum effects that
such fields could cause in quantum experiments. In order to gain
knowledge about such effects, it is useful to derive a quantum master
equation that describes the evolution of the test particle under
influence of a conformally coupled scalar field. For this, it is usually
assumed that the investigated quantum system is open and interacting
with an environment, coining the phrase open quantum system [ 147 ] .
There are powerful field theoretical tools that allow for the study of
open quantum systems (see e.g. Ref. [ 41 ] ) but they can be intricate
in their usage when actual predictions for experiments are supposed to
be made. The work in Ref. [ 3 ] addresses this problem, and presents as
a main result novel tools based on non-equilibrium QFT that are used to
derive a master equation describing the influence of conformally coupled
scalar fields on a quantum test particle.
The corresponding derivation and the novel tools that had to be
developed for this purpose comprise the main content of this section. At
first, in Section 4.1 , it will be explained in more detail what is
meant by an open quantum system. Then a short introduction to atom
interferometry will be provided in Section 4.2 . Subsequently, the
quantum master equation will be derived in Section 4.3 . While doing so,
the used tools and all background needed for their development will be
explained on the way. Section 4.4 provides a conclusion with a short
discussion of experimental implications that can be expected from the
studied quantum effects.

### 4.1 Open quantum systems

Similar to a classical system, a realistic quantum system must be open,
meaning that it is continuously interacting with one or more
uncontrollable environments whose effects on the system cannot be
neglected [ 147 ] ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 If not otherwise mentioned, all following
arguments in this section refer to those presented in Ref. [ 147 ] as
well. . Such interactions cause phenomena like energy and momentum
diffusion [ 41 ] , and ultimately effects like decoherence [ 146 ] .
Typical examples of open quantum systems can be found in quantum optics
[ 148 ] but also in fields like early Universe cosmology (see e.g. Refs.
[ 149 , 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 , 154 , 155 , 156 , 157 ] ) and heavy-ion
physics (see e.g. Ref. [ 158 , 159 ] ).
Calculations in open quantum dynamics usually deal with a system @xmath
that is surrounded by and interacting with an environment @xmath . An
environment could be, for example, an electromagnetic, gravitational or
scalar field. In general, it is assumed that the combined system @xmath
is itself closed. The combined system is described by a density operator
@xmath such that the expectation value of an operator @xmath acting on
the full system is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The so-called Liouville-von Neumann equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

describes the time evolution of this density operator, where @xmath is
the Liouville super-operator (also known as Liouvillian), mapping an
operator to an operator, and acting like

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the Hamiltonian of the closed composite system.
A common assumption is that system and environment are only weakly
coupled, such that the environment is barely affected by the system,
while the system is subject to changes induced by the environment.
Therefore, the environment is approximately constant over time. This
so-called Born approximation makes it possible to separate @xmath and
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the separated system or environment density
operator. Furthermore, another commonly used assumption is that any
excitations induced in @xmath due to @xmath decay within a time much
shorter than a (coarse grained) time scale of interest. This is
implemented by the Markov approximation, which in practical terms means
that time integrals are not integrated up to finite times but up to
@xmath . Physically this means that memory effects are ignored, meaning
that the system does not get feedback from its own effects on the
environment and therefore does not depend on any earlier times. The
combination of both approximations is often referred to as Born-Markov
approximation. Figure 8 illustrates the situation when they are applied.

Since the environment @xmath is often uncontrollable experimentally and
difficult to describe, only the subsystem @xmath and its evolution under
presence of @xmath are of interest. In order to mathematically extract
@xmath from the total density operator, a partial trace

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with respect to the environmental degrees of freedom is taken. For
example, if there are the variables @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The time evolution of the so-called reduced density matrix @xmath under
presence of the environment is then described by a master equation,
which - under the Markov approximation - can have the Lindbladian form,
which resembles Eqn. ( 4.2 ) but has a super-operator that not only
describes unitary evolution (as in the Liouville-Von Neumann equation)
but also non-unitary effects. However, without the Markov
approximation,the master equation, which is then referred to as
non-Markovian, does not necessarily have this general form. A
non-Markovian master equation will be derived in Section 4.3 .
Non-unitary effects are characteristic for open quantum systems, and may
include, e.g. decoherence. Decoherence is an effect that may explain the
emergence of the classical world as a quantum-to-classical transition [
146 ] . It means that after a certain time - the decoherence time - a
quantum system, represented by a superposition of states, becomes
classical, i.e. its superposition is destroyed and it remains in a
particular state. This is mathematically represented by the behaviour of
its density matrix @xmath , which for a quantum system is idempotent but
for a classical statistical system is not, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As an example ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 The following discussion is inspired by Ref. [
146 ] . , consider a system given by the superposition of two states:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where its idempotent density matrix is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

An operator @xmath acting on this system has then an expectation value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Introducing an interaction with an environment @xmath leads, after a
characteristic decoherence time, to an entangled total system of @xmath
- and @xmath -states:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the total density operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

to compute the reduced density matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

shows that now only diagonal elements remain, and @xmath is not
idempotent anymore. Consequently, the system @xmath is now classical -
it has decohered.

### 4.2 Atom interferometry

Atom interferometry has successfully been used to constrain light scalar
fields like chameleons and symmetrons [ 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 101 ,
144 , 145 ] . Here a short overview of this type of experiment shall be
given in order to explain how it can be used to observe decoherence that
could, for example, be induced by conformally coupling scalar fields ²⁷
²⁷ 27 Here the open system would be the atoms in the interferometer with
an environment formed by the conformally coupling scalar fields. . More
details of atom interferometry can be found e.g. in Ref. [ 40 ] .
Optical interferometry uses light to create interference patterns in a
detector. Alterations in these patterns can hint at a distortion or
change of the system, which allows light interferometers to be used to
detect those. For example, LIGO makes use of this principle by measuring
the change in the length of its two laser interferometer arms during the
passage of a gravitational wave [ 160 ] . Atomic interferometry follows
the same idea: quantum mechanical atoms are wave-like and can be
interfered with each other. More spectacularly, it is even possible to
have two superposed states of the same atom travelling along two
different paths and then coming together in a detector in order to form
an interference pattern. This is actually the same principle as the one
behind the famous double slit experiment with electrons.
In practice, a superposition of two energy or momentum states of an atom
is created using laser light. Following the schematics in Figure 9 , a
laser with the right energy to excite an atom from its ground state
@xmath to a higher energetic state @xmath has only a certain chance
@xmath to do so. Since only a measurement of the atom can tell an
observer whether the atom is excited or not, it remains in a
superposition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

after the pulse of laser light has passed.

If the atom managed to absorb a photon from the laser, i.e. if it got
excited, it also absorbed the photon’s momentum. Therefore, the excited
state corresponds to a larger momentum than the ground state. This means
that, starting at an atom source, the two states would travel a defined
path towards a detector in different times ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 For this, it is
assumed that the momentum of a laser pulse photon is aligned with the
direction of motion of the atom. . Of course this would not lead to the
desired interference pattern since for this the two states have to
arrive simultaneously. Consequently, both states must travel along
different paths, i.e. on two different interferometer arms. This idea is
illustrated in Figure 10 : one state travels on path @xmath , the other
one on path @xmath . Both then arrive at the same time in the detector
and interfere with each other. In order to control the path length and
shape, states can be manipulated via absorption or induced emission [
161 ] due to another laser. In this way, the energies and momenta of the
superposed atomic states can be modified during the experiment. During a
realistic atom interferometry experiment, the laser is typically pulsed
three times, once to split the wave function apart, once to reflect the
two paths back toward each other, and finally to recombine the beam.
This is analogous to the beam splitter and mirrors used in an optical
interferometer.

Depending on the difference

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in the lengths of the paths, the measured intensity @xmath in the
detector can be between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
intensity that would be measured if the atom was merely a classical
particle. A measured intensity @xmath corresponds to destructive and
@xmath to constructive interference. Varying the path length difference
@xmath and plotting the resulting intensities leads to the interference
pattern depicted by the blue and orange lines in Figure 11 , where the
green line corresponds to @xmath .

Such an interference pattern can be used to observe decoherence. For
this, it needs to be understood that decoherence appears as a
statistical effect. This means, that even if an environment is present
and interacting with the atoms coming from the source, not every atom
superposition will decohere before it reaches the detector. There is
only a certain chance that the superposition decays within a finite time
scale, which means that, generally, some atoms will still not be
classical when being detected. As a consequence, the appearance of
decoherence during an experiment does not necessarily cause the
interference pattern to vanish but instead causes the measured intensity
amplitudes to decrease since not all observed atoms can interfere but
are rather classical (see the orange line in Figure 11 ). Hence,
measuring intensity peak-to-peak amplitudes that are smaller than @xmath
is an indication of decoherence. In the extreme case where all measured
atoms have lost their superpositions before reaching the detector, the
classical results depicted by the green line in Figure 11 ) is
recovered.

### 4.3 Derivation of the master equation

Here the quantum master equation describing the evolution of a toy model
atom, modelled as a scalar field ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 Clearly, this proxy for an
atom has some shortcomings. For example, while atoms are complex and
generally stable configurations, a scalar field has no complex internal
structure, and allows for decay and production processes that are not
expected from real atoms. This will shortly be discussed in Section
4.3.3 . , under the influence of a conformally coupled scalar field is
finally derived ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 This section (including all its subsections) is
heavily based on Ref. [ 3 ] . . The system is described by its density
matrix whose time evolution is studied with the master equation. In
Section 4.3.1 more details on the physical setup will be given, and
subsequently a first expression of the master equation will be derived
with the help of the closed time path formalism and the Feynman-Vernon
influence functional. This will be done for a particular model, the
@xmath chameleon (see Section 2.4.3 ) but could in principle be done for
any other conformally coupled scalar field model as well. The resulting
master equation will be obtained in an abstract field basis whose
physical interpretation is intricate. Consequently, a formalism for
projecting into a single particle subspace momentum basis will be
developed under guidance of thermo field dynamics. Afterwards, the
projected master equation will be renormalised, and a short quantitative
analysis with experimental implications be given.

#### 4.3.1 Physical setup

What shall be investigated here is the effect of a scalar field @xmath
as an environment on the open system scalar field @xmath which is acting
as a toy model atom. A master equation describing the evolution of the
system will be derived. For this, the starting point is the Einstein
frame action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

describing system, environment, and their interactions. Here @xmath is
the Ricci scalar, @xmath is the potential of the environmental scalar
@xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the Jordan frame matter Lagrangian of the single scalar field @xmath
, which will later be expressed in terms of @xmath .
The conformal transformation between Jordan and Einstein frame is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the conformal factor is

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being model-dependent parameters, and
@xmath being a coupling constant with the dimension of a mass.
The Einstein frame matter Lagrangian resulting from Eqns. ( 4.18 ) and (
4.19 ) is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Looking at Eqn. ( 4.22 ) it becomes apparent that the atom field @xmath
is not canonically normalised. In order to cure this problem a
redefinition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is applied, leading to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Clearly Eqn. ( 4.24 ) is also not canonically normalised but it as
canonical as possible, meaning that it contains a canonically normalised
kinetic term and some higher order non-canonical kinetic terms. It
actually turns out that the non-canonical kinetic terms are suppressed
compared to the canonical term since they contain factors of @xmath .
Consequently, the non-canonical terms are dropped from here on.
For the effective potential of the environmental scalar field @xmath ,
as a sum of @xmath and a coupling to matter, the following form is
assumed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy density of an external source that could, for
example, be a vacuum chamber in an atom interferometry experiment. The
potential in Eqn. ( 4.25 ) could describe different types of scalar
field models, e.g. @xmath chameleons (see Section 2.4.3 ) or symmetrons
(see Section 2.4.2 ). In any case it leads to a non-trivial background
configuration @xmath of the scalar field @xmath , which, dropping any
corrections of order @xmath or higher, fulfils the classical equation of
motion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The field can be expanded around this background into

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a fluctuation.
Under the assumption of a constant background, which implies @xmath and
@xmath , a constant mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

of the scalar field @xmath can be defined. This results in the full
Lagrangian of the two scalar system being given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where (up to terms of order @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the squared mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for the @xmath -field was defined.
It will later prove useful to divide the action resulting from the
Lagrangian in Eqn. ( 4.29 ) into

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the constant term arising from @xmath was omitted since it does
not contribute to the dynamics, and the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

introduced. The actions in Eqns. ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.34 ) are just free
actions of massive scalar fields, while Eqn. ( 4.35 ) describes
self-interactions of @xmath , and Eqn. ( 4.36 ) interactions between
@xmath and @xmath . For the subsequent calculation it will be assumed
that the interactions of @xmath and @xmath take place over a finite
amount of time, i.e. between the preparation of the initial state and
the measurement of the system. Hence, the hypervolume

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

was introduced. As an alternative to restricting the time integration to
a finite interval, the coupling constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
could be given an explicit time-dependence, reflecting the switching on
and off of the interactions by the experimental apparatus. More
generally, a switching function describing the realistic preparation of
the system could be introduced.

#### 4.3.2 Functional approach

Next, the master equation for the model set up in Section 4.3.1 can be
derived. For this, the example of an @xmath chameleon with @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath will be considered. The coupling constants presented
in Eqns. ( 4.30 ) and ( 4.31 ) therefore become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the aim is to build an open system by tracing out the environmental
degrees of freedom from the total density matrix. More concretely, the
combined closed system comprised of @xmath and @xmath is described by
the density matrix @xmath but for this study, only the evolution of the
partial system @xmath is of interest. For this reason, the @xmath
degrees of freedom have to be traced out, resulting in a reduced density
matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes a partial trace with respect to @xmath . This trace
is evaluated in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the second to last line a complete set of eigenstates of the
operator @xmath at time @xmath was inserted, @xmath is a functional
delta function, the notations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

were introduced, and the operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

defined. In order to simplify the notation, the spatial dependence of
@xmath is not explicitly given. However, in later sections the notation
from Eqn. ( 4.44 ) will also appear for spatial coordinates.
Even though at first glance seemingly superfluous, two copies of the
field eigenstates distinguished by labels @xmath have been introduced.
This doubling of degrees of freedom, however, is needed in order to
write down a path integral representation of the trace of an operator in
terms of the Schwinger-Keldysh closed time path formalism [ 162 , 163 ]
(see also Figure 12 ). For the subsequent procedures this will be
essential because the objects of interest, the matrix elements of the
density matrix, are supposed to be expressed in terms of a path integral
formalism.

Now knowing the reduced density matrix as given by the trace in Eqn. (
4.42 ), the reduced density functional is of interest:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where two copies of the eigenstates of the operator @xmath at time
@xmath were inserted, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, it is assumed that the full system described by @xmath at the
initial time @xmath is a product state

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

such that, at this time, both subsystems @xmath and @xmath are
independent of each other. Under this assumption, the reduced density
functional at time @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the so-called influence functional (IF) propagator (see e.g. Ref. [
41 ] where this expression can be found). For obtaining the IF
propagator,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath being the Hamiltonian corresponding to the Lagrangian in
Eqn. ( 4.29 ), is used, and insertions of complete sets of field and
conjugate momentum eigenstates at all intermediate times between @xmath
and @xmath on both sides, left and right of @xmath , are done. More
precisely, plus/minus type states are inserted left/right of @xmath ,
giving rise to the closed time path formalism [ 162 , 163 ] , pictured
in Figure 12 . Following e.g. Ref. [ 164 ] , this then results in the
path integral expression in Eqn. ( 4.50 ) with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The effective action appearing in Eqn. ( 4.50 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath indicates functionals that depend on both of the doubled
field variables @xmath and @xmath , e.g. the action associated with
unitary evolution can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

However, the so-called influence action @xmath , which generally
describes non-unitary evolution, also contains mixes of @xmath and
@xmath fields, and is explicitly given by the Feynman-Vernon influence
functional [ 165 , 41 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The desired quantum master equation can actually be obtained by taking
the partial time derivative of Eqn. ( 4.49 ). In the special case in
which only local interactions are induced within the open subsystem this
yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The influence action does not, in general, include only local
interactions, however, and the functional master equation for the model
in Eqns. ( 4.33 )-( 4.36 ) cannot be written as in Eqn. ( 4.56 ).
In order to evaluate the master equation, the influence action is
perturbatively computed up to second order in the small parameters
@xmath (not necessary all of the same order of magnitude), which yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.57)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the time arguments of the terms contributing to the influence
action in Eqn. ( 4.57 ) were dropped for convenience.
The influence action can be further evaluated by substituting the Eqns.
( 4.35 ) and ( 4.36 ) into Eqn. ( 4.57 ). Though, it has to be
considered that the chameleon scalar field @xmath is actually in thermal
contact with the vacuum chamber walls. It is therefore assumed that
chameleon and chamber walls are in thermal equilibrium, such that the
initial environmental state is a thermal Gaussian state given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inverse thermodynamic temperature and @xmath is the
free Hamiltonian of the @xmath fluctuations. The Boltzmann constant is
taken to be unity in the used set of units. Using Wick’s theorem [ 60 ]
, the correlation functions resulting from substituting Eqns. ( 4.35 )
and ( 4.36 ) into Eqn. ( 4.57 ) lead to combinations of scalar @xmath
-propagators of the forms (see e.g. Ref. [ 166 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which are the Feynman, Dyson, negative and positive Wightman
propagators, respectively. The operators @xmath and @xmath denote time-
and anti-time-ordering. Furthermore, the notation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the signum function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the Bose-Einstein distribution [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

were introduced. Some relevant properties for the vacuum scalar
propagators without thermal corrections can be found in Appendix C .
With these four types of propagators the terms contributing to the
influence action in Eqn. ( 4.57 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.72)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.73)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the factors arising from @xmath , originally omitted, are restored
in order to illustrate that these do not contribute to @xmath .
Hereafter, it will be left implicit that all time integrals run over the
domain @xmath .
Altogether, the influence action is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.75)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

From now on @xmath will be set to unity.
It can be seen that the sum over the terms in squared brackets beginning
in the second line of Eqn. ( 4.75 ) has to vanish due to the largest
time equation [ 167 , 168 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In Appendix C.2 it is shown how this expression can be derived for the
vacuum scalar propagators without thermal corrections.
Consequently, Eqn. ( 4.75 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.77)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 4.3.3 Operator-based approach

After finding Eqn. ( 4.77 ), a master equation obtained by taking the
partial time derivative of Eqn. ( 4.49 ) could in principle be
quantitatively evaluated. However, its physical interpretation is
challenging. So far, the master equation was only formulated in a basis
of the doubled scalar degrees of freedom, see, e.g., Eqn. ( 4.56 ). This
abstract field basis makes it intricate to extract physically meaningful
information. Therefore, a formalism shall now be developed that can be
used to project such a master equation into a more suitable basis with a
clear physical interpretation.
Since the resulting equation is supposed to approximate the evolution of
relatively heavy cold atoms (e.g. Rubidium) as used in atom
interferometry experiments, and the production of atom-anti-atom pairs
is likely to be strongly suppressed under such conditions, a restriction
to a single particle subspace is reasonable. In addition, momenta are
chosen to be the physical variables of interest since momentum
superpositions of atoms can be created in atom interferometers. Hence,
in order to proceed, a projection into a single particle momentum
subspace shall be derived.
Guidance for the derivation of the desired projection formalism is
provided by thermo field dynamics (TFD) [ 169 , 170 , 171 ] (see also
Ref. [ 172 ] ), an operator-based formulation of the path integral
approach with doubled degrees of freedom, which were required for this
approach, presented in Section 4.3.2 . The doubling of degrees of
freedom is represented by a doubled Hilbert space defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are Hilbert spaces corresponding to the @xmath branch of
the closed time path, respectively. A scalar field operator @xmath is
then embedded by defining the plus- and minus-type field operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with analogous expressions for the embeddings of the usual scalar
creation and annihilation operators. Here, @xmath indicates time
reversal (see e.g. Ref. [ 54 ] ). In the interaction picture, the two
types of field operators can be written in their usual Fourier
decomposition as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the notation introduced in Eqns. ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.15 ) was used.
When some operators and states here have no time arguments, then this
means that they are evaluated at @xmath .
Plus- and minus-type creation and annihilation operators introduced in
Eqn. ( 4.81 ) act in their corresponding Hilbert spaces. For this, a
doubled vacuum state

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is defined, such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and so on.
The density operator of an isolated system can be embedded as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the unit operator. With the help of the state [ 170 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.88)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

the expectation value of an operator @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition, this state can, for example, be used to rewrite the
Schrödinger picture Liouville equation ( 4.2 ) in a Schrödinger-like
form ³¹ ³¹ 31 In order to see that this is true, it has to be shown that
@xmath . After expanding @xmath , the first term of the commutator on
the left-hand side equals the first term on the right-hand side. All
what remains to be shown is that @xmath . For simplicity, in what
follows, only single particle states will be considered. It can be seen

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

and similarly

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

showing that both expressions are indeed equal.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is the Liouvillian operator.
Next, in the interaction picture, a density operator can be given in the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where, as described earlier, only single particle states were
considered, and the matrix element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is therefore the object of interest for the subsequent studies. It
should be stressed that all of the basis states and operators are
evaluated at equal times, which therefore makes the matrix element in
Eqn. ( 4.93 ) picture-independent (see Refs. [ 173 , 174 ] ).
Using the TFD language, Eqn. ( 4.93 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where there is now a time-dependent state @xmath .
Now, using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

it follows that ³² ³² 32 For showing this, it should be considered that,
in the interaction picture, the base vectors evolve with the free part
of the Schrödinger picture Hamiltonian @xmath , while the state vectors,
and therefore the density operator, evolve with the interaction part
@xmath (see e.g. Refs. [ 173 , 174 ] ). It can then be seen that

@xmath @xmath @xmath

and

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

where @xmath here denotes the Dirac picture Hamiltonian.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath , is the effective Liouvillian that comes from tracing out
the chameleon degrees of freedom, and @xmath results from the effective
action in Eqn. ( 4.53 ).
Allowing for the fact that @xmath is a non-local ³³ ³³ 33 This means
that it depends on past times, e.g. via an explicit time integration, as
is not unexpected when tracing out the environmental fields. , but
time-ordered operator, and after accounting for the free-phase evolution
of the right-most creation operators, the expectation value on the
right-hand side of Eqn. ( 4.3.3 ) can be time-ordered as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.99)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Replacing the creation and annihilation operators in Eqn. ( 4.99 ) with
field operators via

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.101)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.105)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here @xmath approaches @xmath from above and @xmath approaches @xmath
from below to ensure that the time-ordering of the operators is
equivalent to the original ordering in Eqn. ( 4.99 ).
The role of the differential operators in Eqn. ( 4.105 ) is to remove
external propagators and replace them with plane-wave factors.
Therefore, the procedure outlined here for projecting into the
single-particle subspace amounts to an LSZ-like reduction [ 175 ] (see
also, e.g. Ref. [ 56 ] ) of the four-point function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The master equation in the form of Eqn. ( 4.105 ) can be translated into
the path integral formalism similarly to Eqn. ( 2.26 ) and becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath got replaced by @xmath .

#### 4.3.4 Quantum master equation

Eqn. ( 4.3.3 ) is the quantum master equation in the desired single
particle momentum subspace basis. Its last line contains contractions of
the involved fields that lead to the appearance of scalar propagators,
which for the field @xmath will generally be denoted as @xmath . Though,
it must be remarked that due to the form of Eqn. ( 4.105 ), no
contractions between plus- and minus-type fields are possible, i.e. only
@xmath or @xmath contractions are allowed, leading to the Feynman and
Dyson propagators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.108)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

That only these propagators can appear may be seen from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which indicates that, at least in the single-particle subspace, mixing
the two types of operators leads to a vanishing result.
Furthermore, the propagators resulting from contracting two chameleon
fields do not receive thermal corrections since it is assumed that the
system @xmath is at zero temperature and therefore out-of-equilibrium
with the surrounding environment @xmath .
Substituting Eqns. ( 4.53 ), ( 4.54 ) and ( 4.77 ) into Eqn. ( 4.3.3 ),
and performing the contractions of the @xmath fields results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the energies were labelled with the respective field they
correspond to. An example of the evaluated field contractions leading to
the terms in Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) can be found in Appendix D . The right-hand
side of Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) is represented diagrammatically in Figure 13 .
Figures 13 (a) and (b) correspond to the @xmath tadpole insertion
arising from the first term in the second line of Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ), and
(c) and (d) to the @xmath (lollipop) tadpole from the third term in the
second line. Figures 13 (e) and (f) correspond to the @xmath tadpoles,
arising from the second term in the second line, and the remaining
Figures 13 (g)-(i) are the @xmath bubble diagrams, appearing in the
third to seventh lines of Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ). The final two lines of Eqn. (
4.3.4 ) contain a contribution from the absorptive part of the
disconnected vacuum diagram shown in Figure 13 (j). The disconnected
diagrams could be absorbed order-by-order in a redefinition of the
matrix element @xmath , taking into account that the time-derivative on
the left-hand side of Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) counts at a finite order in the
coupling constants. For the present discussions, however, the vacuum
diagram is left explicit throughout for completeness.
The terms in the third to ninth lines of Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) include decay
(i.e. @xmath ) and production processes (i.e. @xmath ), which would not
be expected to be present for realistic atoms, which are complex and
stable configurations of many elementary particle fields rather than a
simple scalar one. These decay and production processes arise here
because such processes are permitted in the simple scalar field theory
that has been used as a toy proxy for the atom.

Next, the remaining @xmath integration in Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) can be done to
yield

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.112)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the dummy parameter @xmath was introduced in order to simplify the
sum over the two energy flows in the thermal contributions (see
e.g. Ref. [ 166 ] ), and the identity in Eqn. ( 4.68 ) was made use of.
Specifically, it was used to show that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (4.113)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

It is apparent that all terms on the right-hand side of Eqn. ( 4.112 ),
except for those in the first line and the first term in the second
line, vanish for @xmath . This is expected since those terms arose from
a remaining time integral in Eqn. ( 4.3.4 ) whose measure becomes nil in
this limit. In addition, it can be observed that the right-hand side of
Eqn. ( 4.112 ) becomes real under @xmath , and is consistent with the
usual property of a density matrix element @xmath .

#### 4.3.5 Renormalised master equation

The terms in Eqn. ( 4.112 ) yield quadratic and logarithmic ultra-violet
divergences. For the sake of completeness, short comments on the
renormalisation of these terms will be given here, and the final
expression of the master equation, including counterterms, presented. A
more detailed discussion of these issues can be found in Ref. [ 3 ] .
At the considered order, there are three relevant counterterms: the mass
counterterms for the @xmath and @xmath fields, and the tadpole
counterterm for the @xmath field. They lead to a counterterm action

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with each counterterm being given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.115)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.116)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.117)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the index @xmath indicates that this quantity is taken at zero
temperature ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 The thermal corrections are assumed to be tempered,
such that they do not contain any ultra-violet divergences. , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are the non-local bubble self-energy and the non-local chameleon
self-energy, respectively.
The counterterms are non-local in time. This must be the case because,
as mentioned earlier, some of the terms in Eqn. ( 4.112 ), including
most of the divergent ones, are vanishing in the limit @xmath .
Introducing @xmath -independent counterterms, which themselves contain
non-finite terms, would therefore amount to artificially creating a
divergence at @xmath , which would also persist for all later finite
times. Only having @xmath -dependent counterterms which also vanish in
@xmath and have the same time evolution as the divergences can cure this
problem.
The non-locality of the counterterms makes sense if it is considered
that the external preparation and measurement of the system take place
over a finite time, which means that time-translational invariance and
Lorentz invariance are broken. This gives rise to a non-trivial
dependence on the zeroth momentum component which also has to be
reflected by the counterterms. For this reason, the subtraction point
for the renormalisation has been taken to only be a fixed three-momentum
@xmath .
After renormalisation, the master equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.120)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.121)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.122)
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

were defined, and the contribution from the disconnected diagram was
omitted. The self-energy appearing here also contains thermal
corrections:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.124)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are real, whereas @xmath is complex.
Each of the terms in Eqn. ( 4.120 ) can be given a clear interpretation:
@xmath describes coherent evolution, resulting from the mass shifts,
@xmath corresponds to decays and, together with the real part of @xmath
, is responsible for decoherence. In addition, @xmath also accounts for
momentum diffusion due to the coupling between the different momentum
states.

### 4.4 Experimental implications

Now with the renormalised master equation ( 4.120 ) at hand, it shall be
estimated whether its predictions could in principle be observed in
laboratory experiments in order to constrain conformally coupled scalar
fields like the @xmath chameleon ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 This section is heavily based
on Ref. [ 3 ] . . However, there are some momentum integrals left that
have not been computed. They are analytically very challenging and
require a numerical calculation which goes beyond the scope of the
current analysis. Consequently, a full quantitative result cannot be
given here for every term appearing in Eqn. ( 4.120 ). Fortunately, the
first term in @xmath given in Eqn. ( 4.121 ) contains the leading order
effect and does not require such an integration.
In order to see this, it shall be recalled that the master equation was
derived with a rescaled mass defined by Eqn. ( 4.28 ), which depends on
the background value of the chameleon field. If an experiment was
conceived that is sensitive to the absolute mass @xmath of the matter
field, which would mean that the phase evolution based on the mass
measured in a vanishing ambient value of the chameleon field can be
predicted, then the leading effect on the dynamics could be captured by
expanding

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.125)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath . The first term on the right-hand side of Eqn. ( 4.125 )
corresponds to the ordinary unitary evolution term but all other terms
are corrections to it. Of those, the very first term, i.e. the one
proportional to @xmath , is of first order in the small parameter @xmath
. Under the assumption that effects caused by the thermal corrections
are much smaller than those that arise due to temperature-independent
contributions from the chameleon ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 This is a standard assumption
when people consider the effects of chameleon fields in experiments. ,
this particular term is the leading term in the quantum master equation.
All other terms are either of second order in small parameters @xmath ,
@xmath or thermal corrections. The term of interest is therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.126)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The current investigation was started with the hope to make predictions
for atom interferometry experiments. A typical spherical vacuum chamber
has dense walls, such that the chameleon field can be assumed to be
constant and heavy within them. Inside the chamber the chameleon can be
much lighter and evolves towards the minimum of its effective potential
in Eqn. ( 2.86 ). However, over a large part of the chameleon parameter
space, and for typical vacuum chamber sizes, the chamber radius @xmath
is smaller than the Compton wavelength of the chameleon, which means
that the field cannot reach the actual minimum of its potential. In this
case the chameleon adjusts its value, such that its Compton wavelength
becomes equal to chamber radius, which results in modified background
and mass values

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.127)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath [ 104 , 140 ] is a constant that has to be determined
numerically by taking into account properties like the chamber geometry.
It can be assumed that the chameleon profile is approximately constant,
i.e. equal to this modified minimum in Eqn. ( 4.127 ), over the spatial
range explored by the atoms. The form of the chameleon profile inside
the chamber is illustrated schematically in Figure 14 .
Next, the energies in Eqn. ( 4.126 ) are expanded under the
non-relativistic assumption @xmath , leading to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the difference in speeds of both atomic states is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For giving an example of a quantitative prediction, the quantum test
mass is considered to be a Rubidium-87 atom with @xmath , with @xmath
being an atomic mass unit (see e.g. Ref. [ 176 ] ), and @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath (speeds of up to @xmath were reported in atomic
transport experiments [ 177 ] ) are chosen. The conservative value of
@xmath is motivated by constraints on chameleon theories [ 37 , 38 ] ,
and the value of @xmath was chosen to remain well within the regime of
perturbative validity. It should be admitted, however, that the chosen
parameters are in tension with the current experimental bounds for the
chameleon potential considered here. Even so, the aim of this
investigation is to provide a conservative estimate of the order of
magnitude of the effects.
Substituting the chosen parameter values into Eqn. ( 4.129 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.131)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The smallest phase shift that is currently measurable in atom
interferometry experiments is of order @xmath (inferred from Ref. [ 178
] ). This means that the obtained value for @xmath is far out of reach
for current experiments. The other effects induced by the chameleon
field like decoherence and momentum diffusion are even more suppressed.
In conclusion, it can be seen that the effects induced by the quantum
fluctuations of the quartic chameleon considered here are negligibly
small and potentially out of reach for any near-future experiment. This
result supports previous work that has treated the chameleon field
classically in laboratory experiments, and means that this will still be
valid as those experiments continue to improve in sensitivity. It is to
be expected that similar results would be obtained for other light
scalar field models (e.g. those presented in Section 2.4 ) but a
possible pathway to experimental detectability is increasing the ratio
@xmath , which might be an option for models with less constrained
parameter spaces.

## 5 Closing remarks and outlook

To date, gravity is not entirely understood, and in particular the
possible nature of its quantised theory is still a great mystery.
Motivated by attempts to unify gravity with quantum physics, and to
explain phenomena like dark matter or dark energy, Einstein’s theory of
gravity has been modified throughout history. Some of these modified
gravity theories give rise to new scalar degrees of freedom, some of
which are expected to cause a gravity-like fifth force. Fifth forces,
however, are heavily constrained by Solar System-based tests [ 35 ] .
So-called screening mechanisms, coining the phrase screened scalar
fields, are means to circumvent these constraints by suppressing fifth
forces in environments of large mass densities, while allowing for
potentially phenomenologically relevant effects to happen in less dense
regions of space.
Screened scalar fields arising from modified gravity theories are
subjects of ongoing research efforts in theoretical and experimental
physics. Their parameter spaces have successfully been constrained in
various observations and experiments. However, there is still a lot of
work and novel ideas required to prove or fully exclude the existence of
such fields.
In the current thesis, two tests of screened scalar fields have been
presented - one from astrophysics, one from quantum physics. For this,
short overviews of general scalar fields, scalar-tensor theories of
gravity, and some of the most prominent screened scalar field models
were given in Section 2 .
In Section 3 , a particular type of scalar field, the symmetron (see
Section 2.4.2 ), was taken as an example to investigate its effect on
gravitational lensing by galaxies. It was shown that, under the
assumption of a disformal coupling which had not been considered in
previous analyses, the symmetron’s contribution cannot explain the
modification of lensing by baryonic matter that is otherwise attributed
to particle dark matter (see Section 3.3 ). However, a model that
includes an additional scalar field with very particular properties has
the potential to do so (confer Section 3.4 ).
Section 4 dealt with open quantum dynamics induced by conformally
coupling scalar fields. The idea was to investigate whether open quantum
dynamical effects like phase shifts and decoherence due to the presence
of light scalar fluctuations could be observed in experiments like atom
interferometry. For this study, methods from non-equilibrium quantum
field theory were developed and applied. In this way, a single particle
momentum subspace quantum master equation describing the evolution of a
test particle system under influence of a conformally coupling scalar
field was derived. As an example, the @xmath chameleon was chosen, and a
rough estimation of the leading order effect for reasonable experimental
parameters showed that, at least for this particular model, it is
currently many orders of magnitude away from being detectable in modern
atom interferometers (see Section 4.4 ). However, there is the
possibility that another conformally coupled scalar field model with a
larger, less constrained parameter space still left to be explored,
could be constrained or detected with such methods.
Both presented projects have potential for future work. For example, it
could be possible that there is a parameter regime that allows the
symmetron to store enough energy for explaining the modification of
gravitational lensing by combining the symmetron fifth force and the
additional gravitational pull from the stored energy. This still needs
investigation. Furthermore, the two-field model presented in Section 3.4
deserves further research in order to find constraints on the additional
scalar field @xmath and the model parameter @xmath .
The open dynamics project, however, promises a plethora of potential
future projects. For example, instead of using a toy model scalar field,
more realistic atom models could be studied, and full numerical
solutions for the remaining integrals be obtained. Applications of the
developed projection formalism to gravitational decoherence, particle
phenomenology, cosmology, condensed matter, and heavy-ion physics are
also at hand.

## Appendix A Fifth forces

Fifth forces caused by the presence of conformally coupled scalar fields
are a central topic in this thesis. Here it will be shown how they
appear in the Einstein frame. At first, in Section A.1 , it will be
explained how the coupling between a scalar field and matter actually
arises. Subsequently, the general equation for a fifth force experienced
by a non-relativistic point particle will be derived in Section A.2 .

### a.1 Coupling between scalar and matter

As previously seen, e.g. in Section 2 , scalar fields appearing in the
context of scalar-tensor theories of gravity couple to the trace of the
energy-momentum tensor @xmath of other matter. Here it will be shown how
this coupling arises. For this, an example scalar-tensor theory
described by the Einstein frame action (compare with Eqn. ( 2.3 ) in
Section 2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is considered. The action @xmath is the matter action, @xmath represents
arbitrary matter fields, @xmath is the modified gravity scalar field,
and the conformal transformation between Jordan and Einstein frame is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Varying the action in Eqn. ( A.1 ) with respect to @xmath leads to the
equation of motion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Lagrangian associated with the matter action @xmath
.
Dividing Eqn. ( A.3 ) by @xmath , and applying a chain rule to the last
term on its right-hand side yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the trace of the energy-momentum tensor [ 23 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The last line of Eqn. ( A.4 ) corresponds to the equation of motion that
can be derived by using the Euler-Lagrange equations [ 36 ] with the
scalar field Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Choosing, for example,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which, for the appropriate choice of the potential @xmath and @xmath ,
is the chameleon Lagrangian in Eqn. ( 2.85 ).

### a.2 Derivation of fifth forces

In this section it will be shown how to derive the fifth force acting on
a massive test particle. The action of a free particle of mass @xmath
serves as a starting point, [ 179 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Jordan frame proper time, and @xmath is the Jordan
frame metric.
Next, the conformal transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is applied, where the conformal factor is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being some positive real numbers, and @xmath is
assumed. Substituting Eqn. ( A.11 ) into Eqn. ( A.9 ), and Maclaurin
expanding in @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now it can be seen that Eqn. ( A.12 ) contains the Einstein frame action
for a free particle but, in addition, also a potential term depending on
the scalar field @xmath . This means, that the particle was free in the
Jordan frame but is interacting in the Einstein frame.
Eqn. ( A.12 ) can be rewritten as [ 179 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the velocity @xmath . From this, the Lagrange function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

can be read off. In the non-relativistic limit @xmath Eqn. ( A.14 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the non-dynamic term and terms higher than first order in the
small parameters were dropped.
The first term on the right-hand side of Eqn. ( A.15 ) is the kinetic
term and the second gives the potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From this the fifth force can be obtained as [ 180 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For one of the most common choices, @xmath and @xmath , see e.g. Ref. [
88 ] , this becomes the familiar

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Christoffel symbols

Here the Christoffel symbols that are used in Section 3 are given. The
general formula for computing Christoffel symbols from the metric @xmath
is [ 129 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

### b.1 Perturbed FLRW metric

The Christoffel symbols derived from the perturbed FLRW metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In order to recover the unperturbed Christoffel symbols, setting @xmath
is sufficient.

### b.2 Perturbed Jordan frame FLRW metric with extended field content

In Section 3.4 the following transformation between Jordan frame and
Einstein frame was introduced:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are placeholders for spatial coordinates, and the constant
@xmath describes the coupling between the symmetron @xmath and the
scalar field @xmath . The conformal factor @xmath can be ignored for the
Christoffel symbols presented here since it was shown in Section 3.2
that it does not have any effect on gravitational lensing. For
completeness, however, it shall be stated that the modification of
Christoffel symbols due to a conformal coupling is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For the purpose discussed in Section 3.4 only the modifications due to
the disformal coupling to @xmath are of interest. The explicit
expression for the FLRW Christoffel symbols modified in this way from
Appendix B.1 are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the left-hand side of each equation corresponds to a Jordan frame
Christoffel symbol expressed in terms of the Einstein frame metric and
the scalar field @xmath on the right-hand side.

## Appendix C Properties of scalar propagators

Propagators of scalar fields play a major role in the discussion in
Section 4 . Some properties of such propagators, which are vital for
this discussion, will be presented and proven here. In particular, in
Section C.1 it will be shown that they all coincide in the equal time
limit of their arguments, and in Section C.2 two important relations
between the different types of propagators will be introduced.
The used propagators are defined in terms of the doubled scalar degrees
of freedom living on a closed time path contour by [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
     @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes time-ordering. These objects are called Feynman,
Dyson and negative/positive frequency Wightman propagators. Their
integration contours in the complex plane are depicted in Figures 15
(a)-(d).
A derivation of the explicit expressions for Eqns. ( C.1 )-( C.4 ) after
integrating over the four-momentum @xmath and a generally nice
discussion of propagators can be found in Ref. [ 181 ] .

### c.1 Coincidence limit

A relevant property of the four propagators in Eqns. ( C.1 )-( C.4 ) is
that they all coincide in the equal time limit, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These identities will now be proven, and for this purpose the following
notation is introduced:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

At first, it is straightforward to see that at least the last identity
in Eqn. ( C.1 ) is true:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath was used in order to go from one propagator to the other.
Showing that also @xmath coincide with the Wightman propagators in the
equal time limit is more involved. They can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the Sokhotski-Plemelj theorem [ 182 , 183 ] was made use of, and
@xmath denotes the principle value part [ 63 ] . It can already be seen
that the latter term in the expression above looks similar to the
Wightman propagators. This means, that the principle value part must be
vanishing if Eqn. ( C.1 ) is supposed to be correct. An explicit
calculation shows that this is indeed the case:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Therefore, Eqn. ( C.8 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which coincides with the expressions in Eqn. ( C.7 )

### c.2 Relations between propagators

There are two important relations connecting Feynman, Dyson and Wightman
propagators that will be derived now. At first,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

will be proven. For this, Eqns. ( C.1 ) and ( C.2 ) provide a starting
point:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the last line Cauchy’s integral formula [ 184 ] was used:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being a closed curve in the complex plane and @xmath or
@xmath for integrating around the curve counterclockwise or clockwise,
respectively.
Rewriting Eqn. ( C.12 ) further leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which concludes the proof.
The identity in Eqn. ( C.11 ) can be used for proving the so-called
greatest time equation for any positive integer order ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 @xmath
corresponds to the Feynman propagator, @xmath to the negative frequency
Wightman propagator, and so on. :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For convenience, the following proof of this equation will make use of
Eqn. ( C.11 ) in a simplified notation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, it is noted that for every considered propagator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With these ingredients Eqn. ( C.15 ) is proven as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.18)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the third line the binomial theorem [ 176 ] was used.
Extracting from the sum the terms for @xmath and @xmath , these terms
sum up to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the remaining sum is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

By making use of Eqns. ( C.17 ) and ( C.1 ), Eqn. ( C.20 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

since Feynman, Dyson and Wightman propagators coincide under this sum.
The propagators in Eqn. ( C.21 ) can now be extracted from the sum.
Recombining Eqn. ( C.21 ) with Eqn. ( C.19 ) and applying the binomial
theorem again therefore leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

due to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix D Example: Scalar field contractions

In order to give the reader better means to reproduce the master
equation ( 4.3.4 ), an example term from Eqn. ( 4.77 ) will be evaluated
under the projection formalism expressed in Eqn. ( 4.3.3 ). For
simplicity, the thermal corrections will be ignored and only propagators
of the forms given in Eqns. ( C.1 ) and ( 4.108 ) considered. As an
example, one of the terms in the last line of Eqn. ( 4.77 ) is taken,
while its constant pre-factor has been dropped for convenience. Its
evaluation under the projection used in Eqn. ( 4.3.3 ) then goes as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last line on the right-hand side of Eqn. ( D ) becomes

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Acting with the Klein-Gordon operators on the right-hand side of Eqn. (
D ) leads to

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (D.3)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Next, the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is used to evaluate all spatial integrals in Eqn. ( D ), and the
resulting @xmath -functions then allow to easily perform the @xmath
-momentum integrations. Doing so leaves

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.5)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In order to evaluate the remaining momentum integrals, Cauchy’s integral
formula ( C.13 ) can be used. For this, the time derivative is applied,
which schematically acts as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the directions from which the limits of @xmath and @xmath are
approached are taken into account. For example,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the argument of the exponential function on the left-hand side is
always negative, which requires the contour to be closed in the lower
half-plane in order to ensure that the contribution at @xmath vanishes.
Consequently, the negative pole of the Dyson propagator (see Figure 15
(b)) was picked up.
Finally, the result is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

﻿
