The purpose of this thesis is to develop new theories on
high-dimensional structured signal recovery under a rather weak
assumption on the measurements that only a finite number of moments
exists. High-dimensional recovery has been one of the emerging topics in
the last decade partly due to the celebrated work of Candes, Romberg and
Tao (e.g. [ candes2006stable , candes2004robust ] ). The original
analysis there (and the works thereafter) necessitates a strong
concentration argument (namely, the restricted isometry property), which
only holds for a rather restricted class of measurements with
light-tailed distributions. It had long been conjectured that
high-dimensional recovery is possible even if restricted isometry type
conditions do not hold, but the general theory was beyond the grasp
until very recently, when the works [ mendelson2014learning ,
koltchinskii2015bounding ] propose a new “small-ball method”. In these
two papers, the authors initiated a new analysis framework for general
empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems with respect to the square
loss, which is “robust” and can potentially allow heavy-tailed loss
functions. The materials in this thesis are partly inspired by [
mendelson2014learning ] , but are of a different mindset: rather than
directly analyzing the existing ERMs for signal recovery for which it is
difficult to avoid strong moment assumptions, we show that, in many
circumstances, by carefully re-designing the ERMs to start with, one can
still achieve the minimax optimal statistical rate of signal recovery
with very high probability under much weaker assumptions than existing
works.
