Traditional communication networks consist of large sets of
vendor-specific manually configurable devices. These devices are
hardwired with specific control logic or algorithms used for different
network functions. The resulting networks comprise distributed control
plane architectures that are complex in nature, difficult to integrate
and operate, and are least efficient in terms of resource usage.
However, the rapid increase in data traffic requires the integrated use
of diverse access technologies and autonomic network operations with
increased resource efficiency. Therefore, the concepts of Software
Defined Networking (SDN) are proposed that decouple the network control
plane from the data-forwarding plane and logically centralize the
control plane. The SDN control plane can integrate a diverse set of
devices, and tune them at run-time through vendor-agnostic programmable
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).

This thesis proposes software defined cognitive networking to enable
intelligent use of network resources. Different radio access
technologies, including cognitive radios, are integrated through a
common control platform to increase the overall network performance. The
architectural framework of software defined cognitive networking is
presented alongside the experimental performance evaluation. Since SDN
enables applications to change the network behavior and centralizes the
network control plane to oversee the whole network, it is highly
important to investigate SDN in terms of security. Therefore, this
thesis finds the potential security vulnerabilities in SDN, studies the
proposed security platforms and architectures for those vulnerabilities,
and presents future directions for unresolved security vulnerabilities.
Furthermore, this thesis also investigates the potential security
challenges and their solutions for the enabling technologies of 5G, such
as SDN, cloud technologies, and virtual network functions, and provides
key insights into increasing the security of 5G networks.
