The next generation of mobile networks is set to become increasingly
complex, as these struggle to accommodate tremendous data traffic
demands generated by ever-more connected devices that have diverse
performance requirements in terms of throughput, latency, and
reliability. This makes monitoring and managing the multitude of network
elements intractable with existing tools and impractical for traditional
machine learning algorithms that rely on hand-crafted feature
engineering. In this context, embedding machine intelligence into mobile
networks becomes necessary, as this enables systematic mining of
valuable information from mobile big data and automatically uncovering
correlations that would otherwise have been too difficult to extract by
human experts. In particular, deep learning based solutions can
automatically extract features from raw data, without human expertise.
The performance of artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved in other
domains draws unprecedented interest from both academia and industry in
employing deep learning approaches to address technical challenges in
mobile networks.

This thesis attacks important problems in the mobile networking area
from various perspectives by harnessing recent advances in deep neural
networks. As a preamble, we bridge the gap between deep learning and
mobile networking by presenting a survey on the crossovers between the
two areas. Secondly, we design dedicated deep learning architectures to
forecast mobile traffic consumption at city scale. In particular, we
tailor our deep neural network models to different mobile traffic data
structures (i.e. data originating from urban grids and geospatial
point-cloud antenna deployments) to deliver precise prediction. Next, we
propose a mobile traffic super resolution (MTSR) technique to achieve
coarse-to-fine grain transformations on mobile traffic measurements
using generative adversarial network architectures. This can provide
insightful knowledge to mobile operators about mobile traffic
distribution, while effectively reducing the data post-processing
overhead. Subsequently, the mobile traffic decomposition (MTD) technique
is proposed to break the aggregated mobile traffic measurements into
service-level time series, by using a deep learning based framework.
With MTD, mobile operators can perform more efficient resource
allocation for network slicing (i.e, the logical partitioning of
physical infrastructure) and alleviate the privacy concerns that come
with the extensive use of deep packet inspection. Finally, we study the
robustness of network specific deep anomaly detectors with a realistic
black-box threat model and propose reliable solutions for defending
against attacks that seek to subvert existing network deep learning
based intrusion detection systems (NIDS).

Lastly, based on the results obtained, we identify important research
directions that are worth pursuing in the future, including (i) serving
deep learning with massive high-quality data (ii) deep learning for
spatio-temporal mobile data mining (iii) deep learning for geometric
mobile data mining (iv) deep unsupervised learning in mobile networks,
and (v) deep reinforcement learning for mobile network control. Overall,
this thesis demonstrates that deep learning can underpin powerful tools
that address data-driven problems in the mobile networking domain. With
such intelligence, future mobile networks can be monitored and managed
more effectively and thus higher user quality of experience can be
guaranteed.

{preliminary} {laysummary}

Due to the ever-growing mobile traffic demands and increasing types of
mobile services, the architectures of next generation mobile network
inevitably become more complex. Therefore, managing the multitude of
network elements becomes intractable, if merely relying on human-driven
management mechanisms. Using machine learning to automate analysis and
management of mobile network functions becomes promising. Triggered by
recent advanced techniques of parallel computing, deep learning
demonstrated its superior ability in automatic feature engineering,
which traditionally requires human expertise.

In this thesis, we attack a range of important problems in the mobile
networking area from different perspectives, using deep learning
approaches. As a preamble, we bridge the gap between deep learning and
mobile networking by presenting a survey on their crossovers.

We then examine the problem of mobile traffic forecasting, which is
increasingly important for resource management, network slicing and
public transportation support. We design dedicated deep learning
architectures to forecast mobile traffic at the city scale tailored to
different types of network deployments, to effectively extract
spatio-temporal correlations and deliver precise prediction for both
aggregated and service-level measurements. With our approaches, mobile
operators can manage the mobile networks more effectively and thus
offering better services to mobile users.

Mobile traffic engineering requires fine-grained knowledge of traffic
distribution over space and time. Obtaining fine-grained traffic
measurements is however costly, as it relies on dedicated probes and
expensive data post-processing. Drawing inspiration from image super
resolution, we propose a mobile traffic super resolution (MTSR)
technique to complete coarse-to-fine-grain transformation on mobile
traffic measurement using generative adversarial network (GAN)
architectures. After training, the GAN can take the raw coarse
measurements as input and infer precisely their fine-grained
counterparts, to serve various applications. This significantly reduces
the measurements overhead and delivers deeper insights to the mobile
operators.

Knowledge of traffic consumption at per mobile service level is
important for network slicing purpose, i.e., logical partitioning of the
physical infrastructure among services with different requirements.
However, current approaches heavily rely on deep packet inspection
(DPI), which is difficult to deploy at large scale and has substantial
privacy problems. To mitigate this issue, we propose the mobile traffic
decomposition (MTD) technique to break the aggregated mobile traffic
measurements into the service level measurement using a deep learning
based frameworks called Microscope . Microscope can capture the
spatio-temporal correlations in mobile traffic and deliver precise
per-service traffic estimates, which can be an important complement of
(DPI).

Deep neural networks are becoming increasingly popular for network
intrusion detection systems, as they can achieve high detection accuracy
with limited feature engineering. However, such sophisticated models are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which can compromise the detectors by
introducing dedicated subtle perturbation to time-based traffic
features. We introduce Tiki-Taka , to study the robustness of deep
anomaly detectors against a realistic black-box adversarial attack
threat model, and propose defense solutions which help minimize to risk
of those attacks.

We lastly conclude this thesis and pinpoint future research directions
which are promising to pursue. Overall, this thesis explores a new
territory that empowers the future mobile networks with deep neural
network based machine intelligence.
