Here we look at the existence of solution flows of stochastic
differential equations on noncompact manifolds and the properties of the
solutions in terms of the geometry and topology of the underlying
manifold itself. We obtain some results on “strong p-completeness” given
conditions on the derivative flow, and thus given suitable conditions on
the coefficients of the stochastic differential equations. In particular
a smooth flow of Brownian motion exists on submanifolds of @xmath whose
second fundamental forms are bounded. Another class of results we obtain
is on homotopy vanishing given strong moment stability. We also have
results on obstructions to moment stability by cohomology. Also we
obtain formulae for @xmath for differential form @xmath in terms of a
martingale and the form itself, not just its derivative, extending
Bismut’s formula.

One of the contributions of the thesis is to solve the open problem on
the so called strong completeness (the existence of a globally defined
continuous solution flow) for stochastic differential equations (SDEs)
on non-compact manifolds. Such results are well known for compact
manifolds and for the Euclidean space with Lipschitz continuous
coefficients. At the same time we introduce a new method: the derivative
flow method which allows us to improve the results in @xmath , not
simply by weakening the Lipschitz conditions, but more profoundly. The
idea is to take the holistic approach and take the pair of stochastic
processes: the solution flow and its derivative with respect to the
initial data (differentiated in the sense of probability only). This
allows significant growth of the derivatives (e.g. in fraction powers
and even linearly) of the coefficients of the SDE provided the growth of
the coefficients themselves are controlled. In light of the developments
after the PhD thesis, we mention also the martingale method for
obtaining integral representation formula for the weighted heat
semigroup and the intertwining of heat semigroups.

An immediate and very well known demonstration of the connection between
diffusion processes and geometry is given by the non-explosion of a
Brownian motion. A @xmath -Brownian motion on @xmath is a strong Markov
process with generator @xmath which exists naturally on a Riemannian
manifold. If @xmath this is the Brownian motion. A Brownian motion has
no-explosion from anywhere if and only if the fundamental solution of
the heat equations is unique. This is related also to the behaviour at
infinity of the associated probability semigroup, c.f. Chapter 4. We
shall make more connections between properties of diffusions and that of
the manifolds. For example, a slightly modification of Bakry’s method [
5 ] shows that if the heat semigroup for 1-forms is “continuous” on
@xmath , then the Brownian motion has no explosion. Indeed one can
choose an SDE whose solutions @xmath is an @xmath -BM with initial value
@xmath . We can take the special gradient SDE obtained with the
isometric embedding of the manifold into @xmath , in most cases we could
choose to use other equations as well. The symmetric semi-group on
function is defined as usual: @xmath , where @xmath is the life time of
the solution @xmath . A differential 1-form is a section of the
cotangent bundle @xmath . The semi-group on differential 1-forms is: for
@xmath , @xmath . If applied to @xmath where @xmath is a function , the
inter-twinnining property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds and if there is a point @xmath and an open neighbourhood @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath for any @xmath and for any @xmath and any @xmath
, we expect non-explosion. See Lemma 7.2.1 . Let @xmath , where @xmath
is the @xmath -filtration generated by @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this makes connection with the Bakry-Emery condition, i.e. the deformed
Ricci curvature is bounded from below. We shall see that the Bakry-Emery
condition, is not optimal for either the explosion problem or for the
existence of an invariant probability measure. For the existence of an
invariant probability measure see the article ‘On extension of Myers’
Theorem’ (1995) for further clarification.

We observe that integrability conditions on the derivative flows are
also related to properties of the manifolds as well as on the diffusion
themselves. Assuming this type of condition, we have results on
non-explosion problem, the existence of global smooth solution flow
(strong p-completeness), as well as homotopy and cohomology vanishing
results, and integral representations of semigroups.

Before going into detail, we would also like to point out that the
existence of a continuous flow is of basic importance in the study of
ergodic properties of dynamical systems. Our result on the strong
completeness implies the existence of perfect co-cycles.

The first three chapters of the thesis are preliminary. Of these chapter
1 is to establish notation, chapter 2 and chapter 3 deal with results
which are essentially known (especially in special cases) but not found
anywhere in suitable form. A new result is the essential
self-adjointness of the Bismut-Witten Laplacian @xmath , and @xmath , on
non-compact manifolds.

Inspired by the idea of uniform covers, we introduce the weak uniform
cover method, in chapter 4, which allows us to look at many different
problems from the same point of view including the explosion problem,
the behaviour at infinity of diffusion processes and probability
semigroups, along with the geometry of the underlying manifold at
infinity. As an example we conclude that linear growth gives the @xmath
property. We have a result on the non-explosion of SDEs on an open set
of @xmath . The results on non-explosion are used in chapter 5 to obtain
strong completeness.

In chapter 5, we solve a question in SDE open for over twenty years:
Does a SDE has a smooth global solution flow on a non-compact manifold
if the SDE does not explode? The only results, known at this points, are
for linear spaces and for smooth SDEs on compact manifolds, the first
assume globally Lipshcitz type condition and latter is obtained by
lifting the SDE to the diffeomorphism group. The first counter example
of an SDE for which solutions from any point exist for all time but for
which the continuous dependence on the initial point fails, was given by
Elworthy in 1978, prior to which there was the popular belief that if
the there is no explosion from any points then the solution depends
continuously on the initial data (provided coefficients are sufficiently
smooth. This incorrect belief was led by theories of ODE where there is
no noise and theory of one dimensional SDEs. In a recent article ‘Lack
of strong completeness for stochastic flows’ with Schetzow we
constructed an SDE in @xmath with bounded smooth coefficients, the SDE
is smooth but the continuous dependence on the initial data failed.

Our results also improve and offer insights to the flow problem on the
Euclidean space, beaking the barrier of global Lipschitz continuity. We
may allow polynomial growth of the derivatives of the coefficients of
the SDE in some cases. Our observation is that the existence of a global
smooth solution flow is linked in a fundamental manner with the
derivative flows and with the rate of growth of the data in the
linearised SDE along its solutions.

The concept of strong p-completeness is introduced due to the complexity
of strong completeness. A stochastic differential equation is said to be
strongly p-complete if it has a version which is smooth on any given
smooth singular p-simplex. It is called strongly complete if there is a
smooth flow of the solution on the whole manifold. We start with a
theorem on strong 1-completeness which is applied to obtain the
intertwing property @xmath in chapter 6. The intertwining property is an
underlying condition for our martingale method to differentiation
formula of Markovian semi-groups.

Strong 1-completeness is needed in chapter 7 to obtain homotopy
vanishing results and is also used in chapter 8. Later we give a theorem
on strong p-completeness, in particular the existence of a continuous
flow and flows of diffeomorphisms. Strong p-completeness leads naturally
to cohomology vanishing given strong moment stability (see page 7.4.2 ).
These theorems are originally given in terms of integrability conditions
on the derivative flows @xmath , but those conditions can also be
checked in terms of the bounds on the coefficients of the stochastic
differential equations. See section 5.3 . In particular, as a simple
example, there is a smooth flow of Brownian motions on a submanifold of
@xmath whose second fundamental form is bounded.

In chapter 6, we look at the probability semigroup for 1-forms, the heat
semigroup for 1-forms, and the differentiation of the probability
semigroups for functions and ask a basic and yet important question:
does @xmath equals @xmath ? This question is answered from different
approaches, but all require conditions on @xmath . We use this knowledge
of the semigroups extensively in the next two chapters. Following from
the discussions, we get a result on the @xmath boundedness and
contractivity of heat semigroups for forms. As a corollary, we give a
cohomology vanishing result.

Proceeding to chapter 7, the interplay between diffusion processes and
geometric and topology properties of the underlying manifold becomes
clearer. The main theorems here are on the vanishing of the first
homotopy group @xmath given conditions on the regularity of the
diffusions and strong moment stability, i.e. the supremum over a compact
set of the @xmath norm of the derivative flow decays exponentially fast.
In particular we conclude that a certain class of manifold cannot have a
strongly moment stable s.d.s. if its fundamental group is not trivial.
We study, again briefly, the vanishing of harmonic 1-forms and
cohomology vanishing. The moment estimates was extended, after the
completion of the thesis, to tensor field of @xmath , see the article of
Elworthy and Rosenberg ‘Homotopy and Homology Vanishing Theorems and the
Stability of Stochastic Flows’.

Finally in chapter 8, we obtain a formula for @xmath , for elliptic
Markov generators, in terms of @xmath and a martingale, but does not
depend on @xmath . For this we tweaked the basic idea, that showing
@xmath is a solution of the Kolmogorov equation, with a simple
martingale technique. I happened on this method ‘ while trying to extend
a result of Elworthy [ 26 ] for closed differential 1-forms to closed
differential @xmath -forms with @xmath and at the same time trying to
understand Malliavin Calculus. At the line 4 of the proof, one would
normally take the expectation of the both sides of the identity and
conclude Kolmogorov’s equation. Instead, we multiplied both sides by a
well chosen martingale, and applied the Itô isometry. We then explored
the semi-group on differential forms, especially its inter-twining
property and apply the Markov property of the system of SDE on the
tangent bundle. An easy application of this formula is an implicit
formula for the gradient of the logarithm of the probability kernels.
For a compact manifold, the gradient logarithmic heat kernel formula was
proved by Bismut using a perturbation of the driving Brownian motion on
the horizontal SDE on the orthonormal frame bundle. The method
introduced in this thesis has since been used in proving the Strong
Feller property for stochastic partial differential equations (SPDE) and
for a while it was the only method for proving uniqueness of invariant
probability measures for SPDEs, the first article showing strong Feller
property by a differentiation formula for the semigroup generated by a
SPDE was given by Da Prato, Elworthy, and Zabczyk. More recently, it was
shown by Hairer and Mattingly that an asymptotic Feller property can be
used to replace the strong Feller property. The former can hold under
less restrictions on the equation can can be obtained by an approximate
or modified differentiation formula.

We also obtain an integral representation formula for closed
differential forms of degree @xmath where @xmath , extending the result
of Elworthy [ 26 ] where such a formula was obtained for closed
differential 1-forms. In fact this was the motivation for the earlier
work studying @xmath , as explained earlier the intertwining property
will imply that @xmath , the semigroup acting on @xmath . For @xmath ,
we took the geometric advantage afforded by gradient SDEs. Gradient SDEs
is not needed for differential 1-forms. In addition, we develop also the
martingale method for proving a formula for @xmath where @xmath is a
@xmath -form, @xmath . This formula turned out to be a special version
of the for-mentioend integral formula in the case the differential form
is exact. Our use of the gradient stochastic differential equation for
the treatment of semi-groups on differential forms of degree higher than
@xmath motivated, with hindsight, the study of intuitive Riemmann
connections associated to, elliptic and possibly degenerate, stochastic
differential equations of non-gradient form. See ‘Concerning the
Geometry of Diffusion Operators’ by Elworthy, LeJan, and nyself. Another
theme is to relate the geometrical and topological properties of
manifolds to that of the diffusion processes on it.
