## Part I Background

### Chapter 1 Introduction and preliminaries

#### 1.1 Introduction

Let @xmath be a filtered probability space satisfying the usual
conditions including right continuity. Let @xmath be a @xmath
dimensional smooth manifold. Consider the following stochastic
differential equation(s.d.e.) on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a @xmath valued Brownian motion( @xmath -adapted), @xmath
is @xmath from @xmath to the tangent bundle @xmath with @xmath : @xmath
@xmath a linear map for each @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath is a @xmath
vector field on @xmath .

By @xmath we mean the Stratonovich integral.

Let @xmath be a random variable independent of @xmath . Denote by @xmath
the solution starting from @xmath , with @xmath the explosion time . By
a solution we mean a maximal solution which is sample continuous unless
otherwise stated. Under our assumptions on coefficients the solution to
equation @xmath is unique in the sense of that if @xmath and @xmath are
two solutions with same initial point, then they are versions of one
another, i.e. @xmath almostly surely, and @xmath almostly surely for all
@xmath on @xmath .

Furthermore the solutions to the stochastic differential equation @xmath
are diffusion processes, i.e. @xmath is a path continuous strong Markov
process for each @xmath . In fact most of the interesting diffusions can
be given in this way. The importance of a diffusion process is largely
related to its semigroup @xmath (given by @xmath ), and the
corresponding infinitesimal generator @xmath (which we discuss in detail
in chapter 4), or to the consideration of @xmath as a random
perturbation of the dynamical system given by the vector field @xmath .

The pair @xmath , often simplified as @xmath , is called a stochastic
dynamical system (s.d.s.).

The thesis contains two themes. The first considers fundamental problems
of stochastic differential equations: completeness and strong
completeness. The main theme of the second part is to relate geometrical
and topological properties of manifolds to the diffusion processes on
it. The first furnishes a start for the second. And both make good use
of the fact that integrability conditions on the derivative flows give
very strong conditions on the manifolds as well as on the diffusion
themselves. We have nonexplosion, strong p-completeness results,
homotopy and cohomology vanishing results assuming this type of
condition.

As we shall see properties of diffusions are directly related to those
of the manifolds. An immediate demonstration of the connection between
diffusion processes and geometry is given by the well known fact: the
nonexplosion of a Brownian motion (which exists naturally on a
Riemannian manifold) is equivalent to the uniqueness of solutions of the
heat equations, which relates to the behaviour at infinity of the
associated probability semigroup as shown in chapter 4.

Before going into detail, we would also like to point out that the
existence of a continuous flow is of basic importance in the study of
ergodic properties.

The first three chapters of the thesis are preliminary. Of these chapter
1 is to establish notation and contains quoted results, chapter 2 and
chapter 3 deal with results which are essentially known (especially in
special cases) but not found anywhere in suitable form. Much of the
treatment in chapter 2, in which we discuss carefully the Bismut-Witten
Laplacian @xmath and its associated semigroups, was arrived at together
with D. Elworthy and S. Rosenberg. In chapter 3 we look at the invariant
measure for an h-Brownian motion and its ergodic properties.

Inspired by the idea of uniform covers, we introduce the weak uniform
cover method in chapter 4, which allows us to look at many different
problems from the same point of view including the explosion problem,
the behaviour at infinity of diffusion processes and probability
semigroups, along with the geometry of the underlying manifold at
infinity. As an example we conclude that linear growth gives the @xmath
property and have a result on the nonexplosion of s.d.e. on an open set
of @xmath . The results on nonexplosion are used in chapter 5 to obtain
strong completeness.

In chapter 5, the concept of strong p-completeness is introduced due to
the complexity of strong completeness. A stochastic differential
equation is said to be strongly p-complete if it has a version which is
smooth on any given smooth singular p-simplex. It is called strongly
complete if there is a smooth flow of the solution on the whole
manifold. We start with a theorem on strong 1-completeness which is
applied to get @xmath in chapter 6. Here @xmath , and @xmath is the
derivative flow(c.f. section 1.2). Strong 1-completeness is needed in
chapter 7 to get homotopy vanishing results and is also used in chapter
8. Later we give a theorem on strong p-completeness, in particular the
existence of a continuous flow and flows of diffeomorphisms. Strong
p-completeness leads naturally to cohomology vanishing given strong
moment stability (see page 7.4.2 ). These theorems are originally given
in terms of integrability conditions on @xmath , but those conditions
can also be checked in terms of the bounds on the coefficients of the
stochastic differential equations. See section 5.3 . In particular, as a
simple example, there is a smooth flow of Brownian motions on a
submanifold of @xmath whose second fundamental form is bounded.

In chapter 6, we look at the probability semigroup for 1-forms, the heat
semigroup for 1-forms, and the differentiation of the probability
semigroups for functions and ask a basic and yet important question:
does @xmath equals @xmath ? This question is answered from different
approaches, but all require conditions on @xmath . We use this knowledge
of the semigroups extensively in the next two chapters. Following from
the discussions, we get a result on the @xmath boundedness and
contractivity of heat semigroups for forms. As a corollary, we give a
cohomology vanishing result.

Proceeding to chapter 7, the interplay between diffusion processes and
geometric and topology properties of the underlying manifold becomes
clearer. The main theorems here are on the vanishing of the first
homotopy group @xmath given conditions on the regularity of the
diffusions and strong moment stability, i.e. the supremum over a compact
set of the @xmath norm of the derivative flow decays exponentially fast.
In particular we conclude that a certain class of manifold cannot have a
strongly moment stable s.d.s. if its fundamental group is not trivial.
We also look briefly at the vanishing of harmonic 1-forms and cohomology
vanishing.

Finally in chapter 8, we get a formula for @xmath for elliptic systems
in terms of @xmath and a martingale, extending the formula given in [ 26
] . We also obtain a similar type of formula for @xmath forms. In
particular we have an explicit formula for the gradient of the logarithm
of the heat kernel extending Bismut’s formula.

Bibliographical notes are scattered in every chapter. But we would like
to refer to [ 31 ] and [ 27 ] for general references. See also [ 45 ] .

#### Flow chart

[]

#### 1.2 Probabilistic set-up

##### Brownian motions and Brownian systems

A path continuous strong Markov process on a Riemannian manifold is
called a Brownian motion (BM) if its generator is @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the Laplace-Beltrami operator. It is called a Brownian motion
with drift @xmath if its generator is @xmath . Here @xmath is a @xmath
smooth vector field on @xmath . The drift @xmath is called a gradient
drift if @xmath for some function @xmath . We will always assume @xmath
is @xmath smooth for simplicity. But in many cases we only need it to be
@xmath .

A stochastic dynamical system @xmath is called a Brownian system (with
drift @xmath ) if its solution is a Brownian motion (with drift @xmath
). Equivalently @xmath is an orthogonal projection for each @xmath .
i.e. @xmath and @xmath .

In the text, we often use h-Brownian system for a Brownian system with
drift @xmath , and h-Brownian motion for a Brownian motion with drift
@xmath .

##### Gradient Brownian flow

Let @xmath be an isometric immersion. Define @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A stochastic dynamical system @xmath with @xmath so defined is called a
gradient Brownian system (with drift). When @xmath , its solution flow
is called a gradient Brownian flow . It is called a h-gradient Brownian
system if @xmath . For such a system, we can always choose, for each
@xmath , an orthonormal basis (o.n.b.) @xmath of @xmath , such that for
all @xmath and @xmath either

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes for the covariant derivative of @xmath . In
particular we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath . See [ 31 ] or [ 25 ] for the proof.

#### The derivative flow

Let @xmath . Denote by @xmath the solution flow to the following
covariant stochastic differential equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is in fact the derivative of @xmath in measure in the following sense
as shown in [ 31 ] : let @xmath be a @xmath map and @xmath a smooth
curve with @xmath , and @xmath . Then for any @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By convention @xmath if @xmath . Let @xmath , and let @xmath . We write
@xmath , @xmath for simplicity. Clearly @xmath is a solution to the
stochastic differential equation on the tangent bundle @xmath
corresponding to equation 1.3 . Furthermore it has the same explosion
time as @xmath according to [ 26 ] . In a trivialisation we may not
distinguish between the derivative flow and its principal part, if there
is no confusion caused.

#### Itô formula for forms

First, we recall Itô formula for one forms from [ 26 ] : Let @xmath be a
stopping time with @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the differential operator on 1-forms associated with a
s.d.s. @xmath defined as follows (for Levi-Civita connection):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath and @xmath is closed, then as shown in [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For higher order forms, there is a similar formula from [ 26 ] ; we
quote here the formula for gradient systems. But first we need some
notation (see [ 1 ] ):

Let @xmath be a linear map from a vector space @xmath to @xmath . We
define @xmath from @xmath to @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , where @xmath . Denote by @xmath the @xmath vector induced
by @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here is Itô formula for gradient Brownian systems for @xmath forms as
given in [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moment exponents: For @xmath , @xmath compact, we have moment exponents
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and point moment exponents @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will say a flow is moment stable if @xmath for each x, and strongly
moment stable if @xmath for each compact set @xmath . It is called
strongly @xmath -moment stable if @xmath for each compact subset @xmath
of @xmath . For discussions on various exponents and related problems,
see Arnold [ 2 ] , Baxendale and Stroock [ 7 ] , Carverhill, Chappel and
Elworthy [ 11 ] , Chappel [ 12 ] , and Elworthy [ 26 ] [ 25 ] .

Invariant measure: A @xmath -finite measure @xmath on @xmath is called
an invariant measure for @xmath , if the following holds for all @xmath
and @xmath functions @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Some notation: Let @xmath be the Riemannian volume element on @xmath .
Then @xmath is said to have finite volume if @xmath . Similarly @xmath
is said to have finite h-volume if @xmath . e.g. @xmath has finite
volume for @xmath the Gaussian density given by @xmath .

#### 1.3 Unbounded operators on Hilbert space

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space. An operator @xmath on @xmath is a linear
map from a subspace of @xmath to @xmath . The subspace is called its
domain, which we denote by @xmath . We also denote by ker @xmath the
kernel of @xmath , and @xmath ( or Ran @xmath ) the image of @xmath in
@xmath . A closed operator @xmath is an operator with its graph @xmath a
closed subspace of @xmath . An operator @xmath is called an @xmath of
@xmath if @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath on @xmath . If @xmath has a
closed extension, it is closable . In this case the smallest extension
of it is called its closure , which we denote as @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.3.1.

[ 59 ] [p.250]. If @xmath is closable, @xmath , i.e. @xmath contains
precisely those @xmath such that: there exist @xmath with @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , some @xmath (and then @xmath ).

An interesting class of operators are operators with dense domain,
called densely defined operators. Let @xmath be such an operator, there
is a well defined adjoint operator @xmath defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For such @xmath and @xmath we set: @xmath .

Notice that if @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath is called a
symmetric operator . There are also the following properties of adjoint
operators:

###### Theorem 1.3.2.

[ 59 ] [p.253]. Assume @xmath is dense in @xmath , then:

1.  @xmath is closed, and @xmath is symmetric.

2.  @xmath is closable if and only if @xmath is dense, in which case
    @xmath .

3.   If @xmath is closable , then @xmath .

A symmetric operator is @xmath - @xmath if @xmath . It is essentially
self-adjont if its closure is self-adjoint, equivalently if it has only
one self-adjoint extension.

Here is another test for essential self-adjointness:

###### Theorem 1.3.3.

[ 59 ] [p.257]. Let @xmath be a symmetric operator on a Hilbert space.
Then the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is essentially self-adjoint.

2.   ker @xmath .

3.   Ran @xmath are dense.

The Friedrichs extension : Let @xmath be a positive symmetric operator.
Let @xmath be its quadratic form (bilinear form) defined as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . A quadratic form is closed if @xmath is a sequence in
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath , then it follows @xmath and @xmath
converges to @xmath in @xmath norm. The closure of @xmath is the least
extension of @xmath which is closed. The closure of @xmath is in fact
the quadratic form of a unique self adjoint operator @xmath , which is a
positive extension of @xmath and is called the Friedrichs extension of
@xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.4.

(Von Neumann theorem) [ 69 ] Let @xmath be a closed densely defined
operator, then @xmath and @xmath are self-adjoint.

Furthermore, If @xmath is symmetric and @xmath is densely defined, then
@xmath is the Friedrichs extension of @xmath . See [ 59 ] [p.181]

Given operators @xmath and @xmath , we may define new operators @xmath ,
and @xmath . For this, @xmath is defined on @xmath , on which @xmath ,
while @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.5 (spectral theorem-functional calculus form).

[ 59 ]

Let @xmath be a self-adjoint operator on @xmath . Then there is a unique
map @xmath from the bounded Borel functions on @xmath into @xmath so
that

1.  @xmath is an algebraic *-homomorphism.

2.  @xmath is norm continuous, that is, @xmath .

3.   Let @xmath be a sequence of bounded Borel functions with @xmath
    converging to @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and
    @xmath . Then, for any @xmath , @xmath .

4.   If @xmath pointwise and if the sequence @xmath is bounded, then
    @xmath strongly.

5.   If @xmath , @xmath .

6.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

#### 1.4 Semigroups and Generators

###### Definition 1.4.1.

A family of operators @xmath on a Banach space @xmath is called a one
parameter semigroup (of class @xmath ) if they satisfy the following:
(not to be confused with the @xmath semigroup later in chapter 4.)

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

3.   For each @xmath , @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

For such a semigroup, all @xmath are bounded operators with @xmath , for
@xmath and some constants @xmath , @xmath .

The third condition in the definition is equivalent to each of the
following if @xmath satisfies the semigroup property (1) and (2) in the
definition above: [ 17 ] , [ 59 ]

1.  It is weakly continuous at @xmath : @xmath , each @xmath . i.e. for
    any @xmath , the dual space, @xmath

2.  The map @xmath from @xmath is jointly continuous.

Denote by @xmath . Let @xmath , if @xmath . The operator @xmath on
@xmath is called the infinitesimal generator , which enjoys the
following properties:

###### Theorem 1.4.1.

[ 17 ] Let @xmath be a semigroup of class @xmath , @xmath its generator.
Then the following hold:

1.   The operator @xmath is closed and densely defined.

2.  @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , @xmath is continuously differentiable on @xmath and
    satisfies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.   Furthermore if a function @xmath satisifies

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Definition 1.4.2.

A contraction semigroup is a semigroup of class @xmath with @xmath for
all @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.4.2 (The Reisz-Thorin interpolation theorem).

[ 18 ]

Let @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Let @xmath be a linear operator from
@xmath to @xmath which satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath Let @xmath and define @xmath , @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath for all @xmath .

In particular if @xmath is a bounded operator both on @xmath and @xmath
: then @xmath extends to a operator on @xmath , for @xmath . Furthermore
if @xmath is both an @xmath and @xmath contraction, it is an @xmath
contraction for all such @xmath (restricting to @xmath functions).

Finally we quote the following theorem on dual semigroups from [ 17 ] :

###### Theorem 1.4.3.

[ 17 ] If @xmath is a generator of a one parameter semigroup @xmath on a
reflexive Banach space @xmath , then @xmath is a one parameter semigroup
on @xmath with generator @xmath .

#### 1.5 Differential forms

Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold with Levi-Civita connection @xmath
and a positive measure @xmath given by @xmath , for a smooth function
@xmath on @xmath , where @xmath denotes the volume element determined by
the metric. Denote by @xmath the space of differentiable @xmath forms.
Let @xmath be a p-form; there is an element @xmath such that for any
@xmath , and @xmath , @xmath

@xmath . For two p-forms @xmath and @xmath , we define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the completion of @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath
denotes direct sums. Then @xmath is a Hilbert space with the inner
product defined above (forms of different order are considered
orthogonal). Those forms in @xmath are called @xmath forms. Let @xmath
be the space of smooth @xmath forms with compact support, and @xmath the
space of smooth functions with compact support. There is the usual
exterior differential operator @xmath on @xmath with adjoint @xmath ,
here @xmath is the formal adjoint of @xmath for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the adjoint of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath the @xmath
adjoint of operator @xmath , so that @xmath , @xmath when restricted to
@xmath . Notice that @xmath is dense in @xmath , so all the operators
concerned have dense domain.

Denote by @xmath the dual space of the antisymmetric tensor tangent
bundle of order @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath . For each @xmath , there
is the annihilation operator @xmath given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have identified @xmath with antisymmetric multilinear forms.

Let @xmath be a vector field on @xmath with @xmath the corresponding
solution flow. There is the interior product of @xmath by @xmath given
by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . If @xmath is a 1-form, we write @xmath for @xmath . Here
@xmath denotes the adjoint. There is also the Lie derivative @xmath of
@xmath in direction @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath . They are related by the following formula [ 1 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath , the formal adjoint @xmath
of the exterior differential operator on @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a function @xmath on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also for @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath . Similar arguments show that: @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be the Hodge-Laplace operator on forms defined as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath the Bismut-Witten Laplacian defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly @xmath . The restricted operators on @xmath forms are denote by
@xmath and @xmath respectively. If @xmath , we simply write @xmath and
@xmath .

Divergence theorem Let @xmath be a vector field. Define the divergence
of @xmath to be: @xmath . It is the formal adjoint of @xmath on @xmath .
The h-divergence of @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the formal adjoint of @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergence theorem holds for h-divergences, i.e. let @xmath be a
precompact open set in @xmath with piecewise smooth boundary, then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where @xmath is the unit outer normal vector to @xmath , and @xmath the
Riemannian surface area element(corresponding to @xmath ). The equation
can be proved from equation 1.8 and from the usual divergence theorem
with @xmath .

#### 1.6 Parabolic regularity etc.

Recall that @xmath is a smooth function on @xmath . Let @xmath be a
@xmath solution to the following equation on @xmath forms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is in fact a classical solution(i.e. @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath ). Furthermore it is smooth if @xmath and @xmath are.
See [ 56 ] and [ 24 ] .

The following theorem is given by Strichartz for the Laplacian, but it
is easy to see it is true for @xmath (defined on page 1.5 , c.f. theorem
@xmath ). Let @xmath be the heat semigroup defined by functional
analysis.

###### Theorem 1.6.1.

[ 62 ] There is a heat kernel @xmath satisfying:

1.   The function @xmath is smooth on @xmath , symmetric in @xmath and
    @xmath , and is strictly positive for @xmath .

2.  @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all @xmath .

3.  @xmath , for all @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , for
    @xmath , and

4.  @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , and these properties continue to
    hold for all @xmath , @xmath if we define @xmath by equation 1.10 .
    Moreover we have uniqueness of the semigroup for @xmath in the
    following sense: if @xmath is any strongly continuous contractive
    semigroup on @xmath for fixed @xmath such that @xmath is a solution
    to @xmath , then @xmath .

### Chapter 2 On the Bismut-Witten Laplacian and its semigroups

Main result: From the essential self-adjointness of @xmath , we get the
Hodge decomposition theorem and a result on @xmath , which we use
extensively later. These results are generally considered well known,
but there does not appear to be a suitable reference which gives these
in exactly the context we want, especially for the Bismut-Witten
Laplacian @xmath . This problem arose when I was trying to work out
@xmath , and occurred again when D. Elworthy and S. Rosenberg were
working on their paper [ 35 ] . This chapter is the result of
discussions among the three of us, part of the result is in fact used in
[ 35 ] .

#### 2.1 The self-adjointness of weighted Laplacians

Chernoff [ 14 ] has proved that @xmath and all its powers are
essentially self-adjoint on @xmath (with @xmath , but exactly the same
proof gives the result for @xmath making use of the h-divergence theorem
stated on page 1.9 as seen later in the context). In particular the
Hodge-Laplacian operator @xmath is essentially self-adjoint. From this
we obtain @xmath and the Hodge-Kodaira decomposition, and therefore :
@xmath and @xmath . Consequently we get: @xmath . Thus all the
operations on @xmath are exactly as for @xmath . We will give Chernoff’s
proof for the self-adjointness, adapted to our context.

First we introduce the terminology. Let @xmath be a first order
differential operator on the complexified cotangent bundle @xmath .
Consider @xmath , which is called a symmetric hyperbolic system if
@xmath is a zero order operator, i.e. it is given locally by
multiplication by a matrix valued function of @xmath . The symbol @xmath
for @xmath is a linear map from @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath is a smooth form on @xmath with
@xmath . The local velocity of propagation @xmath associated to @xmath
is defined as a function on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are mainly interested in the following operator @xmath for the proof
of the next two theorems. It indeed gives rise to a hyperbolic system
since @xmath , and has symbol: @xmath . Here @xmath is defined by:
@xmath for @xmath . The local velocity for @xmath is constantly @xmath ,
from the following:

For each fixed @xmath , we may write @xmath into the sum of two
orthogonal parts: @xmath satisfying: @xmath , and @xmath , by letting
@xmath be the component of @xmath along @xmath . So @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 2.1.1 (Energy inequality).

[ 14 ] Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold with Riemannian distance
@xmath . The geodesic ball radius @xmath centered at @xmath is denoted
by @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath a smooth solution to @xmath on @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath be real numbers with @xmath , then the following
inequality holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular if @xmath vanishes on @xmath , then @xmath vanishes
throughout @xmath for @xmath .

Proof: We first introduce a (h-)divergence free vector field @xmath on
@xmath as follows. Let @xmath be a real valued function on @xmath ,
denote by @xmath the differential of @xmath in the time component, and
@xmath the space differential. Then define @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write @xmath . Notice @xmath is given in the form of the sum of time and
space parts, so therefore is the divergence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the h-divergence of @xmath in its space variables.

But @xmath , since for any function @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath . Applying divergence theorem for the h-divergence, we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the mantle part of the boundary of @xmath , and @xmath
the unit outer normal vector to @xmath , which is in fact given by:
@xmath , for @xmath , and some positive constant @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The required inequality follows.

Let @xmath . We shall view the equation @xmath as a symmetric hyperbolic
system of partial differential equations as follows:

Let @xmath be local sections of @xmath which are pointwise orthonormal.
Then we may wite @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , the space of smooth forms in @xmath . We shall assume that
one of them has compact support. The identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and an integration by parts show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall let @xmath denote the matrix whose entries are @xmath . On
setting @xmath , the equation: @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is symmetric.

Thus locally there is a unique smooth solution to the Cauchy problem for
this hyperbolic equation by standard theory. See e.g. [ 48 ] .

###### Theorem 2.1.2.

[ 14 ] Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, and let @xmath .
There is a unique smooth solution to the hyperbolic equation: @xmath ,
for each initial value @xmath . Moreover @xmath , each @xmath .

Proof: Take a local trivialization of the tangent bundle @xmath . For
@xmath , there is a constant @xmath such that @xmath is contained in a
single chart. Then by the local existence and uniqueness theorem: for
each @xmath smooth on @xmath , there is a unique smooth solution on
@xmath , from the energy inequality. Notice the propagation speed is
identically @xmath for @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath , the geodesic ball @xmath is compact on a complete
Riemannian manifold. Let @xmath be smooth on @xmath . We can find a
common @xmath for all points in the ball @xmath such that the statement
above holds, given initial data on @xmath . Moreover the solutions
coincide on overlapping areas from the local uniqueness. Altogether they
define a solution on the truncated cone:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The solution at @xmath in turn serves as initial data on @xmath , then
we have a solution on: @xmath . Continuing with the procedure, we obtain
a unique solution @xmath .

In particular this show that the solution up to time @xmath on @xmath is
determined by solution at time @xmath on the ball @xmath , and therefore
by initial value on @xmath .

Let @xmath on @xmath . For each number @xmath and @xmath , @xmath on
@xmath from the above argument. So the uniqueness holds.

We show next that there is a globally defined solution for each smooth
data @xmath with compact support inside the ball @xmath , some @xmath .
As has been shown there is a unique solution on @xmath . Moreover the
solution vanishes outside @xmath . Extend the solution to @xmath by
setting it to be @xmath outside @xmath . The solution so defined is
smooth and h as support in @xmath at time @xmath , which serves in turn
as initial data and gives us a solution on @xmath . We can by this means
propagate the solution for all time. It is clear that the solution
@xmath thus obtained has compact support for each @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.3.

[ 14 ] Denote by @xmath the solution given in the theorem above for
@xmath . Then @xmath is a unitary group from @xmath with @xmath , and
extends to @xmath as a unitary group.

Proof: We only need to prove the unitary part. Take @xmath , @xmath from
@xmath .Than

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The fact that @xmath is a group comes from the uniqueness of the
solution, and @xmath follows from the standard semigroup result.

###### Theorem 2.1.4.

[ 14 ] The operator @xmath and all its powers are essentially
self-adjoint.

Proof: Let @xmath , @xmath . It is a symmetric operator. According to
theorem 1.4 we only need to show @xmath if @xmath , @xmath . Suppose
@xmath . Let @xmath . Consider @xmath which is bounded in @xmath since
@xmath is a unitary operator.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So @xmath , for some constant @xmath . Where @xmath satisfies: @xmath ,
and so is not a pure imaginary. Thus @xmath , since it is bounded in
@xmath . In particular @xmath . Thus @xmath . A similar argument works
with @xmath .

#### 2.2 The Hodge decomposition theorem

To explore the relationship of these operators, let us first notice that
@xmath , and @xmath before giving the following lemmas:

###### Lemma 2.2.1.

On @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It is also true that: @xmath
, and @xmath . Similarly for @xmath .

Proof: Take @xmath , there are therefore @xmath in @xmath converging to
@xmath in @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath . But @xmath , so @xmath , and
@xmath .

Let @xmath , then for all @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath and @xmath . The rest can be proved analogously.

###### Proposition 2.2.2.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Then:

@xmath .

Proof: We write @xmath for @xmath in the proof. Since both @xmath , and
@xmath are closed from theorem 1.2, so is @xmath since @xmath and @xmath
map to different spaces. For the same reason @xmath is also a closed
operator. Noticing @xmath , @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

from the following argument:

Let @xmath . For any @xmath , there is the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last equality comes from theorem 1.3.2 . We now take adjoint of both
sides of @xmath and @xmath and get:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

But by theorem @xmath , @xmath

So combine @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath , and each is a self-adjoint operator. Thus we have
proved that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Remark: Let @xmath , it is now clear that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: First we know that @xmath is self adjoint from @xmath . By
theorem @xmath , @xmath is self adjoint. But there is only one self
adjoint extension for @xmath . The result follows. Furthermore @xmath is
in fact the Friedrichs extension of @xmath from the remark after theorem
@xmath .

The following is a standard result:

###### Proposition 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be a self-adjoint operator on Hilbert space @xmath with dense
domain. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath , @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath .

Let @xmath . Then by definition for any @xmath , we have: @xmath .
However this shows that: @xmath , and @xmath . Thus @xmath . Therefore
@xmath . This finishes the proof.

We are ready to prove the following Hodge decomposition theorem:

###### Theorem 2.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold with measure @xmath , here
@xmath . Let @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: From the propositions above, we know:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We only need to prove the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear the two spaces on the right hand side are orthogonal to each
other. Take @xmath . By definition there are @xmath , such that @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath are in different spaces, we may write @xmath
such that: @xmath , and @xmath . Thus follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next let @xmath . Let @xmath . Take @xmath converging to @xmath such
that @xmath . Then there is the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we get: @xmath . Similarly @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from @xmath , and @xmath .

For the proof of the second part, recall @xmath . For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath The proof is complete.

###### Proposition 2.2.5.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, then:

@xmath , and @xmath .

Proof First notice @xmath is an extension of @xmath . Let @xmath , we
may write @xmath . Here @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . However @xmath ,
@xmath . So @xmath , and @xmath is in the domain of @xmath . But then
@xmath , by lemma 1. So @xmath , and therefore @xmath .

This gives: @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Similarly we can prove @xmath .

Remark: Restricted to @xmath forms, the above lemma can be obtained by
an approximation method as suggested by Gaffney [ 38 ] .

With these established, we are happy to use @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
for their closure without causing any confusion.

#### 2.3 The semigroup associated with @xmath

Since @xmath is non-positive, there is a semigroup @xmath with generator
@xmath defined by the spectral theorem. Furthermore @xmath solves:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a @xmath form.

###### Proposition 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Let @xmath , then @xmath ,
and @xmath .

Proof: See Gaffney [ 39 ] for a proof of the lemma for @xmath forms
(h=0). Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath Denote by @xmath and @xmath the
operators defined by the spectral theorem corresponding to an operator
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath , all @xmath and @xmath , so the spectral theorem gives the
following convergence result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus for @xmath , we have ( @xmath is automatically in @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath . Let @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the proof is finished noticing both sides of the equality above
consist of orthogonal forms.

### Chapter 3 Invariant measures and ergodic properties of BM on
manifolds of finite h-volume

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. There is an invariant
measure for h-Brownian motion, i.e. for the diffusion process with
generator @xmath . In this chapter we give a direct proof of the
existence of invariant measures and deduce some ergodic properties,
which are used in chapter 6 and 7. These ergodic properties are
essentially known and well treated in [ 52 ] and [ 61 ] , at least when
the weight @xmath is zero. However in their treatment, the processes are
required to have the @xmath property if the manifold is not compact. Our
treatment avoids the problem of having to assume the @xmath property for
the Brownian motion concerned.

The following lemma is a standard result from semigroup theory:

###### Lemma 3.0.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold given the measure @xmath .
Let @xmath . Denote by @xmath the heat semigroup. Then

@xmath and moreover:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove this, we only need to show for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the fact that @xmath . See chapter 2. Noticing the dual semigroup
@xmath equals @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof is finished.

Next we notice if @xmath is a complete Riemannian manifold of h-finite
volume, then @xmath is in the domain of @xmath (let @xmath be the
sequence in @xmath approximating the constant function @xmath as in the
appendix, then @xmath in @xmath ). Thus we have nonexplosion for a
h-Brownian motion in this case as is well known (see [ 40 ] for the case
of @xmath ). A quick proof is as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also have:

###### Theorem 3.0.2.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, then @xmath is an
invariant measure for @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each @xmath function @xmath .

Proof: First notice if the invariance property @xmath holds for
functions in @xmath , it holds for all @xmath functions since @xmath is
continuous on @xmath .

Next there is the following divergence theorem: let @xmath be a @xmath
1-form with @xmath also in @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be proved by taking approximations of @xmath forms by smooth
compactly supported forms and using the Green theorem on page 1.9 , as
proved in [ 42 ] for @xmath .

Let @xmath , then @xmath is in the domain of the h-Laplacian @xmath by
the previous lemma and we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recall for an elliptic system our semigroup @xmath has the strong Feller
property, i.e. it sends @xmath to @xmath . See [ 54 ] . For such
processes there are several notions of recurrence. The basic definition
is as follows:

###### Definition 3.0.1.

Denote by @xmath the probability law of a process @xmath starting from
@xmath . The process @xmath is called recurrent if for each @xmath , the
trajectories of @xmath return @xmath a.s. infinitely often to any given
open set in @xmath . It is called transient if for each @xmath , the
trajectories @xmath tend @xmath a.s. to infinity as @xmath .

Let @xmath be the potential kernel of the differential operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then in potential language, @xmath is transient if and only if @xmath is
everywhere finite on compact sets, i.e. when @xmath applied to @xmath
for @xmath compact is finite. It is recurrent if and only if @xmath is
identically infinite on open sets. So a strong Feller process is either
transient or recurrent as proved in [ 4 ] following [ 3 ] .

###### Theorem 3.0.3.

Let @xmath be an h-Brownian motion on a complete Riemannian manifold of
finite h-volume, then @xmath is recurrent.

We only need to show that it is not transient. Assume @xmath is
transient. Let @xmath be a compact set, then @xmath a.s. So @xmath by
the dominated convergence theorem and @xmath . But @xmath h-vol(K). This
gives a contradiction.

###### Proposition 3.0.4.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold of h-finite volume. Let
@xmath be the invariant probability measure, then we have for any
compact set @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here ”vol” denotes the h-volume.

Proof: First notice @xmath , so @xmath converges in @xmath to a harmonic
function. The convergence is also in @xmath since @xmath , and also the
limit function is a constant. So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

But

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Part II Completeness and properties at infinity

### Chapter 4 Properties at infinity of diffusion semigroups and
stochastic flows via weak uniform covers

#### 4.1 Introduction

I. Background

A diffusion process is said to be a @xmath diffusion if its semigroup
leaves invariant @xmath , the space of continuous functions vanishing at
infinity, in which case the semigroup is said to have the @xmath
property. A Riemannian manifold is said to be stochastically complete if
the Brownian motion on it is complete, it is also said to have the
@xmath property if the Brownian motion on it does. One example of a
Riemannian manifold which is stochastically complete is a complete
manifold with finite volume. See Gaffney [ 40 ] . More generally a
complete Riemannian manifold with Ricci curvature bounded from below is
stochastically complete and has the @xmath property as proved by Yau [
68 ] . See also Ichihara [ 44 ] , Dodziuk [ 20 ] , Karp-P. Li [ 49 ] ,
Bakry [ 5 ] , Grigoryán [ 41 ] , Hsu [ 43 ] , Davies [ 19 ] , and Takeda
[ 64 ] for further discussions in terms of volume growth and bounds on
Ricci curvature. For discussions on the behaviour at infinity of
diffusion processes, and the @xmath property, we refer the reader to
Azencott [ 4 ] and Elworthy [ 32 ] . But we would like to mention that a
flow consisting of diffeomorphisms (c.f. page 5.2.6 ) has the @xmath
property by arguing by contradiction as in [ 32 ] .

Those papers above are on a Riemannian manifold except for the last
reference. For a manifold without a Riemannian structure, Elworthy [ 31
] following It @xmath [ 46 ] showed that the diffusion solution to ( 1.1
) does not explode if there is a uniform cover for the coefficients of
the equation. See also Clark [ 15 ] . In particular this shows that the
s.d.e ( 1.1 ) does not explode on a compact manifold if the coefficients
are reasonably smooth. See [ 10 ] , [ 25 ] . To apply this method to
check whether a Riemannian manifold is stochastically complete, we
usually construct a stochastic differential equation whose solution is
Brownian motion.

II. Main results

The main aim [ 53 ] of this chapter is to give unified treatment to some
of the results from H. Donnelly-P. Li and L. Schwartz. It gives the
first a probabilistic interpretation and extends part of the latter. We
first introduce weak uniform covers in an analogous way to uniform
covers, which gives nonexplosion test by using estimations on exit times
of the diffusion considered. As a corollary this gives the known result
on nonexplosion of a Brownian motion on a complete Riemannian manifold
with Ricci curvature going to negative infinity at most quadratically in
the distance function [ 44 ] .

One interesting example is that a solution to a stochastic differential
equation on @xmath whose coefficients have linear growth has no
explosion and has the @xmath property. Notice under this condition, its
associated generator has quadratic growth. On the other hand let @xmath
, and let @xmath be an elliptic differential operator :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath . Let @xmath be the positive square
root of the matrix @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath . Then the s.d.e.
defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has generator @xmath . Furthermore if @xmath has quadratic growth and
@xmath has linear growth, then both @xmath and @xmath in the s.d.e.
above have linear growth. In this case any solution @xmath to the
following partial differential equation :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies : @xmath , if @xmath (see next part).

III. Heat equations, semigroups, and flows

Let @xmath be a compactification of @xmath , i.e. a compact Hausdorff
space which contains @xmath as a dense subset. We assume @xmath is first
countable. Let @xmath be a continuous function on @xmath . Consider the
following heat equation with initial boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is known that there is a unique minimal solution to the first two
equations on a stochastically complete manifold, the solution is in fact
given by the semigroup associated with Brownian motion on the manifold.
So the above equation is not solvable in general. However with a
condition imposed on the boundary of the compactification, Donnelly-Li [
21 ] showed that the heat semigroup satisfies ( 4.3 ). Here is the
condition and the theorem:

The ball convergence criterion: Let @xmath be a sequence in @xmath
converging to a point @xmath on the boundary, then the geodesic balls
@xmath , centered at @xmath radius @xmath , converge to @xmath as @xmath
goes to infinity for each fixed @xmath .

An example of manifolds which satisfies the ball convergence criterion
is @xmath with sphere at infinity. However this is not true if @xmath is
given the compactification of a cylinder with a circle at infinity added
at each end. The one point compactification also satisfies the ball
convergence criterion. Another class of examples is manifolds with their
geometric compactifications and with the cone topology, i.e. the
boundary of the manifold are equivalent classes of geodesic rays. See [
23 ] . Recall that two geodesic rays @xmath and @xmath are said to be
equivalent if the the Riemannian distance @xmath between the two points
@xmath and @xmath is smaller than a constant for each @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.1 (H.Donnelly-P. Li).

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold with Ricci curvature
bounded from below. The over determined equation ( 4.1 )-( 4.3 ) is
solvable for any given continuous function @xmath on @xmath , if and
only if the ball convergence criterion holds for @xmath .

Notice that if the Brownian motion starting from @xmath converges to the
same point on the boundary to which @xmath converges, then ( 4.1 )-( 4.3
) is clearly solvable. See section 4 for details. We would also like to
consider the opposite question: Do we get any information on the
diffusion processes if we know the behaviour at infinity of the
associated semigroups? This is true for many cases. In particular, for
the one point compactification, Schwartz has the following theorem [ 60
] , which provides a partial converse to [ 32 ] :

###### Theorem 4.1.2 (L. Schwartz).

Let @xmath be the standard extension of @xmath to @xmath , the one point
compactification. Then the map @xmath is continuous from @xmath to
@xmath , the space of measurable maps with topology induced from
convergence in probability, if and only if the Semigroup @xmath has the
@xmath property and the map @xmath is continuous from @xmath to @xmath .

#### 4.2 Weak uniform covers and non-explosion

###### Definition 4.2.1.

[ 31 ] A stochastic dynamical system (1) is said to admit a uniform
cover( radius @xmath , bound @xmath ), if there are charts @xmath of
diffeomorphisms from open sets @xmath of the manifold onto open sets
@xmath of @xmath , such that:

1.  @xmath , each @xmath . ( @xmath denotes the open ball about @xmath ,
    radius @xmath ).

2.   The open sets @xmath cover the manifold.

3.   If @xmath is given by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with @xmath similarly defined, then both @xmath and @xmath are
    bounded by @xmath on @xmath . Here @xmath is the generator for the
    dynamical system.

Let @xmath . Equation ( 1.1 ) can be interpreted as It @xmath integral.

###### Definition 4.2.2.

A diffusion process @xmath is said to have a weak uniform cover if there
are pairs of connected open sets @xmath , and a non-increasing sequence
@xmath with @xmath , such that:

1.  @xmath , and the open sets @xmath cover the manifold. For @xmath
    denote by @xmath the first exit time of @xmath from the open set
    @xmath . Assume @xmath a.s. unless @xmath almost surely.

2.   There exists @xmath , a family of increasing open subsets of @xmath
    with @xmath , such that each @xmath is contained in one of these
    sets and intersects at most one boundary from @xmath .

3.   Let @xmath and @xmath , then for @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.  @xmath .

Notice the introduction of @xmath is only for giving an order to the
open sets @xmath . This is quite natural when looking at concrete
manifolds. In a sense the condition says the geometry of the manifold
under consideration changes slowly as far as the diffusion process is
concerned. In particular if the @xmath can be taken all equal, we take
@xmath ; e.g. when the number of open sets in the cover is finite. On a
Riemannian manifold the open sets are often taken as geodesic balls.

###### Lemma 4.2.1.

Assume there is a uniform cover for the stochastic dynamic system(1),
then the solution has a weak uniform cover with @xmath , all @xmath .

Proof: This comes directly from lemma 5 , Page 127 in [ 31 ] .

An example of a stochastic differential equation which has a weak
uniform cover but not a uniform cover is given by example 0 on page 50
and the example on page @xmath .

Remarks:

1.  If @xmath is a stopping time, then the inequality ( 4.4 ) gives the
    following from the strong Markov property of the process.:

    let @xmath , and @xmath , then when @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    since

      -- -- -------- -------- --
            @xmath   @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- --

    here @xmath denotes the distribution of @xmath .

2.  Denote by @xmath the heat solution on @xmath with Dirichlet boundary
    condition, then ( 4.4 ) is equivalent to the following: when @xmath
    ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

3.  The methods in the article work in infinite dimensions to give
    analogous results (when a Riemannian metric in not needed).

Exit times: Given such a cover, let @xmath . We define stopping times
@xmath as follows: Let @xmath . Let @xmath be the first exit time of
@xmath from the set @xmath . Then @xmath must be in one of the open sets
@xmath . Let

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Then @xmath are disjoint sets such that @xmath . In general we only need
to consider the nonempty sets of such. Define further the following: Let
@xmath , if @xmath . Otherwise if @xmath , let:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a similar way, the whole sequence of stopping times @xmath and sets
@xmath are defined for @xmath . Clearly @xmath so defined is measurable
with respect to the sub-algebra @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.2.

Given a weak uniform cover as above. Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof: Notice for such @xmath , @xmath . Therefore for @xmath we have:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

as in remark 1. Here @xmath is the characteristic function for a
measurable set @xmath , and @xmath denotes taking expectation.

###### Lemma 4.2.3.

If @xmath , @xmath non-increasing. Then there is a non-increasing
sequence @xmath , such that @xmath :

(i) @xmath

(ii) @xmath

Proof: Assume @xmath , all @xmath . Group the sequence @xmath in the
following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .  Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .  Clearly the @xmath ’s so defined satisfy the
requirements. @xmath

So without losing generality, we may assume from now on that the
constants @xmath for a weak uniform cover fulfill the two conditions in
the above lemma. With these established, we can now state the
nonexplosion result. The proof is analogous to that of theorem 6 on Page
129 in [ 31 ] .

###### Theorem 4.2.4.

If the solution @xmath of the equation @xmath has a weak uniform cover,
then it is complete(nonexplosion).

Proof: Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Pick up a number @xmath (possibly
depending on @xmath and @xmath ), such that @xmath . This is possible
since @xmath . So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath , we get: @xmath .

Remark: The argument in the above proof is valid if the definition of a
weak uniform cover is changed slightly, i.e. replacing the constant
@xmath by @xmath (with some slow growth condition, say @xmath is bounded
for all n) but keep all @xmath equal.

As a corollary, we have the following known result:

###### Corollary 4.2.5.

Let @xmath be the explosion time. If @xmath , for some @xmath . Then
there is no explosion.

Prove by induction. In the following we look into some examples:

Example 0: The flow @xmath on @xmath does not have a uniform cover. The
problem occurs at the origin. But it does have a weak uniform cover as
constructed below. First note that we only need to worry about the
origin. Take @xmath , for @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Here @xmath is a constant. Now

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by the maximal inequality. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See the remark above to see @xmath is a ”weak uniform cover”.

Example 1 : Let @xmath be a family of relatively compact open (proper)
subsets of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Assume there is a
sequence of numbers @xmath with @xmath , such that the following
inequality holds when @xmath and @xmath : @xmath . Then the diffusion
concerned does not explode by taking @xmath to be a weak uniform cover
and @xmath .

#### 4.3 Boundary behaviour of diffusion processes

To consider the boundary behaviour of diffusion processes, we introduce
the following concept:

###### Definition 4.3.1.

A weak uniform cover @xmath is said to be regular (at infinity for
@xmath ), if the following holds: let @xmath be a sequence in @xmath
converging to @xmath , and @xmath , then the corresponding open sets
@xmath converges to @xmath as well. A regular uniform cover can be
defined in a similar way.

For a point @xmath in @xmath , there are a succession of related open
sets @xmath , which are defined as follows: Let @xmath be the union of
all open sets from @xmath such that @xmath contains @xmath , and @xmath
be the union of all open sets from @xmath such that @xmath intersects
one of the small balls @xmath defining @xmath . Similarly @xmath are
defined. These sets are well defined and in fact form an increasing
sequence.

###### Lemma 4.3.1.

Assume @xmath has a regular (weak) uniform cover. Let @xmath be a
sequence of @xmath which converges to a point @xmath . Then @xmath
converges to @xmath as well for each fixed @xmath .

Proof: Note that by arguing by contradiction, we only need to prove the
following: let @xmath be a sequence @xmath , then @xmath , as @xmath .
First let @xmath .

By definition, for each @xmath , @xmath , there are open sets @xmath and
@xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore @xmath as
@xmath . Let @xmath be a sequence of points with @xmath . But @xmath
since @xmath does. So @xmath again from the definition of a regular weak
uniform cover. Therefore @xmath converges to @xmath as @xmath , which is
what we want. The rest can be proved by induction.

###### Theorem 4.3.2.

If the diffusion @xmath admits a regular weak uniform cover, with @xmath
, all @xmath , then the map @xmath can be extended to the
compactification @xmath continuously in probability with the restriction
to the boundary to be the identity map, uniformly in @xmath in finite
intervals. (We will say @xmath extends.)

Proof: Take @xmath and a sequence @xmath in @xmath converging to @xmath
. Let @xmath be a neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . We want to prove
for each @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath converges to @xmath , there is a number @xmath for each
@xmath , such that if @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath , Choose @xmath such
that @xmath . For such a number @xmath fixed, we have:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the constant in the definition of the weak uniform cover.
Let @xmath go to infinity to complete the proof.

Remark: If the @xmath can be taken all equal, theorem 4.2.4 , theorem
4.3.2 hold if ( 4.4 ) is relaxed to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some nonnegative function @xmath satisfying @xmath .

Example 2: Let @xmath with the one point compactification. Consider the
following s.d.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then if both @xmath and @xmath have linear growth, the solution has the
@xmath property.

Proof: There is a well known uniform cover for this system. See [ 15 ] ,
or [ 31 ] . A slight change gives us the following regular uniform
cover:

Take a countable set of points @xmath such that the open sets @xmath and
@xmath cover @xmath . Let @xmath ; and @xmath , for @xmath . Let @xmath
be the chart map on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This certainly defines a uniform cover(for details see Example 3 below).
Furthermore if @xmath and @xmath , then any @xmath satisfies the
following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . Thus we have a regular uniform cover which gives the
required @xmath property. @xmath

Example 3: Let @xmath , compactified with the sphere at infinity: @xmath
. Consider the same s.d.e as in the example above. Suppose both @xmath
and @xmath have sublinear growth of power @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for a constant @xmath . Then there is no explosion. Moreover the
solution @xmath extends.

Proof: The proof is as in example 2, we only need to construct a regular
uniform cover for the s.d.e.:

Take points @xmath in @xmath (with @xmath , @xmath ) , such that the
open sets @xmath defined by : @xmath , @xmath cover @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath , and let @xmath be the chart map from @xmath to
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a uniform cover for the stochastic dynamical system. In
fact, for @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly @xmath , and @xmath .

Next we show this cover is regular. Take a sequence @xmath converging to
@xmath in @xmath . Assume @xmath . Let @xmath . We want to prove @xmath
converge to @xmath . First the norm of @xmath converges to infinity as
@xmath , since @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be the biggest angle between points in @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is a uniform cover satisfying the convergence criterion for
the sphere compactification. The required result holds from the theorem.

This result is sharp in the sense there is a s.d.e. with coefficients
having linear growth but the solution to it does not extend to the
sphere at infinity to be identity:

Example 4: Let @xmath be a one dimensional Brownian motion. Consider the
following s.d.e on the complex plane @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The solution starting from @xmath is in fact @xmath , which does not
continuously extend to be the identity on the sphere at infinity.

Example 5: Let @xmath be a bounded open set of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
s.d.s. (in Itô form) on @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath , then there is no explosion. Here @xmath
denotes the distance function on @xmath and @xmath denotes the boundary
of @xmath .

Proof: Choose points @xmath such that the balls @xmath centered at
@xmath radius @xmath cover @xmath . Define a map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by the triangle inequality of the distance function. Thus we have a
uniform cover and so nonexplosion.

This result is sharp in the sense that there is an example (in Itô form)
given in [ 65 ] which satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , but has explosion. Here is the example (on @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath . See [ 65 ] for more discussions on nonexplosion on open
sets of @xmath .

#### 4.4 Boundary behaviour continued

A diffusion process is a @xmath diffusion if its semigroup has the
@xmath property. This is equivalent to the following [ 4 ] : let @xmath
be a compact set, and @xmath the first entrance time to @xmath of the
diffusion starting from @xmath , then @xmath for each @xmath , and each
compact set @xmath .

The following theorem follows from theorem 3.2 when @xmath in the
definition of weak uniform cover can be taken all equal:

###### Theorem 4.4.1.

Let @xmath be the one point compactification. Then if the diffusion
process @xmath admits a regular weak uniform cover, it is a @xmath
diffusion.

Proof: Let @xmath be a compact set with @xmath ; here @xmath is as in
definition 2.2. Let @xmath , @xmath , then there is a number @xmath such
that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take @xmath . Assume @xmath , some @xmath . Let @xmath be the first
entrance time of @xmath to @xmath , @xmath be the first entrance time of
@xmath to @xmath after @xmath , (if @xmath ), and so on. But @xmath for
@xmath , since any open sets from the cover intersects at most one
boundary of sets from @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The proof is complete by letting @xmath .

Example 6: Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, @xmath a fixed
point in @xmath . Denote by @xmath the distance between @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath the geodesic ball centered at @xmath radius @xmath , and
Ricci @xmath the Ricci curvature at @xmath .

Assumption A:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is defined as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a Brownian motion on @xmath with @xmath . Consider the
first exit time of @xmath from @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have the following estimate on @xmath from [ 43 ] :

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Here @xmath are positive constants independent of
@xmath .

This can be rephrased into the form we are familiar with: when @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath . So there is a @xmath , such that: @xmath , when @xmath .
Thus:

Estimation on exit times: when @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath , then we also have the following :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this we may proceed to prove the following from [ 43 ] :

Corollary: [Hsu]    A complete Riemannian manifold @xmath with Ricci
curvature satisfies assumption A is stochastically complete and has the
@xmath property.

Proof: There is a regular weak uniform cover as follows:

First take any @xmath , and let @xmath . Take points @xmath such that
@xmath covers the manifold. Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a regular weak
uniform cover for @xmath .

Remark: Grigoryán has the following volume growth test on nonexplosion.
The Brownian motion does not explode on a manifold if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the volume of a geodesic ball centered at a point
@xmath in @xmath . This result is stronger than the corollary obtained
above by the following comparison theorem on a @xmath dimensional
manifold: let @xmath denote the volume of the @xmath sphere of radius
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice @xmath is positive when @xmath is sufficiently big provided the
Ricci curvature is not nonnegative everywhere. So Grigoryán’s result is
stronger than the one obtained above.

The definition of weak uniform cover is especially suitable for the one
point compactification. For general compactification the following
definition explores more of the geometry of the manifold and gives
better result:

###### Definition 4.4.1.

Let @xmath be a compactification of @xmath , @xmath . A diffusion
process @xmath is said to have a uniform cover at point @xmath , if
there is a sequence @xmath of open neighbourhoods of @xmath in @xmath
and positive numbers @xmath and a constant @xmath , such that:

1.   The sequence of @xmath is strictly decreasing, with @xmath , and
    @xmath .

2.   The sequence of numbers @xmath is non-increasing with @xmath and
    @xmath .

3.   When @xmath , and @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Here @xmath denotes the first exit time of @xmath from the set
    @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.4.2.

If there is a uniform cover for @xmath , then @xmath converges to @xmath
continuously in probability as @xmath uniformly in @xmath in finite
interval.

Proof: The existence of @xmath will ensure @xmath , which allows us to
apply a similar argument as in the case of the one point
compactification. Here we denote by @xmath the first exit time of the
process @xmath from a set @xmath .

Let @xmath be a neighbourhood of @xmath . For this @xmath , by
compactness of @xmath , there is a number @xmath such that @xmath ,
since @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath . we may assume @xmath . Choose
@xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Denote by @xmath the first exit time of @xmath from @xmath
, @xmath the first exit time of @xmath from @xmath where defined.
Similarly @xmath are defined.

Notice if @xmath , then @xmath , for @xmath . Thus for @xmath there is
the following inequality from the definition and the Markov property:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The proof is finished.

#### 4.5 Properties at infinity of semigroups

Recall a semigroup is said to have the @xmath property, if it sends
@xmath , the space of continuous functions on @xmath vanishing at
infinity, to itself. Let @xmath be a compactification of @xmath . Denote
by @xmath the point at infinity for the one point compactification.
Corresponding to the @xmath property of semigroups we consider the
following @xmath property for @xmath :

###### Definition 4.5.1.

A semigroup @xmath is said to have the @xmath property for @xmath , if
for each continuous function @xmath on @xmath , the following holds: let
@xmath be a sequence converging to @xmath in @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To justify the definition, we notice if @xmath is the one point
compactification, condition @xmath will imply the @xmath property of the
semigroup. On the other hand if @xmath has the @xmath property, it has
the @xmath property for @xmath assuming nonexplosion. This is observed
by subtracting a constant function from a continuous function @xmath on
@xmath : Let @xmath , then @xmath . So @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath .

In fact the @xmath property holds for the one point compactification if
and only if there is no explosion and the @xmath property holds. These
properties are often possessed by processes, e.g. a Brownian motion on a
Riemannian manifold with Ricci curvature which satisfies ( 4.9 ) has
this property.

Before proving this claim, we observe first that:

###### Lemma 4.5.1.

If @xmath has the @xmath property for any compactification @xmath , it
must have the @xmath property for the one point compactification.

Proof: Let @xmath . Define a map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath : @xmath
on the interior of @xmath , and @xmath , if @xmath belongs to the
boundary. Then @xmath is a continuous map from @xmath to @xmath , since
for any compact set @xmath , the inverse set @xmath is open in @xmath .

Let @xmath be the composition map of @xmath with @xmath : @xmath . Thus
@xmath , and @xmath . So for a sequence @xmath converging to @xmath ,
@xmath . @xmath

We are ready to prove the following theorem:

###### Theorem 4.5.2.

If a semigroup @xmath has the @xmath property, the associated diffusion
process @xmath is complete.

Proof: We may assume the compactification under consideration is the one
point compactification from the the lemma above. Take @xmath , @xmath .
But @xmath as @xmath from the assumption. More precisely for any @xmath
, there is a compact set @xmath such that if @xmath , @xmath .

Let @xmath be a compact set containing @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
first exit time of @xmath from @xmath . So @xmath on the set @xmath .
Thus:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the characteristic function of set @xmath . Applying
the strong Markov property of the diffusion we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath , since @xmath is arbitrary. @xmath

In the following we examine the the relation between the behaviour at
@xmath of a diffusion process and the diffusion semigroup.

###### Theorem 4.5.3.

The semigroup @xmath has the @xmath property if and only if the
diffusion process @xmath is complete and can be extended to @xmath
continuously in probability with @xmath .

Proof: Assume @xmath is complete and extends. Take a point @xmath , and
sequence @xmath converging to @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any continuous function on @xmath , by the dominated convergence
theorem.

On the other hand @xmath does not have the @xmath property if the
assumption above is not true. In fact let @xmath be a sequence
converging to @xmath , such that for some neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath
, and a number @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is therefore a subsequence @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus there exists @xmath , such that if @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But since @xmath is a compact Hausdorff space, there is a continuous
function @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath , and @xmath ,
for any open set @xmath in @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So @xmath @xmath

As is known, a flow consisting of diffeomorphisms has the @xmath
property. But this is , in general, not true for the @xmath property.
See example 4.

###### Corollary 4.5.4.

Assume the diffusion process @xmath admits a weak uniform cover regular
for @xmath , then its diffusion semigroup @xmath has the @xmath
property. The same is true for a general compactification if all @xmath
in the weak uniform cover can be taken equal.

Example 7: [ 21 ] Let @xmath be a complete connected Riemannian manifold
with Ricci curvature bounded from below. Let @xmath be a
compactification such that the ball convergence criterion holds (ref.
section 1). In particular the over determined equation ( 4.1 )-( 4.3 )
is solvable for any continuous function @xmath on @xmath if the ball
convergence criterion holds.

Proof: We keep the notation of example 6. Let @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath is the constant in example 6. Let @xmath be a fixed point, and
@xmath be compact sets in @xmath . Take points @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath cover the manifold. Then @xmath is a weak uniform cover from
(4.10) and (4.11). Moreover this is a regular cover if the ball
convergence criterion holds for the compactification.

## Part III Strong completeness, derivative semigroup, and moment
stability

### Chapter 5 On the existence of flows: strong completeness

#### 5.1 Introduction

A stochastic dynamical system @xmath is said to be complete if its
explosion time @xmath is infinite almost surely for each @xmath in
@xmath . It is called strongly complete if there is a version of the
solution which is jointly continuous in time and space for all time. In
this case the solution is called a continuous flow . Examples of s.d.s.
which are complete but not strongly complete can be found in [ 31 ] , [
47 ] , and [ 52 ] .

The known results on the existence of a continuous flow are concentrated
on @xmath and compact manifolds. On @xmath results are given (for Itô
equations) in terms of global Lipschitz or similar conditions. See
Blagovescenskii and Friedlin [ 9 ] . The problems concerning the
diffeomorphism property of flows have been discussed by e.g. Kunita [ 51
] , Carverhill and Elworthy [ 10 ] . See Taniguchi [ 65 ] for
discussions on the strong completeness of a stochastic dynamical system
on an open set of @xmath . For discussions of higher derivatives of
solution flows on @xmath , see Krylov [ 50 ] and Norris [ 58 ] .

On a compact manifold, a stochastic differential equation with @xmath
coefficients is strongly complete. In fact the solution flow is almost
as smooth as the coefficients of the stochastic differential equation.
More precisely the solution flow is @xmath if the coefficients are
@xmath . Moreover the flow consists of diffeomorphisms. See Kunita [ 51
] , Elworthy [ 30 ] , and Carverhill and Elworthy [ 10 ] . For
discussions in the framework of diffeomorphism groups see Baxendale [ 6
] and Elworthy [ 31 ] .

In general we know very little about strong completeness. Our aim is to
prove strong completeness given nonexplosion and certain regularity
properties of the solution.

To begin with we quote the following theorem on the existence of a
partial flow from [ 31 ] (first proved in [ 51 ] , extended later in [
31 ] , and [ 10 ] ):

###### Theorem 5.1.1.

[ 31 ] Suppose @xmath , and @xmath are @xmath , for @xmath . Then there
is a partially defined flow @xmath which is a maximal solution to @xmath
such that if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then there is a set @xmath of full measure such that for all @xmath :

1.  @xmath is open in @xmath for each @xmath , i.e. @xmath is lower
    semicontinuous.

2.  @xmath is in @xmath and is a diffeomorphism onto an open subset of
    @xmath . Moreover the map : @xmath is continuous into @xmath , with
    the topology of uniform convergence on compacta of the first r-1
    derivatives.

3.   Let @xmath be a compact set and @xmath . Then

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    almost surely on the set @xmath . (Here @xmath is a fixed point of
    @xmath and @xmath is any complete metric on @xmath .)

Remark: (1). For each compact set @xmath , @xmath almost surely. This is
easily seen from @xmath a.s. for each @xmath and the fact that a lower
semicontinuous function on a compact set is bounded from below and
assumes its minimum.

(2). As pointed out in [ 32 ] , if there are two partial flows @xmath ,
and @xmath which satisfy conditions 1-3 of theorem for the @xmath
topology, then we have uniqueness: for all @xmath , @xmath almost
surely. Consequently @xmath almostly surely, and for each compact set
@xmath , @xmath almost surely. In particular if we have a version of the
solution which is jointly continuous, then we actually have a version
smooth in the @xmath topology by part 3 of the theorem above.

From the theorem we see that starting from a compact set, the solution
can be chosen to be continuous until part of it explodes. This and the
following example suggests that strong completeness is a very demanding
property, and there is a rich layer between being complete and being
strongly complete.

Example: [ 30 ] , [ 31 ] Let @xmath , and @xmath . Consider the
following stochastic differential equation @xmath on @xmath - @xmath for
@xmath . The solution is: @xmath , which is complete since for a fixed
starting point @xmath , @xmath almost surely never hits @xmath . But it
is not strongly complete. However for any @xmath - @xmath dimensional
hyperplane (or a submanifold) @xmath in the manifold, @xmath a.s., since
a Brownian motion does not charge a set of codimension @xmath . To get
an example on a complete metric space, apply the inversion map @xmath in
complex form as in [ 10 ] . The resulting system on @xmath is @xmath
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The corresponding solution is in fact (in complex notation): @xmath .
We’ll continue this example on page 5.2.4 .

This leads to the following definition, which originally uses @xmath
-dimensional sub-manifolds, those @xmath -dimensional sub-manifolds are
replaced by @xmath -simplices at the suggestion of D. Elworthy.

###### Definition 5.1.1.

A stochastic dynamical system on a manifold is called strongly @xmath
-complete if @xmath a.s. for every @xmath .

Here @xmath is the space of images of all smooth (smooth in the sense of
extending over an open neighborhood) singular p-simplices. Recall a
singular p-simplex in @xmath is a map from the standard p-simplex to
@xmath . For convenience we also use the term singular p-simplex for the
image of a singular p-simplex map.

The example above on @xmath - @xmath (for @xmath ) gives us a s.d.s.
which is strongly n-2 complete, but not strongly (n-1)-complete. It is
strongly (n-2)-complete since a singular (n-2)-simplex has finite
Hausdorff (n-2) measure and is thus not charged by Brownian motion. It
is not strongly (n-1) complete from proposition 5.2.3 on page 5.2.3 .

Of all these ”completeness” notions, we are particularly interested in
strong 1-completeness, which helps us to get a result on @xmath (see
page 6.3.1 ) and is used to get a homotopy vanishing result in theorem
@xmath replacing the obvious requirement of strong completeness. It
turns out on most occasions, we only need strong 1-completeness and this
follows from natural assumptions.

Once we get strong completeness, naturally we would like to know when
does the flow consist of diffeomorphisms , i.e. there is a version of
the flow such that except for a set of probability zero, @xmath is a
diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath . This
is basically the ”onto” property of the flow, since the flow is always
injective as showed in [ 52 ] and by part 2 of theorem 5.1.1 . We will
discuss this at the end of the next section.

Note: Results in this chapter remain true when ( 1.1 ) is changed to a
time dependent equations.

#### 5.2 Main Results

If not specified, by @xmath we mean the partial flow defined in theorem
@xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.1.

If the stochastic differential equation considered is

strongly p-complete, then @xmath a.s. for any @xmath dimensional
submanifold @xmath of @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath be a @xmath dimensional submanifold. Since all smooth
differential manifolds have a smooth triangulation [ 55 ] , we can
write: @xmath . Here @xmath are smooth singular p-simplexes. But @xmath
a.s. for each @xmath from the assumption. Thus @xmath is continuous a.s.
and thus so is @xmath itself. Thus @xmath a.s. from remark 2 on page
5.1.1 .

Note if @xmath equals the dimension of @xmath , p-completeness gives
back the usual definition of strong completeness, i.e. the partial flow
defined in theorem 5.1.1 satisfies @xmath almost surely as showed above.
See also remark 2 after theorem @xmath . In this case we will continue
to use strong completeness for strong n-completeness.

We need the following cocycle property from [ 31 ] for the next
proposition: For almost all @xmath , for all @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the exceptional set for ( 5.2 ) can be taken independent of
@xmath and @xmath , according to a recent survey by L. Arnold
(manuscript). However we do not need this refinement here.

###### Proposition 5.2.2.

Let @xmath . If there is a number @xmath such that: @xmath , then @xmath
almost surely.

Proof: There is no explosion by corollary 4.2.5 . Let @xmath be the set
of @xmath such that if @xmath , then @xmath is continuous on @xmath .
Consider @xmath which is continuous on @xmath if @xmath . Let @xmath .
Thus @xmath for @xmath and @xmath has measure zero. Inductively we get
@xmath almostly surely.

The following proof was suggested to me by D. Elworthy, improving an
earlier result of myself proved in more restrictive situation:

###### Proposition 5.2.3.

A stochastic dynamical system on a n-dimensional

manifold is strongly complete if strongly (n-1)-complete.

Proof: Since strong n-completeness holds for compact manifolds, we shall
assume @xmath is not compact. Let @xmath be a geodesic ball centered at
some point @xmath in @xmath with radius smaller than the injectivity
radius at @xmath . Since @xmath can be covered by a countable number of
such balls, we only need to prove @xmath almost surely.

Let @xmath be such a ball. It clearly divides @xmath into two parts, one
bounded and the other unbounded. Write @xmath . Here @xmath is the
bounded piece. Fix @xmath . By the ambient isotopy theorem there is a
diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath given by: @xmath for @xmath some
diffeomorphism from @xmath to its image, and satisfying:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath , @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

on @xmath .

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

here @xmath denotes the projection to @xmath . Thus @xmath is compact.
By @xmath , @xmath , for @xmath , stays in a compact region. So @xmath
almost surely from part 3 of theorem 5.1.1 .

Take a sequence of nested relatively compact open sets @xmath such that
it is a cover for @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a standard smooth
cut off function such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath the solution flow to the s.d.s. @xmath
. Then @xmath can be taken smooth since both @xmath and @xmath have
compact support. Let @xmath be the first exit time of @xmath from @xmath
and @xmath for a compact set @xmath . Thus @xmath is a stopping time.
Furthermore @xmath before @xmath .

Clearly @xmath , and in fact @xmath as proved in [ 10 ] .

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 5.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complete connected Riemannian manifold. Suppose all the
coefficients of the stochastic differential equation are @xmath , and
assume there is a point @xmath with @xmath almost surely. Then we have
@xmath for all @xmath , if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for every compact set @xmath and each @xmath . In particular when @xmath
holds we have strong 1-completeness, and strong completeness if
dimension of @xmath is less or equal to @xmath .

proof: Let @xmath . We shall show @xmath . Take a piecewise @xmath curve
@xmath connecting the two points @xmath and @xmath . Suppose it is
parametrized by arc length @xmath with @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the image set of the curve. Let @xmath , and @xmath .
Then on @xmath , @xmath is a piecewise @xmath curve. Denote by @xmath
the length of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a stopping time such that @xmath , then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus for each @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Assume @xmath . Take @xmath with @xmath . Now @xmath is a bounded set
a.s. since @xmath is sample continuous in @xmath and @xmath . Thus there
is @xmath a.s. such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

But by theorem @xmath , almostly surely on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

So by the triangle inequality we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining @xmath with @xmath , we get, almostly surely on @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath almostly surely on @xmath .

Let @xmath be the stopping times defined immediately before this
theorem, which converge to @xmath . Then there is a subsequence of
@xmath , still denote by @xmath , such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However from equation ( 5.6 ) and our hypothesis @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath almost surely. Applying Fatou’s lemma, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives a contradiction. Thus @xmath . In particular @xmath for all
@xmath .

Next take @xmath . Replacing @xmath by @xmath in the proof above we get
@xmath This is because in the proof above we only used the fact that
there is a point @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath satisfies
@xmath .

To see strong 1-completeness, just notice the set of smooth singular
1-simplexes @xmath is contained in @xmath . The proof is finished.

Remark:

(1). We only need inequality @xmath to hold for one sequence of
exhausting open sets @xmath . In particular they may be different for
different compact sets @xmath .

(2). The second inequality holds if we assume:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each number @xmath and compact set @xmath . However we keep the
inequality with stopping times since it is sometimes easier to calculate
from the original stochastic differential equation, and gives sharper
result as will be shown later in the examples. See lemma 5.3.4 on page
5.3.4 .

(3). The requirement on the connectness can be removed by assuming that
the s.d.e. is complete at one point of each component of the manifold.

Example: (1). The requirement for the manifold to be complete is
necessary. e.g. the example on @xmath on page 5.1.1 satisfies equation (
5.4 ) but is not strongly complete (see also the example on page 7.5 ).
In fact the transformed flow @xmath on @xmath by inverting does not
satisfy the condition of the theorem on its derivative and it is not
strongly 1-complete.

(2). Theorem 5.2.4 does not work with equation ( 5.4 ) replaced by

@xmath . This can be seen by using the above example on @xmath but with
the following Riemannian metric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the metric is complete and for each compact set @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say a s.d.e. is complete at one point if there is a point @xmath in
@xmath with @xmath . From the theorem we have the following corollary,
which is known for elliptic diffusions.

###### Corollary 5.2.5.

A stochastic differential equation with @xmath coefficients and
satisfying hypothesis @xmath in theorem @xmath is complete if it is
complete at one point.

With strong 1-completeness we may apply the following Kolmogorov’s
criterion on regularity [ 31 ] to get strong p-completeness:

Kolmogorov’s criterion: Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold
with @xmath denoting the distance between two points. Let @xmath be a
set of @xmath -valued random variables indexed by @xmath for which there
exist positive numbers @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hods for all @xmath in @xmath . Then there is a modification @xmath of
@xmath such that the paths of @xmath are continuous. Here @xmath is the
distance between these two points (induced from @xmath ).

There is a corresponding result for pathwise continuous stochastic
processes @xmath parametrized by @xmath . There is a version which is
jointly continuous in @xmath and @xmath on @xmath for each @xmath , if
the following is satisfied:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath in @xmath . This comes naturally by letting @xmath with
the following metric: @xmath .

Recall a map @xmath is called Lipschitz continuous if there is a
constant @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , @xmath in @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the space of all the image sets of such a Lipschitz
map. This space contains @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.6.

Let @xmath be a complete connected Riemannian manifold. Consider a
s.d.e. which is complete at one point and with @xmath coefficients. Let
@xmath . Then we have @xmath for each @xmath if for each positive number
@xmath and compact set @xmath there is a number @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular this implies strong d-completeness.

Proof: Let @xmath be a Lipschitz map from @xmath to @xmath with image
set @xmath . Take a compact set @xmath with the following property: for
any two points of @xmath , there is a piecewise @xmath curve lying in
@xmath connecting them.

For example the set @xmath can be taken in the following way: Let @xmath
be a minimum length curve in @xmath connecting two points of @xmath ;
its length will be smaller or equal to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
closure of the union of the image sets of such curves.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two points from @xmath . Let @xmath be a
piecewise @xmath curve in @xmath connecting them. Denote by @xmath the
image set of @xmath and @xmath its length. By proposition @xmath ,
@xmath . Thus for any @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Taking infimum over a sequence of such curves which minimizing the
distance between @xmath and @xmath we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Lipschitz property of the map @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have a modification of @xmath of @xmath which is jointly
continuous from @xmath , according to the Kolmogorov’s criterion. So for
a fixed point @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

almost surely. This give a contradiction. So @xmath for all @xmath .

Notice every singular d-simplex has a representation of a Lipschitz map
from the cube @xmath to @xmath (by squashing one half of the cube to the
diagonal). This gives the required strong p-completeness.

This theorem is used in section 7.3 to get a cohomology vanishing
result.

Flows of diffeomorphisms

To look at the diffeomorphism property, we first quote the following
theorem (first proved by Kunita) from [ 10 ] :

Let @xmath . Assume both @xmath and @xmath are @xmath . If the s.d.s. is
strongly complete, then it has a flow which is surjective for each
@xmath with probability one if and only if the adjoint system:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is strongly complete.

For a manifold this works equally well since equation ( 5.10 ) does give
the inverse map up to distribution. Thus if both equations ( 1.1 ) and (
5.10 ) satisfy the conditions of the theorem for strong completeness,
the solution flow @xmath consists of diffeomorphisms. When there is a
uniform cover for @xmath , there is no explosion for both @xmath and
@xmath . In this case, the solution consists of diffeomorphisms if for
@xmath compact:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since both ( 1.1 ) and ( 5.10 ) are strongly complete by theorem 5.2.6 .

#### 5.3 Applications

In this section we look at the stochastic differential equation to see
when the conditions for the theorems above are fulfilled.

As before let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold. Let @xmath , @xmath .
Noticing @xmath is almost surely nonzero for all @xmath , [ 52 ] , we
have the following formula for the @xmath power of the norm of @xmath
from [ 26 ] for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath . Let @xmath . Define @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a stopping time, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be a positive number, then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Burkholder-Davies-Gundy inequality and Hölder’s inequality we
get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the constant in Burkholder’s inequality.

Let @xmath be a relatively compact open set. Denote by @xmath the first
exit time of @xmath from @xmath . For simplicity we write @xmath instead
of @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath are @xmath , there is a constant @xmath such
that: @xmath and @xmath on the set @xmath . Let @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By Gronwall’s lemma:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, taking an orthornormal basis @xmath of @xmath , we
have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes some constant depending only on @xmath and @xmath .
Thus we arrived at the following useful lemma, which is fairly well
known.

###### Lemma 5.3.1.

(1). For each relatively compact open set @xmath , there is a constant
@xmath depending only on the bounds of the coefficients of the
stochastic differential equation on @xmath such that for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a constant depends on @xmath .

(2). Assume both @xmath and @xmath are bounded. By the latter we mean

@xmath for some constant @xmath and all @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Here @xmath is a constant and @xmath depends only on
@xmath . In particular this is the case if @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath are all bounded.

For the proof of @xmath , let @xmath in the above calculation, for
@xmath a sequence of nested relatively compact open set exhausting
@xmath . Then take the limit.

As a corollary, we have the following result on strong completeness:

###### Corollary 5.3.2.

Let @xmath be a complete connected Riemannian manifold. Assume @xmath is
bounded and there is a constant @xmath such that @xmath . Then the
s.d.s. is strongly complete if complete for one point. Note the last
condition is satisfied if @xmath is bounded.

Note we do not use any sort of nondegeneracy in the above corollary.

Let @xmath . Assume the s.d.e. is given in Itô form. We have as a
corollary the following known result:

###### Corollary 5.3.3.

A stochastic differential equation on @xmath (in Itô form ) is strongly
complete if all coefficients are @xmath and globally Lipschitz
continuous.

Proof: First we have completeness as is well known. Write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note also on @xmath : @xmath on @xmath . Substituting these in equation
@xmath the second derivatives of @xmath disappear. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So the boundedness of @xmath and @xmath give us strong completeness.

###### Lemma 5.3.4.

Let @xmath be a sequence of relatively compact open sets exhausting
@xmath , and @xmath the stopping times defined before theorem @xmath on
page 5.2 . Here @xmath is a compact set.

Assume @xmath for some constant @xmath . Then for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proof: First we have: @xmath for @xmath by a similar proof as for @xmath
. So from @xmath on page 5.12 , we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the martingale part disappears. Thus, just as before, there is the
following estimate:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from @xmath and Gronwall’s lemma.

Remark: In fact @xmath holds if @xmath is replaced by @xmath . Here
@xmath is the first exit time of @xmath from @xmath .

From the proof, we have the following corollary of theorem 5.2.4 :

###### Corollary 5.3.5.

A s.d.e. is strongly 1-complete if it is complete at one point and
satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a constant.

##### The case of Brownian system

Next we consider special cases. First we assume the s.d.s. considered is
a Brownian motion with drift @xmath . Then @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the curvature tensor and Ric is the Ricci curvature.
Thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

And therefore we have the following theorem:

###### Theorem 5.3.6.

Assume the s.d.s. is a Brownian motion with gradient drift @xmath . Then
if @xmath is bounded from below with @xmath bounded the Brownian motion
is strongly complete. Here Hess @xmath .

proof: By a result in [ 5 ] , we have completeness if @xmath
Ricc-Hess(h) is bounded from below. The strong completeness follows from
theorem 5.2.6 and lemma 5.3.1 .

In the above theorem, the s.d.s. may be a Brownian motion with a general
drift if we know the system does not explode a priori. The nonexplosion
problem is discussed in chapter 4 and chapter 7.

##### The case of gradient Brownian system

Next we consider gradient Brownian motion as in the introduction and
follow the ideas of [ 28 ] . Let @xmath be the space of normal vectors
to @xmath at @xmath . There is the second fundamental form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the shape operator:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

related by @xmath . If @xmath is the orthogonal projection, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as showed in [ 31 ] and [ 25 ] .

Let @xmath be an o.n.b. for @xmath . Consider @xmath as a linear map
from @xmath to @xmath . Denote by @xmath the corresponding Hilbert
Schmidt norm, and @xmath the norm of a vector in @xmath . Accordingly we
have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

There is also:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the corollary:

###### Corollary 5.3.7.

Assume the second fundamental form is bounded. Then the gradient
Brownian motion with drift @xmath is strongly complete if @xmath is
bounded from below. It consists of diffeomorphisms if both @xmath and
@xmath are bounded from below.

Proof: The strong completeness is clear from the previous theorem. The
diffeomorphism property comes from the fact that its adjoint equation is
also a gradient Brownian system (with drift - @xmath ).

Further, there is the following Gauss’s theorem:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Giving:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the completeness and strongly completeness of a gradient Brownian
motion rely only on the bound on the second fundamental form and the
bound on the drift: there is no explosion if @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath a function on @xmath satisfying:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from Gauss theorem and the example on page 4.4.1 in chapter 4.
Furthermore a gradient Brownian motion is strongly complete if the
second fundamental form is bounded.

### Chapter 6 Derivative semigroups

#### 6.1 Introduction

Assume the derivative of the solution flow of equation @xmath has first
moment: @xmath , we may define a semigroup (formally) of linear
operators @xmath on 1-forms as follows: for @xmath and @xmath a 1-form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is in fact a semigroup on @xmath , the space of bounded 1-forms, if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We are interested in three problems:

1.  When is @xmath well defined, as a strongly continuous semigroup?

2.  When is @xmath ?

3.  When is @xmath , if @xmath ?

If all answers to the questions are yes, we can obtain informations of
heat semigroups and answer the question wether @xmath sends closed forms
to closed forms. These problems are also the basis for the next two
chapters and will be discussed in detail and in great generality in this
chapter. For related discussions, see Vauthier [ 66 ] and Elworthy [ 25
] .

However first let @xmath . We have nonexplosion if @xmath for @xmath and
if @xmath for all @xmath , as will be shown in proposition @xmath in
chapter 7. So it is natural to assume completeness. For a complete
stochastic dynamical system on a complete Riemannian manifold, two basic
assumptions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

will give everything we need:

1.  @xmath , for @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , for @xmath

3.  and strong 1-completeness.

as shown later. c.f. theorem @xmath on page 5.2.4 , theorem @xmath on
page 6.3.1 and proposition @xmath on page 7.2.2 . This basic assumption
is satisfied by solutions of a s.d.e. with all the coefficients and
their first two derivatives bounded as shown in section 5.3 .

But first we recall the properties of probability semigroups for
functions.

#### 6.2 Semigroups for functions

Let @xmath be the probability semigroup on bounded measurable functions
determined by our stochastic dynamical system. Let @xmath be its
generator. Then @xmath on @xmath , the space of smooth compactly
supported functions. If further we assume completeness, then it sends
bounded continuous functions to bounded continuous functions as showed
in [ 31 ] .

Let @xmath , then @xmath is a strongly continuous @xmath semigroup
restricting to @xmath (see [ 33 ] ). Associated with @xmath , there is
also the functional analytic semigroup @xmath . These two semigroups
agree as in [ 33 ] . See also the proposition below. Thus from theorem
1.6.1 on page 1.6.1 , @xmath is smooth on @xmath . Moreover @xmath is
@xmath contractive on @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . See [ 37 ] for
more discussions on the @xmath contractivity of probability semigroups.

Finally we have the following known result :

###### Proposition 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: First we show @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is a strongly
continuous @xmath semigroup on @xmath , it extends to a strongly
continuous @xmath semigroup @xmath on the whole @xmath space. Let @xmath
be the generator of @xmath . Then @xmath is a closed operator by theorem
1.4.1 and agrees with @xmath on @xmath . Thus @xmath since there is only
one closed extension for @xmath from the essential self-adjointness of
@xmath obtained in chapter 2.

Applying the uniqueness theorem for the semigroup of class @xmath
(theorem 1.4.1 ), we get @xmath . Thus @xmath on @xmath .

Next let @xmath be an increasing sequence of functions in @xmath
approaching @xmath with @xmath . Such a sequence exists as shown in the
appendix. Then @xmath since @xmath is in @xmath (c.f. theorem @xmath ).
But @xmath for each @xmath . So the limits must be equal: @xmath .

#### 6.3 @xmath and @xmath

With the help of results on strong 1-completeness, we have the following
theorem which improves a theorem in [ 31 ] , where strong completeness
and bounds on curvatures are assumed.

###### Theorem 6.3.1.

Assume strong 1-completeness and suppose for each compact set @xmath ,
there is a constant @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath function @xmath with both @xmath and @xmath bounded.

Proof: Let @xmath . Take a geodesic curve @xmath starting from @xmath
with velocity @xmath . By the strong 1-completeness, @xmath is a.s.
differentiable with respect to @xmath . So for almostly all @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to show: @xmath . By the strong 1-completeness, we know @xmath
is continuous in @xmath for almost all @xmath . Thus:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

On the other hand, @xmath is continuous in @xmath if @xmath is uniformly
integrable in @xmath with respect to the probability measure @xmath .
This is so if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the proof is finished.

###### Corollary 6.3.2.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Suppose our s.d.s. is
complete. If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath , and @xmath compact, then @xmath for all functions
@xmath with both @xmath and @xmath bounded.

In terms of the coefficients of s.d.e., we have:

###### Corollary 6.3.3.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannain manifold. Suppose our s.d.s. is
complete and satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath if both @xmath and @xmath are bounded. Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: From corollary 5.3.5 on page 5.3.5 , we have strong
1-completeness. Furthermore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath .

Remark: For a stochastic differential equation on @xmath (in Itô form),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as on page 5.3.3 . Also notice if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the system is complete. Thus our result on @xmath improves a
theorem in [ 31 ] , where global Lipschitz continuity is assumed of the
coefficients. Here is a brief proof for the nonexplosion claim we made:

Let @xmath , @xmath . On @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be the first exit time of @xmath from the ball @xmath . Write
@xmath for simplicity. Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By Grownall’s inequality:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath , so there is no explosion.

###### Lemma 6.3.4.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Consider a s.d.s. with
generator @xmath . Let @xmath . Then the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

This is because @xmath from section 6.2 and @xmath from proposition
@xmath .

###### Corollary 6.3.5.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume the conditions of
the above theorem and @xmath . Then for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Remark: We will show later that if @xmath for @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath bounded, then there is no explosion. See proposition @xmath and
its corollary.

Finally as known in the compact case [ 25 ] , we also have:

###### Proposition 6.3.6.

Assume @xmath is finite and continuous in @xmath for @xmath . Here
@xmath is positive constant. Let @xmath be a 1-form in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for each @xmath . Here @xmath is as defined on page @xmath .

In particular if @xmath and @xmath is closed:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the s.d.s. considered is a gradient system, we do not require @xmath
to be closed in the above.

Proof: Take @xmath . Applying Itô formula to @xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is a local operator(so @xmath remain bounded and
continuous) and @xmath is continuous in @xmath .

#### 6.4 Analysis of @xmath for Brownian systems

This section will be devoted to discussions of @xmath in the special
case of @xmath . The situation here is particular nice, since the
generator are both self-adjoint and elliptic. However to start with we
would like to mention the following relevant theorem for a general
elliptic generator, part 2 of which improves a theorem of Elworthy [ 26
] (part 1,3 and 4 here are new):

As usual let @xmath be a sequence of nested relatively compact open sets
in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Denote by @xmath the first exit time
of @xmath from @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.4.1.

Let @xmath . Let @xmath be a regular solution of the heat equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for all @xmath . Then @xmath if one of the following
conditions hold:

1.   Suppose @xmath and @xmath are uniformly bounded in @xmath in @xmath
    for any @xmath , and assume the s.d.s. is complete with @xmath
    bounded and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   Assume completeness, @xmath bounded, and @xmath for each @xmath and
    @xmath .

3.   Suppose @xmath is uniformly bounded in @xmath in @xmath for all
    @xmath , and assume the s.d.s. is complete with @xmath for some
    constant @xmath and each @xmath .

4.   Assume for each @xmath , @xmath converges uniformly in @xmath to
    zero as @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof: (a). Let @xmath , and @xmath . First assume completeness. Apply
Itô formula to @xmath for fixed number @xmath , to get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Take expectations on both sides to get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

under either of the first two conditions.

(b). For the rest we apply the Itô formula with stopping time:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Setting @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking expectations of both sides above to get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(c). Assuming part 3, @xmath is uniformly integrable. So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath from completeness while

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(d). For part 4: Let @xmath . There is a number @xmath s.t. if @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Letting @xmath , we get @xmath . Thus the result.

Remarks: (1). For gradient system, we do not need the assumption @xmath
in the theorem.

(2).Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold and @xmath . This
theorem gives us the equivalence of @xmath and @xmath for closed forms,
while corollary 6.3.5 only gives us the equivalence for exact forms.

(3). Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a regular solution to the heat
equation. But we know @xmath from section 2.3. So in the above theorem
we only need @xmath instead of @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Corollary 6.4.2.

Let @xmath be a manifold with Ric-2Hess(h) bounded from below. Consider
a Brownian system with gradient drift. If for some constant @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath for bounded closed 1-forms @xmath . Note the required
inequality holds if @xmath for some constsnt @xmath .

Proof: Note there is no explosion by [ 5 ] . Furthermore if
Ricci-2Hess(h) is bounded from below by a constant @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in [ 25 ] . Here @xmath is the Hessian flow satisfying:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath for bounded 1-form @xmath . See [ 26 ] for a proof.
Hence @xmath is uniformly bounded in @xmath in finite intervals. Apply
part 3 of theorem 6.4.1 and lemma 5.3.4 , we get the conclusion. End of
the proof.

Note also if @xmath (use @xmath for @xmath ), we may get more
information on the heat semigroup:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

But @xmath has the @xmath property if Ricci is bounded from below. Thus
@xmath converges to zero uniformly in @xmath in finite intervals as
@xmath goes to infinity.

For more discussions on ralations between the Ricci flow and the
derivative flow, see [ 29 ] .

The following result does not assume completeness. It is interesting
since it does not assume any condition on the heat semigroup either. In
fact this is used in the next chapter to get a nonexplosion result. See
proposition 7.2.2 .

###### Proposition 6.4.3.

Let @xmath , take @xmath to be the conjugate number to @xmath : @xmath .
Then @xmath is a @xmath semigroup, if for each @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also if there is a number @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the map @xmath is continuous into @xmath at @xmath for each @xmath ,
then @xmath is a strongly continuous @xmath semigroup.

Furthermore if also @xmath , then @xmath is a strongly continuous
semigroup in @xmath for @xmath .

Proof: Take a 1-form @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last equality comes from the fact that @xmath is the invariant
measure for @xmath . So we have showed @xmath is in @xmath .

To show the strong continuity of @xmath in @xmath , we only need to
prove @xmath is continuous for @xmath in @xmath by the uniform
boundedness principle(see @xmath in [ 22 ] ).

Take @xmath . First we have pointwise continuity from the @xmath
continuity of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath in @xmath and @xmath .

Next we show @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By the invariance property, we also have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is a constant. For the last term we may change order of
taking expectation and taking limit in @xmath . Thus by a standard
comparison theorem, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath .

Finally notice with the last assumption, we can prove that @xmath is a
strongly continuous semigroup both on @xmath and @xmath . It is a @xmath
semigroup since for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its strong continuity comes from the last assumption.

By the Riesz-Thorin interpolation theorem @xmath is a semigroup on
@xmath for @xmath . Furthermore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

End of the Proof.

Remark: This proof works whenever there is an invariant measure for
@xmath .

###### Corollary 6.4.4.

For a gradient Brownian system with drift @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath if for all @xmath and some constant @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the map @xmath is continuous into @xmath .

In particular the conditions hold if there is a number @xmath such that
for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof: From proposition 6.3.6 , the semigroup @xmath has generator
@xmath for gradient system on @xmath . The result follows from theorem
1.4.1 on page 1.4.1 .

Recall we defined @xmath for gradient h-Brownian system (section 5.3) as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Following Strichartz, we discuss the @xmath boundedness of heat
semigroups for forms:

###### Corollary 6.4.5.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold with Ricci-2Hess(h) bounded
from below. Suppose there are constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is @xmath bounded uniformly in @xmath in finite intervals
@xmath , for all @xmath between @xmath and infinity.

Proof: Consider a gradient Brownian system with generator @xmath . It
has no explosion if Ricci-2Hess(h) is bounded from below [ 5 ] . Let
@xmath , corollary 6.4.2 on page 6.4.2 gives us:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the conjugate number to @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

However @xmath if @xmath as in section 5.3. Thus the @xmath boundedness.

Next we consider the @xmath contractivity of heat semigroups (see page
1.4.2 for definition). Define @xmath for @xmath forms as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 6.4.6.

Consider a Brownian system with drift @xmath on a complete Riemannian
manifold. Suppose @xmath for @xmath forms @xmath . If there is a
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the heatsemigroup @xmath on @xmath forms is contractive on @xmath
(on @xmath ), for @xmath between @xmath and @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath . By the argument in the proof of the last corollary,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand we have, for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is both @xmath and @xmath contractive by the uniform
boundedness principle. Finally we apply the Reisz-Thorin interpolation
theorem to get the required result.

Let @xmath be a compact manifold. Then @xmath for closed @xmath 1-form
@xmath , and @xmath for @xmath forms of all order if we are considering
gradient systems. See [ 26 ] for detail. From this we have:

###### Corollary 6.4.7.

Let @xmath be a compact manifold. Consider a gradient Brownian system
with generator @xmath . Then

(1). The first real cohomology group vanishes if the Ricci curvature is
positive definite at one point and there is a number @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath large.

(2). The cohomology in dimension @xmath vanishes for a manifold whose
curvature operator is positive definite at one point or for a
2-dimensional manifold which is not flat if our gradient Brownian system
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath large.

Proof: We apply the following theorem from [ 63 ] : Suppose the real
cohomology in dimension @xmath is not trivial, then the heat semigroup
for @xmath forms is not @xmath contractive for @xmath in the following
cases:

(1). @xmath and the manifold is not flat.

(2). @xmath and the Ricci curvature is strictly positive at one point.

(3). The curvature operator is positive definite at one point.

Note we have @xmath contractivity for some @xmath from the assumption,
thus finishing the proof.

Example:

Let @xmath be the n-sphere of radius @xmath in @xmath . Then the second
fundamental form @xmath is given by: @xmath . The derivative flow for
the gradient Brownian motion on it satisfy:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See Elworthy [ 26 ] . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is less or equal to @xmath , when @xmath big if @xmath . The above
corollary confirms that the kth cohomology vanishes for the n-sphere if
@xmath . However note that the @xmath cohomoloy of the sphere does not
vanish.

We’ll come back to this topic in the next chapter.

### Chapter 7 Consequences of moment stability

#### 7.1 Introduction

In the first section, we will show the first homotopy group vanishes if
the Brownian motion on @xmath is strongly moment stable and satisfies
certain regularity conditions, as for compact manifolds in [ 27 ] . Also
interesting here is the result on finite h-volume of the manifold. In
section 2, we look at the existence of harmonic functions and at
cohomology given strong moment stability.

#### 7.2 Geometric consequences and vanishing of @xmath

We shall first show if the heat semigroup for 1-forms is ”continuous” on
@xmath , then the h-Brownian motion on @xmath has no explosion. In the
following lemma we only used pointwise conditions, improving a result of
Bakry [ 5 ] proved by essentially the same method.

###### Lemma 7.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume there is a point
@xmath with a neighbourhood @xmath such that for each @xmath there is a
constant @xmath with the following property:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath is a positive constant. Then the
h-Brownian motion does not explode.

Proof: Let @xmath be an increasing sequence in @xmath such that @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . Such a sequence exists as shown in the appendix.
Then @xmath for each @xmath , since @xmath and by the bounded
convergence theorem. Here @xmath is defined as in theorem @xmath . By
Schauder type estimate as in the appendix, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath in @xmath . However for @xmath , and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath around @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives: @xmath , for @xmath . But @xmath from proposition 6.2.1 .
Thus @xmath . Consequently @xmath for all @xmath . Next we notice
Brownian motion does not explode if it does not explode at one point.
The proof is finished.

###### Proposition 7.2.2.

Consider a h-Brownian motion on a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume
there is a point @xmath and a neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath such that:
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath is a constant. Then
@xmath if @xmath for @xmath .

Proof: This is a direct consequence of lemma 6.3.4 and the lemma above.

Note: If @xmath for @xmath with both @xmath and @xmath bounded, then set
@xmath , the same argument in lemma 7.2.1 shows @xmath .

The proposition above indicates there is not much point to discuss the
possibility of @xmath when there is explosion. From this there also
arises an interesting question, which we have not answered yet: If
@xmath for @xmath , does it hold for all @xmath ?

###### Corollary 7.2.3.

Let @xmath be a gradient s.d.s. with generator @xmath . Then it has no
explosion if its derivative flow @xmath satisfies the following
conditions:

1.   For each @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   There is a number @xmath such that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   The map @xmath is continuous into @xmath .

Proof: This comes from proposition 7.2.2 and corollary 6.4.4 .

Note that the conditions in the corollary can be checked in terms of the
extrinsic curvatures of the manifold (see section 5.3 ). Thus this gives
us a result on nonexplosion of the Brownian motion(not necessarily
gradient) on @xmath . However it is not clear that this improves Bakry’s
result: there is no explosion if Ricci-Hess(h) is bounded from below.

Following Bakry [ 5 ] , we get a finite volume result:

###### Theorem 7.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume the s.d.s. has
generator @xmath and for each @xmath and each compact set @xmath we
have:

(1). @xmath , for @xmath .

(2).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the h-volume of the manifold is finite.

Proof: Let @xmath with nonempty support @xmath . Then @xmath exists in
@xmath and is h-harmonic: @xmath . This comes from the self-adjointness
of @xmath and an application of the spectral theorem. Let @xmath be the
limit, then @xmath . So @xmath must be a constant.

Assume h-vol @xmath , then @xmath must be zero. We will prove this is
impossible. Take @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is self-adjoint and so the dual semigroup @xmath equals
@xmath .

Next note the stochastic dynamical system is complete under the
assumption from proposition 7.2.2 . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , from @xmath . And we can choose a function @xmath with
@xmath . This gives a contradiction. Thus the h-volume of @xmath must be
finite.

###### Corollary 7.2.5.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume the generator is
@xmath and there is no explosion. Then if for each @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for each compact set @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the manifold has finite h-volume.

Proof: By theorem @xmath , @xmath under the assumption. Applying the
above theorem, we get the conclusion.

###### Corollary 7.2.6.

Let @xmath be a non-compact complete Riemannian manifold with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for eaxh @xmath . Then if @xmath , (for @xmath a Brownian motion on
@xmath ), it cannot be strongly moment stable(defined on page 1 ). Here
@xmath denotes the distance function on @xmath from a fixed point @xmath
.

Proof: This is a direct application of the following theorem from [ 13 ]
: The volume of @xmath is infinite for noncompact manifolds with the
above condition on the Ricci curvature. But by theorem @xmath strong
moment stability implies finite volume. Note the Brownian motion here
has no explosion by the example on page 4.4.1 .

#### 7.3 Vanishing of @xmath

###### Theorem 7.3.1.

Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold with its injectivity radius bigger
than a positive number @xmath . Assume we have an s.d.s. @xmath on
@xmath which is strongly 1-complete( with @xmath coefficients), then the
first homotopy group @xmath vanishes if for each compact set @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Take @xmath to be a @xmath loop parametrized by arc length. Then
@xmath is a @xmath loop homotopic to @xmath by the strong
1-completeness. Let @xmath denote the length of @xmath .

If we can show @xmath is contractible to a point in @xmath with
probability bigger than zero for some @xmath , then the theorem is
proved from the definition: @xmath if every continuous loop is
contractible to one point.

We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath with probability bigger than
zero. For such @xmath wth @xmath , @xmath is contained in a geodesic
ball with radius smaller than @xmath . Since the geodesic ball is
diffeomorphic to a ball in @xmath , it is contractible to one point.
Thus @xmath is contractible to one point for a set of @xmath with
probability bigger than @xmath . This finished the proof.

###### Theorem 7.3.2.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Consider a s.d.s. @xmath
with generator @xmath . Suppose the s.d.s. is strongly 1-complete and
satisfies @xmath for @xmath . Then the first homotopy group @xmath
vanishes if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath be a @xmath loop parametrized by arc length. Then
@xmath is again a @xmath loop homotopic to @xmath from the strong
1-completeness. Denote by @xmath its length.

We only need to show @xmath is contractible to one point for some @xmath
and for some @xmath .

First we claim there is a sequence of numbers @xmath converging to
infinity such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So @xmath , giving @xmath . Therefore @xmath in probability.

Let @xmath be the normalized invariant measure on @xmath for the
process. Let @xmath be a compact set in @xmath containing the image set
of the loop @xmath and which has measure @xmath . Let @xmath be the
infimum over @xmath of the injectivity radius at @xmath .

By ( 7.1 ), there is a number @xmath such that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note h-vol @xmath by theorem @xmath , the ergodic theorem(see chapter 3)
gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

Take a point @xmath in the image of the loop @xmath . There exists a
number @xmath such that if @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by the definition of the injectivity radius, there is a coordinate
chart containing a geodesic ball of radius @xmath around @xmath . So the
whole loop @xmath is contained in the same chart with probability @xmath
(for t big), thus contractible to one point.

###### Corollary 7.3.3.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume nonexplosion for
the h-BM. If @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every compact set @xmath , then we have @xmath .

In particular if @xmath then @xmath cannot be strongly moment stable
given nonexplosion unless @xmath is simply connected.

Proof: Apply theorem 5.2.4 , theorem 6.4.1 , and the theorem above.

###### Corollary 7.3.4.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold of finite h-volume. Assume
the h-Brownian motion on @xmath is strongly 1-complete and satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each compact set @xmath . Then @xmath .

Proof: This comes from the proof of theorem 7.3.2 .

Here is a corollary which generalizes a result of Elworthy and Rosenberg
to noncompact manifolds. See [ 28 ] .

###### Corollary 7.3.5.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Suppose there is a
h-Brownian system on @xmath such that @xmath is bounded and @xmath for
@xmath . Then we have @xmath . In particular if @xmath is a submanifold
of @xmath , we have @xmath if its second fundamental form @xmath is
bounded, and @xmath . Here

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Proof: There is no explosion since Ricci-2Hess(h) is bounded from below
from the assumptions. On the other hand @xmath is bounded above since
@xmath is bounded and so @xmath for @xmath in @xmath . See corollary
6.3.3 . The result follows from theorem 7.3.2 since the s.d.s. is
strongly moment stable from @xmath . The second part of the theorem
follows from the fact that the sum of the last two terms in the formula
for @xmath is @xmath for gradient Brownian systems.

#### 7.4 Vanishing of harmonic forms and cohomology

We come back to the discussion on cohomology vanishing of page @xmath
and aim to extend some of the results in [ 26 ] on cohomology vanishing
given moment stability to noncompact manifolds. See [ 33 ] , [ 26 ] .

Let @xmath be the space of @xmath smooth @xmath forms on @xmath . A
p-form @xmath is closed if @xmath , exact if @xmath for some p-1 form
@xmath . Here @xmath is the exterior differentiation defined in section
@xmath . A @xmath - harmonic form is a form with @xmath . The @xmath de
Rham cohomology group @xmath is defined to be the quotient group of the
group of smooth closed @xmath forms by the group of @xmath exact forms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is also the cohomology group @xmath with compact supports:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a @xmath smooth function. There is the Hodge decomposition
theorem( see page @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a form with @xmath and decomposition: @xmath . Here @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath since @xmath by @xmath and @xmath .

Thus we have the Hodge’s theorem: every cohomology class has a unique
harmonic representative if Im(d) is closed, in particular: the dimension
of @xmath , as a linear space, equals the dimension of the space of
h-harmonic @xmath @xmath forms when @xmath has closed range.

The vanishing problem have been studied by conventional methods by e.g.
Yau [ 67 ] . The problem has been considered in a probabilistic context,
see e.g. Vauthier [ 66 ] , Elworthy and Rosenberg [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] . The
idea we are using here is that the probabilistic semigroup @xmath on
forms often agrees with the heat semigroup (see chapter 6). Thus the
existence of harmonic forms is directly related to the behaviour of
diffusion processes and their derivatives. In the following we follow
Elworthy and Rosenberg’s approach to get vanishing results for harmonic
1-forms. But we use @xmath instead of the standard probabilistic formula
obtained from the Weitzenbock formula. However we do not intend to
include all the possible results in this thesis, but only demonstrate
the idea. A second theorem we give here follows from an approach of
Elworthy [ 27 ] . This approach uses integration of p-forms along
singular p-simplices and fits very well with our definition of strong
p-completeness.

###### Proposition 7.4.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold, consider a s.d.s. with
generator @xmath .

(1). Assume @xmath for closed 1-forms @xmath . Let @xmath be the
conjugate number to @xmath . Then there are no nonzero @xmath h-harmonic
1-forms, if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(2). Assume @xmath for closed bounded 1-forms @xmath . Then there are no
bounded h-harmonic 1-forms if for each @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof: (1). We have nonexplosion and finite volume in the first case
according to the nonexplosion result on page @xmath . Let @xmath be a
nonzero harmonic p-form in @xmath . Then there is a point @xmath with
@xmath . Thus @xmath by continuity. So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

But @xmath , giving a contradiction.

(2). The proof of the second part is just as before. First note we have
nonexplosion. Let @xmath be a closed bounded harmonic 1-form. Let @xmath
with @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

But this is impossible from the assumption. End of the proof.

Remarks (1). Let @xmath . Assume @xmath . Then @xmath on @xmath implies
@xmath on @xmath . Since in this case @xmath , so @xmath is a strongly
continuous @xmath semigroup from proposition 6.4.3 . We may then apply
uniform boundedness principle.

(2). If we know that @xmath has finite h-volume to start with, then all
bounded harmonic 1-forms vanishes if @xmath and if @xmath is strongly
moment stable from theorem 5.2.4 .

Following Elworthy [ 27 ] for the compact case, we have the following
theorem:

###### Theorem 7.4.2.

Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold and assume there is a strongly
p-complete s.d.s. with strong @xmath -moment stability. Then all bounded
closed p-forms are exact. In particular the natural map from @xmath to
@xmath is trivial.

Proof: Let @xmath be a singular p-simplex, and @xmath a bounded closed
p-form. We shall not distinguish a singular simplex map from its image.
Denote by @xmath the pull back of the form @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by definition. But @xmath is homotopic to @xmath from the strong
p-completeness. Thus:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take expectations of both sides to obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

from the strong @xmath moment stability. Thus @xmath , and so @xmath is
exact by deRham’s theorem.

###### Corollary 7.4.3.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Assume there is a complete
s.d.s. on @xmath with strong @xmath moment stability and satisfying
@xmath for each compact set @xmath . Then all bounded closed p-forms are
exact. In particular Suppose @xmath is a closed submanifold of @xmath
with its second fundamental form bounded. Then if @xmath for some
constant @xmath , then the conclusion holds. Here @xmath is as defined
on page 5.16 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Proof: Direct applications of the above theorem and theorem 5.2.6 .

#### 7.5 Examples

Example 1 Let @xmath , @xmath . Then h-vol @xmath . Furthermore we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the s.d.s. on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is strongly complete and strongly @xmath moment stable.

Example 2 Let @xmath , @xmath be independent Brownian motions on @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Brownian flow on the hyperbolic space @xmath . It is strongly
complete and satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath for bounded 1-forms. Thus this Brownian system on @xmath is
not strongly moment stable since @xmath has infinite volume(c.f. theorem
7.3.2 ).

Example 3 Consider the Langevin equation on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are constants. The solution can be written down
explicitly:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It has Gaussian distribution and generator @xmath for @xmath , and has
no explosion. Its derivative flow is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and enjoys the following properties:

1.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Strong 1-completeness from theorem 5.2.4 ,

3.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath from theorem 6.3.1 ,

4.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  The solution process is recurrent and has @xmath as finite invariant
    measure, since h-vol @xmath .

If we consider the same equation on @xmath instead of on @xmath , then
all the properties hold except for the strong 1-completeness as shall be
shown below.

Clearly part 1 and part 4 hold. The solution is recurrent on @xmath
since it is recurrent on @xmath . Furthermore @xmath is still the
invariant measure since @xmath has negligible boundary and from the
completeness of the s.d.e. on @xmath . With these the conclusion of
proposition 3.0.4 certainly holds.

Suppose the process is strongly 1-complete. The ergodic property gives
us @xmath from the proof of the theorem 7.3.2 and part 4 of the
properties. This is a contradiction. Thus we do not have the strong
1-completeness.

Finally part 3 holds since on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as on @xmath .

In the following we look at some surfaces whose second fundamental forms
are bounded. We will show that the Hyperboloid satisfies our hypothesis
which imply @xmath , and Brownian motions on both the torus and the
cylinder cannot be strongly moment stable. First we recall the basic
theory:

Let @xmath be a surface in @xmath parametrized by @xmath . The unit
normal vector @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is the shape operator @xmath given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the differentiation on @xmath . The second
fundamental form @xmath is given in terms of the shape operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is then the Weingarten equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Example 4 [Surface of revolution]

Consider the surface given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this surface:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The normal vector is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Example 4a [The Hyperboloid]

We will show the surface

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies the conditions of theorem 5.3.6 and theorem 7.3.2 . Consider
the following parametrization: @xmath .

Thus @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The unit normal vector is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also the Ricci curvature is given by: Ricci @xmath , while @xmath ,
@xmath . Clearly the second fundamental form is bounded, thus the
Brownian motion on the surface is strongly complete. Next we construct a
Brownian motion with drift which is strongly moment stable and thus
verify @xmath .

According to section 5.3 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath . Let grad @xmath and @xmath denote the gradient and the
Hessian of @xmath in @xmath respectively. Then for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is negative and bounded, we may choose @xmath big such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The system with the chosen drift is then strongly moment stable, so
satisfies the conditions of theorem 7.3.2 .

Example 4b The torus given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . So the Brownian motion here is strongly
complete, but it cannot be strongly moment stable since @xmath @xmath
@xmath . In fact for @xmath , the first moment is identically @xmath as
calculated, e.g. in [ 26 ] .

Example 4c The cylinder @xmath parametrized by @xmath has @xmath and
@xmath . The normal vector is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As for torus, the Brownian motion here is strongly complete but not
strongly moment stable. To convince ourself we will try to add a drift
as for the Hyperboloid. Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly the same argument does not work.

### Chapter 8 Formulae for the derivatives of the solutions of the heat
equations

#### 8.1 Introduction

In chapter 6, we examined carefully @xmath and the heat semigroup @xmath
for one forms, and obtained some conditions to ensure @xmath . In fact
we may expect more once we know @xmath does agree with @xmath . The
semigroup @xmath can be given in terms of the line integral 8.1 and a
martingale, following from Elworthy [ 26 ] for compact manifolds. In
particular we have a formula for the gradient of the logarithm of the
heat kernel, extending Bismut’s formula [ 8 ] . See [ 16 ] for an
infinite dimensional version of the formulae by Da Prato, Elworthy, and
Zabczyk (comment: their proof was inspired by the proof presented in
this chapter, and follows from an earlier private communication). See
also Norris [ 57 ] for another approach.

The discussions for one forms also work well for higher order forms. We
define @xmath for @xmath forms as on page 6.8 , and look briefly the
relation between @xmath and the heat semigroup @xmath for @xmath forms.
In the end we give a formula for the exterior derivative of @xmath in
terms of the derivative flow of a h-Brownian motion and @xmath itself.

In the following we write @xmath . If @xmath is a q-form, we may use
@xmath instead of @xmath .

#### 8.2 For 1-forms

Let @xmath be a 1-form, we define @xmath to be the line integral of
@xmath along Brownian paths as in [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here is the formula for 1-form, which is a direct extension of the
formula in [ 26 ] for compact manifolds:

###### Proposition 8.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete @xmath stochastic dynamical system on a
complete Riemannian manifold @xmath with generator @xmath . Suppose for
closed 1-form @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath .

Proof: Following the proof for a compact manifold as in [ 26 ] . Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Differentiate equation @xmath to get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

since @xmath is uniformly continuous in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from proposition @xmath . Consequently:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Apply Itô formula to @xmath , which is smooth because @xmath is, to get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath . We obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since by Fubini’s theorem we only need to show @xmath is integrable with
respect to the double integral:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Next notice:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from the strong Markov property. We get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

End of the proof.

Remark: If we assume @xmath for each @xmath in the proposition, we do
not need to assume @xmath . Since first we have @xmath for such @xmath
by the uniform boundedness principle and also equation ( 8.4 ) holds
from the following argument:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath . So @xmath since @xmath @xmath is continuous in @xmath .
Thus we may still apply Fubini’s theorem to get: ( 8.4 ).

When @xmath for some function @xmath , formula 8.2 may be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In fact this works in a more general situations. Here is a very
intuitive proof by D. Elworthy and myself (let @xmath be the space of
bounded functions with bounded continuous first derivative.)

###### Theorem 8.2.2.

Let @xmath be a complete nondegenerate stochastic dynamical system so
there is a right inverse map @xmath for @xmath each @xmath in @xmath .
Let @xmath be in @xmath s.t. @xmath . Then for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

provided @xmath is a martingale for all @xmath . Here @xmath is a
solution to @xmath with initial value @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath . Apply Itô formula to the smooth map @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Letting t=T, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

End of the proof.

Note @xmath is a martingale if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In terms of the metric on @xmath determined by @xmath , this condition
becomes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 8.2.3.

Let @xmath be the heat kernel as defined on page 1.6.1 , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

under the assumptions of proposition 8.2.1 .

Proof: The proof is just as for compact case. See [ 26 ] . Let @xmath .
Differentiate equation @xmath on page 1.10 to obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, we may rewrite equation @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing the last two equations, we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus finished the proof.

Remark: Assume @xmath for each @xmath . If formula ( 8.6 ) holds for
@xmath , it holds for @xmath , the space of @xmath functions vanishing
at infinity.

Proof: First assume @xmath positive. Take @xmath in @xmath converging to
@xmath . Then @xmath by Schauder type estimate as in the appendix. The
convergence of the R.H.S. of the formula is also clear. Next take @xmath
.

#### 8.3 For higher order forms and gradient Brownian systems

Let @xmath be a @xmath form, @xmath a @xmath form, the wedge of @xmath
and @xmath is a @xmath form defined as follows ( following the notations
from [ 1 ] ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The symbol @xmath here means that the item below it is omitted.

The exterior differentiation of @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be a @xmath form. Let @xmath , @xmath . Analogously to the
case of 1-forms, we define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then by the argument in proposition 6.4.3 , @xmath is a @xmath semigroup
if @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.3.1.

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. Let @xmath be a complete
gradient Brownian system on @xmath with generator @xmath and satisfying:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for bounded @xmath -forms @xmath .

The proof is as in @xmath . Note a similar result holds for a gradient
Brownian system with a general drift. In fact we could have a parallel
discussion of the properties of @xmath for @xmath forms as in chapter 6.
We should also point out that as for 1-forms, extra conditions on @xmath
will give @xmath for gradient systems, without assuming nonexplosion(see
corollary 7.2.3 on page 7.2.3 ).

Given a @xmath form @xmath , we define a @xmath - @xmath form as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.3.2.

Let @xmath be a complete gradient Brownian system on a complete
Riemannian manifold @xmath with generator @xmath . Suppose for a closed
@xmath form @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and also for each @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proof: Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice @xmath is smooth on @xmath by elliptic regularity, so

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we apply Itô formula (see page 1.6 ) to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the calculations above we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath , then @xmath . By definition and the equality above, we
have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will calculate the expectation of each term of @xmath after wedging
with @xmath . It turns out that the first term and the last term
vanishes. The latter is from equation 1.2 for a gradient system on page
1.2 .

Take @xmath , write @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the linear map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The last step uses the assumption: @xmath . Similar calculation shows:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Comparing these with @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

End of the proof.

Note: With an additional condition: @xmath , the formula in the above
proposition holds for forms which is not necessarily bounded. See the
remark on page 8.2 .

###### Corollary 8.3.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath @xmath form, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proof: In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

There is also the following equality:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by Itô formula,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the q-1 vector induced by @xmath as is defined in the
beginning of the section. So

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

End of the proof.

This corollary can also be proved directly as in theorem 8.2.2 . The
factor @xmath in the formula may look odd, but it is due to that the
tensors concerned is not symmetric.

### Chapter 9 Appendix

###### Lemma 9.0.1.

[ 5 ] Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian manifold. There exists an
increasing sequence @xmath such that:

(1). @xmath

(2). @xmath , each @xmath .

(3). @xmath , for all @xmath .

Proof: This is standard result. Here’s a proof from [ 5 ] . Let @xmath .
We may construct such a sequence @xmath as is well known. For a complete
Riemannian manifold, there is a @xmath smooth function @xmath on @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath is compact for all numbers @xmath . Let
@xmath . Then @xmath is an increasing sequence and satisfies the
requirements.

##### Schauder type estimates

Let @xmath be a smooth differential manifold. Let @xmath be an elliptic
differential operator on @xmath . In local coordinates, we may write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is symmetric positive definite @xmath matrix for each @xmath
. The coefficients are assumed to be @xmath .

Consider the following differential equation of parabolic type:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

on a domain @xmath . A solution @xmath to equation @xmath is a function
which is jointly continuous in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath for @xmath . A function which satisfies the above regularity will
be said to be in @xmath .

Let @xmath be a set of @xmath , define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Theorem 9.0.2.

Let @xmath be a bounded domain in @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath a @xmath
solution to the parabolic equation. Let @xmath be a subdomain of @xmath
with @xmath denoting the distance from the boundary of @xmath to the
boundary of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a constant depending only on the bounds of @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath .

See [ 36 ] @xmath for reference. By standard argument in analysis on
uniform convergence, we conclude (see [ 4 ] and @xmath of [ 36 ] ):

Let @xmath be an increasing sequence of (locally bounded @xmath )
solutions of the parabolic equation @xmath . Assume @xmath pointwise in
@xmath . Then @xmath is also a solution and the convergence is in fact
uniformly in @xmath on compact subset @xmath of @xmath . Thus @xmath ,
and @xmath in @xmath .
