This thesis lies in the field of constant mean curvature (cmc) hypersurfaces
and specifically cmc $1/2$ surfaces in the three-manifold
$\mathbb{H}^2\times\mathbb{R}$. The value $1/2$ is the critical mean curvature
for $\mathbb{H}^2\times\mathbb{R}$, in that there do no exist closed cmc
surfaces with mean curvature $1/2$ or less. Daniel and Hauswirth have
constructed a one-parameter family of complete, cmc $1/2$ annuli that are
symmetric about a reflection in the horizontal plane $\mathbb{H}^2 \times
\{0\}$, the horizontal catenoids. In this thesis we prove that these catenoids
converge to a singular limit of two tangent horocylinders as the neck size
tends to zero. We discuss the analytic gluing construction that this fact
suggests, which would create a multitude of cmc $1/2$ surfaces with positive
genus.
  The main result of the thesis concerns a key step in such an analytic gluing
construction. We construct families of cmc $1/2$ annuli with boundary, whose
single end is asymptotic to an end of a horizontal catenoid. We produce these
families by solving the mean curvature equation for normal graphs off the end
of a horizontal catenoid. This is a non-linear boundary value problem, which we
solve by perturbative methods. To do so we analyse the linearised mean
curvature operator, known as the Jacobi operator. We show that on carefully
chosen weighted H\"older spaces the Jacobi operator can be inverted, modulo a
finite-dimensional subspace, and provided the neck size of the horizontal
catenoid is sufficiently small. Using these linear results we solve the
boundary value problem for the mean curvature equation by a contraction mapping
argument.