Climate Change
The decade 2009-2019 was particularly intense in rhetoric about efforts
to tackle the climate crisis, such as the 2015 United Nations Climate
Change Conference, COP 21. However, the carbon dioxide emissions at the
world scale increased constantly from 29.7 (GtCO ₂ ) in 2009 to 34.2 in
2019. The current gap between rhetoric and reality on emissions was and
is still huge . The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change proposed
different mitigation strategies to achieve the net emissions reductions
that would be required to follow a pathway that limits global warming to
1.5°C with no or limited overshoot. There are still pathways to reach
net-zero by 2050. Several reports propose detailed scenarios and
strategies to achieve these targets. They remain narrow and highly
challenging, requiring all stakeholders, governments, businesses,
investors, and citizens to take action this year and every year after so
that the goal does not slip out of reach. In most of these trajectories,
electrification and an increased share of renewables are some of the key
pillars. The transition towards a carbon-free society goes through an
inevitable increase in the share of renewable generation in the energy
mix and a drastic decrease in the total consumption of fossil fuels.

Thesis topic
In contrast to conventional power plants, renewable energy is subject to
uncertainty. Most of the generation technologies based on renewable
sources are non-dispatchable, and their production is stochastic and
complex to predict in advance. A high share of renewables is challenging
for power systems that have been designed and sized for dispatchable
units. Therefore, this thesis studies the integration of renewables in
power systems by investigating forecasting and decision-making tools.

Since variable generation and electricity demand both fluctuate, they
must be forecast ahead of time to inform real-time electricity
scheduling and longer-term system planning. Better short-term forecasts
enable system operators to reduce reliance on polluting standby plants
and proactively manage increasing amounts of variable sources. Better
long-term forecasts help system operators and investors to decide where
and when to build variable plants. In this context, probabilistic
forecasts, which aim at modeling the distribution of all possible future
realizations, have become a vital tool to equip decision-makers,
hopefully leading to better decisions in energy applications.

When balancing electricity systems, system operators use scheduling and
dispatch to determine how much power every controllable generator should
produce. This process is slow and complex, governed by NP-hard
optimization problems such as unit commitment and optimal power flow.
Scheduling becomes even more complex as electricity systems include more
storage, variable generators, and flexible demand. Thus, scheduling must
improve significantly, allowing operators to rely on variable sources to
manage systems. Therefore, stochastic or robust optimization strategies
have been developed along with decomposition techniques to make the
optimization problems tractable and efficient.

Thesis content
These two challenges raise two central research questions studied in
this thesis: (1) How to produce reliable probabilistic renewable
generation forecasts, consumption, and electricity prices? (2) How to
make decisions with uncertainty using probabilistic forecasts to improve
scheduling? The thesis perimeter is the energy management of "small"
systems such as microgrids at a residential scale on a day-ahead basis.
The manuscript is divided into two main parts to propose directions to
address both research questions: (1) a forecasting part; (2) a planning
and control part.

Thesis first part
The forecasting part presents several techniques and strategies to
produce and evaluate probabilistic forecasts. We provide the forecasting
basics by introducing the different types of forecasts to characterize
the behavior of stochastic variables, such as renewable generation, and
the tools to assess the different types of forecasts. An example of
forecast quality evaluation is given by assessing PV and electrical
consumption point forecasts computed by standard deep-learning models
such as recurrent neural networks. Then, the following Chapters
investigate the quantile forecasts, scenarios, and density forecasts on
several case studies. First, more advanced deep-learning models such as
the encoder-decoder architecture produce PV quantile forecasts. Second,
a density forecast-based approach computes probabilistic forecasts of
imbalance prices on the Belgian case. Finally, a recent class of deep
generative models, normalizing flows, generates renewable production and
electrical consumption scenarios. Using an energy retailer case study,
this technique is extensively compared to state-of-the-art generative
models, the variational autoencoders and generative adversarial
networks.

Thesis second part
The planning and control part proposes approaches and methodologies
based on optimization for decision-making under uncertainty using
probabilistic forecasts on several case studies. We introduce the basics
of decision-making under uncertainty using optimization strategies:
stochastic programming and robust optimization. Then, we investigate
these strategies in several case studies in the following Chapters.
First, we propose a value function-based approach to propagate
information from operational planning to real-time optimization in a
deterministic framework. Second, three Chapters focus on the energy
management of a grid-connected renewable generation plant coupled with a
battery energy storage device in the capacity firming market. This
framework promotes renewable power generation facilities in small
non-interconnected grids. The day-ahead planning of the system uses
either a stochastic or a robust approach. Furthermore, a sizing
methodology of the system is proposed. Finally, we consider the
day-ahead market scheduling of an energy retailer to evaluate the
forecast value of the deep learning generative models introduced in the
forecasting part.

Perspectives
We propose four primary research future directions. (1) Forecasting
techniques of the future. The development of new machine learning models
that take advantage of the underlying physical process opens a new way
of research. For instance, new forecasting techniques that take
advantage of the power system characteristics, such as the graphical
normalizing flows capable of learning the power network structure, could
be applied to hierarchical forecasting. (2) Machine learning for
optimization. Models that simplify optimization planning problems by
learning a sub-optimal space. For instance, a deep learning model can
partially learn the sizing space to provide a fast and efficient tool. A
neural network can also emulate the behavior of a physics solver that
solves electricity differential equations to compute electricity flow in
power grids. Furthermore, such proxies could evaluate if a given
operation planning decision would lead to acceptable trajectories where
the reliability criterion is met in real-time. (3) Modelling and
simulation of energy systems. New flexible and open-source optimization
modeling tools are required to capture the growing complexity of such
future energy systems. To this end, in the past few years, several
open-source models for the strategic energy planning of urban and
regional energy systems have been developed. EnergyScope TD and E4CLIM
are two of them where we think it may be relevant to implement and test
the forecasting techniques and scheduling strategies developed in this
thesis. (4) Psychology and machine learning. Achieving sustainability
goals requires as much the use of relevant technology as psychology.
Therefore, one of the main challenges is not designing relevant
technological tools but changing how we consume and behave in our
society. Thus, machine learning and psychology could help to identify
appropriate behaviors to reduce carbon footprint. Then, inform
individuals, and provide constructive opportunities by modeling
individual behavior.
