Cosmological observations suggest that the Universe is undergoing an
accelerated phase of expansion driven by an unknown form of matter
called dark energy. In the minimal standard cosmological model that best
fits the observational data the dark energy is provided by a
cosmological constant term. However there is currently no convincing
theoretical explanation for the origin and the nature of such an exotic
component. In an attempt to justify the existence of the dark energy
within the framework of particle physics theories, several scenarios
have been considered. In this thesis we present and discuss the
phenomenological aspects of some of these dark energy models. We start
by reviewing the cosmological measurements that give direct and indirect
evidence for the dark energy. Then we focus on a class of theoretical
models where the role of the dark energy is played by a minimally
coupled scalar field called quintessence. For the sake of simplicity we
place special emphasis on two of these models, the Inverse Power Law
times an Exponential potential and the Two Exponential potential. We
then consider the effect of scalar field fluctuations on the structure
formation process in these two models. By making use of the cosmological
distance measurements such as the supernova luminosity distance and the
position of the acoustic peaks in the CMB power spectrum, we constrain
the shape of a general parameterized quintessence potential. We find
that by the present time the scalar field is evolving in a very flat
region or close to a minimum of its potential. In such a situation we
are still unable to distinguish between a dynamical model of dark energy
and the cosmological constant scenario. Going beyond constraining
specific classes of models, we develop a model independent approach that
allows us to determine the physical properties of the dark energy
without the need to refer to a particular model. We introduce a
parameterization of the dark energy equation of state that can account
for most of the proposed quintessence models and for more general cases
as well. Then we study the imprint that dark energy leaves on the CMB
anisotropy power spectrum. We find that dynamical models of dark energy
produce a distinctive signature by means of the integrated Sachs-Wolfe
effect. However only models characterized by a rapid transition of their
equation of state can most likely be distinguished from the cosmological
constant case. By using a formalism to model localized non-Gaussian CMB
anisotropies, we compute analytical formulae for the spectrum and the
bispectrum. The use of these formulae in specific cases such as the SZ
signature of clusters of galaxies provide an alternative cosmological
test.
