A majority of quasar surveys have been based on criteria which assume
strong blue continua or a UV-excess. Any amount of dust along the
line-of-sight is expected to drastically extinguish the optical/UV flux
leading to a selection bias. Radio surveys however should suffer no bias
against extinction by dust. Recently, a large complete sample of
radio-selected quasars has become available (the ‘Parkes sample’). A
majority of these sources exhibit optical–to–near-infrared continua that
are exceedingly ‘red’, very unlike those of quasars selected optically.
The purpose of this thesis, broadly speaking, is to explore the problem
of incompleteness in optical quasar surveys due to obscuration by dust,
and to interpret the relatively ‘red’ continua observed in the Parkes
quasar sample.

The first part of this thesis explores the observational consequences of
an intervening cosmological dust component. A preliminary study explores
the effects of different foreground dust distributions (on
galaxy-cluster scales to the visible extent of normal galaxies) on
obscuration of background sources. Numerical simulations of
dusty-galaxies randomly distributed along the line-of-sight with
simplified assumptions are then performed, and implications on optical
counts of quasars and absorption-line statistics are explored. This
foundation is extended by considering the effects of more complicated
models of foreground obscuration where the dust content evolves with
redshift. The Parkes sample is used to constrain evolutionary and
physical properties of dust in intervening systems. The contribution of
line-of-sight galactic dust to the reddening observed in this sample is
also constrained.

The second part examines the continuum properties of Parkes quasars in
the framework of a number of absorption and emission mechanisms to
assess the importance of extinction by dust. Three classes of theories
are explored: ‘intrinsically red’ AGN emission models, dust extinction
models, and host-galaxy light models. Simple models are developed and
tested against the available data. Several new correlations between
spectral properties are predicted and identified observationally. For
the dust model, we explore the effects of dust on soft X-rays and
compare our predictions with ROSAT data. Possible physical dust
properties are constrained. I then consider the possibility that a ‘red’
stellar component from the host galaxies contributes to the observed
reddening. This contribution is quantified using a novel spectral
fitting technique. Finally, an observational study of near-infrared
polarisation is presented to distinguish between two models for the
reddening: the intrinsic ‘synchrotron emission model’, and the dust
model. Combined with spectral and photometric data, these observations
are used to constrain various emission and dust absorption models.
