## Chapter 1 Introduction

In this thesis we study the behavior of electrons in a metal which is in
electrical contact with a superconductor. The superconductor (S) can be
viewed as a reservoir where due to an effective attraction the electrons
condense into Cooper pairs, while the normal metal (N) is idealized as a
gas of free electrons. Through the diffusion across the NS contact the
metallic electrons acquire superconducting correlations; we call this
the proximity effect.

The Cooper pairs are essentially described by one wavefunction (the
order parameter of the superconductor) producing quantum behavior on a
macroscopic scale. The quantum interference effects between the free
electrons instead rely on the coherence of the single-particle
wavefunctions and are much more fragile. The observable quantum
phenomena are limited to the mesoscopic scale given by the phase
coherence length here. The proximity effect offers an experimental
access to the coherent single-particle physics by combining it with the
macroscopic superconducting correlations.

Here we study the electrical transport and the orbital magnetism of
electrons in normal-metal – superconductor hybrid structures. Our
theoretical work is motivated by an intense experimental activity in
this area of mesoscopic physics triggered by recent advances in
nanostructure fabrication technology. For an introduction to the subject
we refer the reader to the review on “Mesoscopic Electron Transport” [
Kouwenhoven 1997 ] .

The microscopic process underlying the physics of proximity induced
superconductivity is the Andreev reflection (AR) at a NS interface: An
electron incident from the normal metal into the superconductor is
retro-reflected into a hole, transmitting the double electron charge
into the superconductor [ Andreev 1964 ] . In the following, we give an
introduction to the basic properties of the AR and relate the works of
this thesis to this fundamental process.

The quasi-particle transfer at a NS interface is best described by the
Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) equations [ de Gennes 1966a ] , which
determine the two-component wavefunctions @xmath of electron and hole
close to the Fermi level,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We use the linearized Hamiltonian @xmath , where @xmath is the Fermi
velocity, @xmath provides the off-diagonal pair-potential and @xmath is
the quasi-particle energy with respect to the chemical potential. Let us
consider a NS junction as described by the pair potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

While in the normal metal the electron and hole states decouple ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath , @xmath ), the quasi-particles in the superconductor are
coupled evanescent modes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ). By using the ansatz @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath we easily find the Andreev reflection amplitude from
the continuity of the wavefunction,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , the incident quasi-particle excitation is reflected with
probability @xmath . Similarly the Andreev amplitude describing the
conversion of an incident hole to a reflected electron is given by
@xmath . Andreev thus found that the incident quasi-particle excitation
is prevented from entering the superconductor, and consequently heat (or
energy) transport across the NS interface is suppressed [ Andreev 1965 ]
. On the other hand, the double charge @xmath (of incident electron and
reflected hole) is transferred across the NS interface. In the
superconductor the decaying quasi-particle current is converted into
supercurrent [ Blonder 1982 ] .

The Andreev reflection (AR) coherently couples electron and hole states
and thus induces the superconducting correlations @xmath in the normal
metal,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the index @xmath denotes the eigenstates and @xmath is the Fermi
occupation number, see also appendix A . Instead of a Cooper pair
condensate, the proximity metal exhibits correlated electron-hole pairs,
which are mutually independent. Here lies the fragility of the proximity
effect: The thermally excited Andreev pairs at energy @xmath are
dephased over the thermal length @xmath and the correlation function (
1.6 ) is suppressed as @xmath (see Chp. 3.2 ).

Let us consider in the following a normal metal slab of thickness @xmath
on top of a bulk superconductor. Due to the AR process, the
quasi-particles at subgap energies @xmath are bound to the normal layer,
see Fig. 1.1 . The discrete energies of the Andreev bound states follow
from a constructive interference condition for an electron and a hole
traveling back and forth across the normal layer and being converted
into each other at the NS interface ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The bound states are quantized at energies @xmath depending only on the
component of the Fermi velocity in forward direction ( @xmath ). The
energy levels are repelled from the chemical potential, as a finite
energy mismatch of the wave vector @xmath of electron and hole is needed
to compensate for the phase @xmath of the AR. The discrete Andreev
levels contribute to the finite density of states at @xmath filling the
superconducting gap.

The transport through the ballistic NS structure coupled by means of a
tunneling barrier (I) to a NINS junction, see Fig. 1.1 , reveals a
resonance structure at the energies of the Andreev (quasi)-bound states
@xmath [ Rowell 1966 ] . A similar behavior is expected in a diffusive
system, where the average path traveled @xmath is to be replaced by
@xmath ( @xmath mean free path). According to the constructive
interference condition @xmath the resonances are found at the Thouless
energy @xmath . In chapter 2 we analyze the spectral conductance @xmath
and the shot noise @xmath in NS junctions with an arbitrary scattering
region in the normal lead, which typically includes a barrier at the NS
interface and additional disorder in the normal lead. We describe the
single-particle resonance structure that follows from the interplay
between the normal scattering and the AR processes and enhances the
subgap transport.

The linear transport coefficients @xmath and @xmath in a NS junction are
suppressed by the transmission @xmath of the N conductor, reflecting the
two-particle nature of the AR process [ Blonder 1982 , Beenakker 1992a ,
de Jong 1994 ] . This explains why the first observation of an enhanced
subgap conductance could be misinterpreted as being due to supercurrents
[ Kastalsky 1991 ] . Actually, the iterative scattering processes
between the disorder and the interface barrier increase the possibility
for an AR as compared to a simple tunneling junction [ Melsen 1994 ] .
If, on the other hand, the interface barrier is weak, the resonance
structure of the Andreev states, which are el-hole quasi-bound states
between the disorder and the superconductor , determine the transport
coefficients. The conductance @xmath as well as the shot noise @xmath
exhibit peaks at the Andreev or the Thouless energy, respectively, for a
ballistic or a diffusive conductor. Characteristically these resonances
are pinned at a finite energy above the Fermi level, which we understand
in terms of the @xmath phase shift in the AR process, and survive in the
multichannel limit. The reentrance effect observed in NS junctions with
a diffusive lead [ Petrashov 1995 , Charlat 1996 , Poirier 1997a ]
reflect the non-monotonicity of the spectral conductance due to the
underlying Andreev resonances. While theoretical works using the Green’s
function technique have explained these experiments accurately [ Yip
1995 , Nazarov 1996 , Stoof 1996 , Golubov 1988 , Wilhelm 1998 ] , the
Landauer-Büttiker approach offers an intuitive understanding here, based
on a ballistic viewpoint. The diffusive system is described by averaging
over an ensemble of impurity configurations, see [ Marmokos 1993 ,
Argaman 1997 , Lambert 1998 ] . In Chp. 2 we present new results for the
shot noise, which are of interest with respect to ongoing noise
experiments in NS junctions [ Jehl 1999 , Kozhevnikov 1999 ] .

The quantization of the Andreev levels at discrete energies away from
the Fermi level suppresses the density of states (DOS) of the proximity
layer as compared to the bulk metal. From the low energy spectrum ( 1.8
) we obtain the Andreev DOS [ de Gennes 1963 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( @xmath , @xmath ). The excitation gap @xmath is softened in the normal
metal to a linearly vanishing DOS below @xmath . We note that similar
results for the DOS are observed in diffusive NS hybrid structures [
Guéron 1996 , Belzig 1996b ] .

The DOS suppression close to the Fermi level affects the response
properties of the proximity layer. In chapter 3 we consider the magnetic
response, i.e., the screening currents induced by an applied magnetic
field. Generically, the linear current response @xmath is given by the
sum of the diamagnetic current describing the response of the rigid
wavefunction and the paramagnetic current induced by the perturbation of
the wavefunction in the applied field. While the diamagnetic current is
trivially proportional to the bulk electron density, the paramagnetic
current depends on the DOS at the Fermi surface [ Schrieffer 1988 ] .
The solution of the screening problem requires the full knowledge of the
dispersive relation @xmath which has to be solved together with the
Maxwell equation @xmath . ( @xmath is the London penetration depth). The
variation of the field on wavelength @xmath typically induces
quasi-particle excitations at energy @xmath giving a paramagnetic
current. Depending on the availability of the finite energy excitations,
the paramagnetic current either vanishes or compensates for the
diamagnetic current.

In a BCS superconductor with excitation gap @xmath , the paramagnetic
current is gapped (the DOS vanishes) for long wavelength and the
response is purely diamagnetic, @xmath for @xmath . Above the gap the
paramagnetic current is found to cancel the diamagnetic current leaving
a small response @xmath . In real space this implies a range of the
current–field relations of the order of @xmath . For a London length
@xmath we find a local response, while for @xmath the current–field
dependence is nonlocal according to a Pippard-type relation [ Pippard
1953 ] . In a bulk normal metal, the continuous density of states at the
Fermi level implies a cancellation of dia- and paramagnetic currents,
leaving no net screening response.

In a clean proximity layer, the suppression of the DOS produces a net
diamagnetic current, but the lack of a quasi-particle gap translates to
a diverging nonlocality range. It turns out that for finite @xmath the
paramagnetic current is able to compensate the diamagnetic current,
producing the kernel @xmath , and thus the nonlocal current functional [
Zaikin 1982 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We study this screening problem in more detail in Chp. 3 , where the
magnetic response of a NS slab with arbitrary impurity concentration is
discussed. We introduce the powerful quasi-classical Green’s function
technique to derive the general linear current functional. We find that
a finite mean free path provides a cutoff for the nonlocality range, but
that the current–field relations in the proximity effect nevertheless
remain typically nonlocal. We distinguish several regimes for the
magnetic response depending on the geometric thickness @xmath , the
thermal length @xmath and the mean free path @xmath . The reduction of
the screening density and the nonlocality range with decreasing purity
affect the susceptibility in different ways, producing a non-monotonic
dependence in the diamagnetic susceptibility with changing mean free
path. This understanding provides the basis for a quantitative fit with
the experiments [ Müller-Allinger 1999 ] .

The nonlocal field dependence is also found in the spectrum of the
Andreev states. Replacing the gradient in ( 1.1 ) by @xmath we can
account for the vector potential by adding an Aharonov-Bohm-type phase
to the constructive interference condition ( 1.7 ), yielding the bound
state energies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The circular integral gives the flux @xmath enclosed between the
quasi-classical trajectory and the NS interface, see Fig. 1.1 (hatched
region). The flux enters modulo an integer number of flux quanta @xmath
. This leads to a random distribution of the Andreev levels at large
field @xmath , suppressing the energy gap and inducing the magnetic
breakdown in the proximity layer. The magnetic breakdown denotes the
proximity layer’s own critical field @xmath , at which the Meissner
field expulsion ceases to be effective and the applied field penetrates
into the normal layer by a first order transition. While in a small
applied magnetic field the Andreev pairs produce diamagnetic screening
currents, at large fields the superconducting correlations are destroyed
by the random Aharonov-Bohm phases in ( 1.12 ) and the net screening
current vanishes. In Chp. 4 we determine the @xmath phase diagram for
this behavior, finding the first order transition line separating the
diamagnetic phase of effective field expulsion and the normal state of
field penetration.

The magnetic breakdown has been observed recently in increasingly clean
samples [ Oda 1980 , Mota 1982 , Bergmann 1987 , Visani 1990b ] and we
find good agreement of both temperature and thickness dependence of the
breakdown field with experimental data on quasi-ballistic Ag-Nb samples
[ Mota 1989 , Müller-Allinger 1999 ] .

We study a different aspect of nonlocality in Chp. 6 , where we consider
a ballistic normal metal layer connected by two superconducting
reservoirs to a SNS junction. The two NS interfaces act as a confining
potential for the electrons and holes in the normal interlayer. The
junction exhibits current-carrying bound states consisting of an
electron traveling forward and a hole traveling backwards which are
converted into each other by the AR [ Kulik 1970 ] , see Fig. 1.2 . The
constructive interference condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

now features the phase difference @xmath of the two superconducting
reservoirs (the sign of @xmath depending on the orientation of the
quasi-particle current) and implies the spectrum of bound states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These bound states are known to transmit the supercurrent between the
two reservoirs: While at phase difference @xmath the left- and
right-going states are degenerate and their respective currents cancel,
by changing @xmath an asymmetry is introduced producing the
supercurrents in the junction.

Including a magnetic induction as above, the bound state energies

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.15)
  -- -- -- --------

depend on the gauge invariant phase difference ( @xmath ) between the
two endpoints @xmath and @xmath of the quasiparticle trajectories
connecting the superconducting reservoirs, see Fig. 1.2 . The currents
@xmath depend non-locally on the field @xmath . The Josephson current
through the junction is given by the sum of the currents carried along
all the quasi-particle trajectories across the junction. In Chp. 6 we
find that in a junction of finite width the trajectories with multiple
reflections at the metallic boundary alter the field dependence of the
Josephson current, as they experience a different gauge invariant phase
difference, see Fig. 1.2 . The current–flux relation @xmath crosses over
from the usual @xmath - to the anomalous @xmath -periodicity as a
function of increasing field. The cross-over takes place when the
Josephson vortex distance @xmath becomes smaller than the nonlocality
range of the junction. Our results explain the experimental data
recently obtain on S-2DEG-S junctions [ Heida 1998 ] , where the
ballistic link was provided by a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG).

Let us consider the Josephson relation @xmath in a junction between a
conventional, S-wave superconductor (S) and a High- @xmath
superconductor with D-wave symmetry (D). The order parameter in the
D-wave superconductor is direction-dependent as @xmath exhibiting two
lobes with positive sign and two lobes with negative sign, see Fig. 1.3
. The phase difference @xmath across the SND junction thus depends on
the orientation of the quasi-particle trajectory, varying by @xmath for
trajectories connecting with the negative rather than the positive lobes
of the D-wave material. For the alignment of the D-wave superconductor
with a gap @xmath with respect to the @xmath -axis, the two
quasiparticle populations with @xmath and @xmath , see Fig. 1.3 ,
correspond to two conventional Josephson junctions shifted by @xmath
with respect to each other. The spectrum of the bound states is given by
Eq. ( 1.13 ), where @xmath differs by @xmath for the two quasi-particle
populations. Therefore, the @xmath periodicity of the critical current
of each junction is reduced to a @xmath periodicity in the SND junction.

In chapter 7 we propose to exploit the doubly periodic Josephson
relation for the implementation of a quantum bit (qubit). The @xmath
-periodic junction can be viewed as a macroscopic two-level system
exhibiting two degenerate ground states which carry no current and are
thus optimally isolated from the environment. The macroscopic quantum
tunneling between these two states opens the possibility for a quantum
time evolution of the junction, which we propose to use for quantum
computation.

In chapter 5 we return to the orbital magnetism, synthesizing various
elements of proximity induced superconductivity discussed above. The
motivation for this work has been provided by the puzzling low-
temperature anomalies observed in normal-metal – superconductor
cylinders by Mota and co-workers [ Visani 1990a , Mota 1994 ] . In the
low-temperature low-field corner of the H-T phase diagram, the Ag-Nb and
Cu-Nb samples develop a paramagnetic signal on top of the saturated
Meissner response, which produces a reentrance in the magnetic
susceptibility (for a detailed discussion of the experiments see also [
Visani 1990c , Frassanito 1996 ] ). We note that the observed behavior
is not believed to be related to the low-temperature reentrance in the
conductance of a disordered NS junction discussed above, which is due to
the finite energy properties entering the non-equilibrium transport. The
magnetic response instead is a thermodynamic property of the system.

In chapter 5 we consider the consequence of a repulsive
electron-electron interaction in the normal metal proximity layer. The
repulsive coupling @xmath induces a finite gap @xmath in the normal
layer which is proportional to the induced superconducting correlations
( 1.6 ). The order parameter changes sign across the NS interface as the
coupling constant changes from attractive to repulsive. The NS structure
behaves like a Josephson junction with a phase difference of @xmath
across the NS interface. We know from Eq. ( 1.13 ) that a junction with
@xmath traps density of states at the Fermi energy @xmath , according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which remains true in the limit of a vanishing junction length @xmath .
The phase difference @xmath across the junction cancels the phase shifts
@xmath of the two AR. As all transverse wavefunction @xmath exhibit a
zero energy bound state, the DOS shows a peak a zero energy with
macroscopic weight

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

per unit surface.

As we show in Chp. 5 , this peak implies a paramagnetic instability in
the current response and leads to a spontaneous onset of currents along
the interface. Spontaneous moments form at the NS interface producing a
low-temperature reentrance in the magnetic susceptibility. The
qualitative agreement of our results with the observed low-temperature
anomaly is indicative of a repulsive electron-electron interaction in
these systems.

## Chapter 2 Nonlinearity in normal-metal – superconductor transport:
Conductance and shot noise

### 2.1 Scattering matrix approach to normal-metal – superconductor
transport

#### 2.1.1 Introduction

The study of electronic transport in normal-metal–superconductor (NS) or
semiconductor–superconductor (SmS) sandwiches has attracted a
considerable amount of interest in the past years. At sufficiently low
temperature and in high quality mesoscopic samples, the phase-breaking
length of the electrons is larger than the typical system size,
resulting in directly observable quantum coherence effects. Of special
interest is the effect of the electronic phase-coherence in a normal
metal–superconductor system. In the standard theory of the proximity
effect, the influence of the superconductor on the normal metal can be
understood in terms of the coherent coupling of electrons and holes in
the metal as described by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations [ de
Gennes 1966a ] . The correlation between electrons and holes is produced
by the process of Andreev reflection [ Andreev 1964 , Blonder 1982 ] at
the NS interface, by which an incident electron is back-reflected into a
hole, converting quasiparticle current to supercurrent. This microscopic
picture of electron-hole correlation is equivalent to that provided by a
pair correlation function in the normal metal, which is induced by the
superconductor through the contact at the NS interface. The scattering
matrix approach makes use of the microscopic single particle picture of
coupled electron and hole channels providing a straightforward tool
within a formalism of the Landauer–Büttiker type [ Landauer 1970 ,
Büttiker 1985 , Beenakker 1992a ] .

The quality of the interface as well as the phase breaking processes
determine the strength of the proximity effect and naturally have their
impact on the current–voltage characteristics (CVC). A few fascinating
transport experiments [ Pothier 1994 , Petrashov 1995 , Courtois 1996 ]
have been carried out recently, investigating temperature and voltage
dependence, as well as the flux modulation, of both NS and SmS
junctions. Interestingly, the relative strength of the interface barrier
and the elastic scattering in the normal region is crucial for the
features of the CVC. The ratio of the two determines whether subgap
conductance peaks arise at zero or finite voltage [ Volkov 1993 ,
Marmokos 1993 , Yip 1995 ] . The investigation of these so-called zero
and finite bias anomalies in the subgap conductance have been the object
of recent experiments [ Kastalsky 1991 , Nguyen 1992 , Nitta 1994 ,
Bakker 1994 , Magnée 1994 , Poirier 1997a ] . The present work draws
much of its motivation from the ongoing discussions and experiments in
this area, see also [ Aleiner 1996 ] . In our case study of a double
barrier NINIS junction we observe zero and finite bias anomalies and
shed light on the underlying mechanism.

Recently in [ Nazarov 1996 , Stoof 1996 ] as well as [ Golubov 1988 ] ,
the carrier transport in disordered NS junctions has been described in
terms of an energy-dependent diffusion constant, successfully explaining
the recent experiments on reentrance in the conductivity at low
temperatures [ Petrashov 1995 , Charlat 1996 ] . Their work uses the
quasi-classical Green’s functions technique [ Rammer 1986 ] , which
allows to describe transport both close to equilibrium [ Hekking 1994 ]
and far away from equilibrium [ Volkov 1993 , Volkov 1994 , Zhou 1995 ]
and facilitates the averaging over disorder in diffusive conductors.
This approach is quite indispensable if phase-breaking processes are to
be included. An appealing alternative approach is the scattering matrix
technique, which relies on the quasiparticle wavefunctions described by
the BdG equations. While being valid in a general context, it describes
the transport in mesocopic systems from the intuitive ballistic point of
view. The transport through normal or superconducting leads is expressed
through the properties of a multichannel scattering matrix accounting
for all elastic scattering processes, whether they be due to a geometric
constriction, single impurities, or disorder (inelastic processes are
excluded from such a description). By these means, the transport problem
is reduced to solving a ballistic problem at the interfaces of the
normal and superconducting leads. The current and the conductance of the
system are determined analytically in terms of the transmission and
reflection amplitudes of the scattering matrix. Adhering to this
formalism rather than the Green’s function technique helps us to improve
our understanding of zero and finite bias anomalies.

The study of normal–superconducting junctions goes back to the works of
Kulik [ Kulik 1970 ] on SNS junctions and of Blonder et al. [ Blonder
1982 ] on NIS junctions, who studied nonlinear transport within the
framework of the BdG equations considering quasi one-dimensional models.
On the other hand, the scattering matrix technique was developed by
Landauer and co-workers [ Landauer 1970 , Büttiker 1985 ] in the linear
response regime, resulting in the well known conductance formula for a
normal metal. Lambert [ Lambert 1991 ] and Takane and Ebisawa [ Takane
1991 , Takane 1992 ] extended the approach to include superconducting
segments, on the basis of which Beenakker [ Beenakker 1992a ] derived a
zero temperature, linear response conductance formula for the transport
through NS junctions. A few studies have been carried out recently [
Marmokos 1993 , Brouwer 1995 , Claughton 1996 ] combining the scattering
matrix approach with the finite voltage transport model of Ref. [
Blonder 1982 ] . They have limited themselves to the energy dependence
of the scattering states to extract finite voltage properties of the CVC
in the subgap regime. Here, we extend these works to voltages above the
gap and additionally take into account the full voltage dependence of
the transport problem. This is important within the context of the sign
reversal symmetry of the differential conductance which we discuss
below. At the same time, we provide a common framework for the above
studies, tracing them back to a single general formula.

In the present chapter, we derive the general expression for the current
through a NS junction in the scattering matrix approach, valid for
multiple channels, finite voltage, and nonzero temperature. We review
the derivation of the current–voltage relation and express it in terms
of a spectral conductance formula, thereby accounting for the full
voltage dependence of the transport problem. The reflection at the NS
interface is made explicit using the Andreev approximation and a
conductance formula is obtained expressing the result in terms of the
normal scattering matrix. We illustrate this formula in the new regime
of voltages above the gap and expose its connection to previously
obtained limits. We describe the existence of resonances due to
quasi-bound Andreev states, and show that they produce sharp conductance
peaks in both the single and multichannel junction. We explain the
generic mechanism underlying the appearance of zero and finite bias
anomalies in the ballistic two barrier system. Finally, we interpret our
results in connection to the recent experiments on zero and finite bias
anomalies in disordered NS junctions.

Chapter 2.1 closely follows our paper published in [ Lesovik 1997 ] . We
would like to point out further works, both theoretical and
experimental, which have been carried out since then [ Hartog 1997 ,
Lambert 1998 , Wilhelm 1998 , Lesovik 1998 ] .

We consider a normal–superconducting junction with quasi
one-dimensional, ballistic normal and superconducting leads, as shown in
Figure 2.1 . The pair potential vanishes in the normal part, due to the
absence of electron-electron interactions. Between the normal lead and
the NS interface, the electrons traverse a disordered region, the
transmission through and the reflection thereof are described by a
scattering matrix. Between the scattering region and the NS interface, a
small ballistic normal region serves to separate the scattering in the
normal part, which mixes all electron channels at a given energy, from
the scattering at the NS interface, where electron and hole channels are
mixed in the reflection process. The coherent scattering in the disorder
region of the normal metal is described by the @xmath scattering matrix,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

which we denote by @xmath . The matrix connects the incoming @xmath
electron (hole) channels @xmath ( @xmath ) on each side to the equal
energy outgoing channels @xmath ( @xmath ) according to Figure 2.1 (
@xmath ). The @xmath channels represent the different transverse states,
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath reflection and transmission matrices for
electron channels, @xmath and @xmath the comprehensive @xmath matrices
including the complex conjugated reflection and transmission amplitudes
for holes ¹ ¹ 1 We denote the complex conjugate of a matrix @xmath by
@xmath , the transposed matrix by @xmath and the adjoint by @xmath . .
Following usual convention, we include the propagation in the ballistic
region @xmath in the scattering matrix. For states normalized to carry
unit probability current [ Blonder 1982 ] , the continuity equation
implies the unitarity of the scattering matrix. By allowing for a
dependence of the scattering matrices on voltage we can account for the
full voltage dependence of the scattering problem. We can thus describe
the deformation of the states due to the space dependent potential
including, e.g., the voltage dependent Schottky barrier at a
semiconductor–superconductor (SmS) interface.

We define an analogous unitary scattering matrix for the NS interface
@xmath (see Fig. 2.1 ) by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

The @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath give the
reflection and transmission amplitudes of the states normalized to unit
probability current in the normal and superconducting lead ² ² 2 Note
that the connection the unit charge currents on either side of the
interface will not produce unitarity, since quasiparticle charge current
is not a conserved quantity in the superconductor, see also appendix A .
In the evaluation of the current, we will consider the matrix ( 2.1 ) to
be specified by an arbitrary model for the disorder, while the matrix (
2.2 ) will be made explicit below using the BdG equations. The total
effect of all scattering processes in the disorder region and at the NS
interface can be described by a unitary, global @xmath scattering
matrix. We restrict ourselves to its sub-matrix @xmath describing the
reflection into the normal region,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are again @xmath reflection
matrices. @xmath can be expressed through the given scattering matrices
( 2.1 ) and ( 2.2 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

representing the sum over all scattering paths of an incident electron
or hole excitation, multiply scattered between the disorder region and
the NS interface. Apart from the direct reflection at the disorder
region, the simplest process contributing consists of an excitation,
which is first transmitted ( @xmath ) through the disorder region,
reflected ( @xmath ) at the NS interface, and transmitted ( @xmath )
back to the normal lead. All further paths result from iterative
scattering processes between the disorder region and the NS interface.

We now derive the current in the normal lead, expressing it through the
global reflection matrix @xmath . Applying a voltage @xmath (denoting
the voltage in a two point measurement) on the normal side has two
consequences. First, the voltage induces an electrostatic potential drop
over the disorder region in the NS junction, resulting in a deformation
of scattering states. The coupling of incident and outgoing channels is
thus voltage dependent in general, as described by @xmath . A stationary
state incident from the normal lead (of energy @xmath in channel @xmath
) consists of the incident electron and the reflected electron- and
hole- states and carries the current ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Second, the applied voltage shifts the chemical potential of the
reservoir attached to the normal lead by @xmath with respect to the
reservoir on the superconducting side. The deformation of the states by
itself produces no net current ³ ³ 3 This can be shown using the
unitarity of the global scattering matrix including the Andreev process
by an extension of the argument given for a normal junction. . The net
current flow results exclusively from the difference in occupation of
the (finite voltage) scattering states incident from the left and right
reservoirs. Writing the sum over channels as a trace, we obtain the
current–voltage relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the spectral conductance

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

A factor two accounts for the spin degeneracy. The defined spectral
conductance @xmath describes the current contribution of the incident
scattering states at energy @xmath , at a given voltage @xmath (by
convention, the energy is measured with respect to the chemical
potential in the superconductor). Formulas ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.7 ) imply the
differential conductance

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the expansion @xmath at zero temperature. This differs from the
differential conductance of Ref. [ Blonder 1982 ] , @xmath , by
accounting for the change in the conductance of the open channels with
increasing voltage.

The expressions ( 2.4 ), ( 2.6 ), and ( 2.7 ) determine the general form
of the current–voltage relation of a disordered NS junction, for an
arbitrary scattering and pair potential at the NS interface.

We close this section with a discussion of the symmetry of the CVC with
respect to sign reversal of the applied voltage. In the subgap regime
@xmath , the incoming quasiparticle excitations may not enter the
superconductor. The probability current of the states @xmath is totally
reflected and thus the global reflection matrix @xmath of ( 2.3 ) is
unitary. The unitarity produces the relations @xmath and @xmath . The
symmetry of electron- and hole- type excitations in the BdG equations
guarantees @xmath . As a consequence, the subgap conductance takes the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

A subtle issue is that this symmetry does not yet imply a symmetry in
the CVC under reversal of voltage [ Leadbeater 1996 ] . The latter
requires that @xmath , which amounts to @xmath being independent of
voltage. Then we have @xmath and the differential conductance is
invariant under sign reversal of the voltage. Indeed, in recent
experiments on SmS junctions [ Magnée 1994 , Poirier 1997a ] , an
asymmetry in the CVC was found in the subgap regime, which can be
understood on the basis of the above discussion taking into account the
voltage dependent Schottky barrier at the SmS interface. An explicit
account of the voltage dependence of @xmath requires the scattering
matrix @xmath to be determined in the applied electrostatic potential.
In principle, this task demands the self-consistent solution of the
scattering problem and the Poisson equation, see [ Christen 1996 ] . In
the next section, we evaluate the spectral conductance ( 2.7 ) by using
the Andreev approximation for the scattering at the NS interface.

#### 2.1.2 Spectral conductance in the Andreev approximation

The stationary states in the ballistic leads are solutions of the BdG
equations [ de Gennes 1966a ] and are of the plane wave type. A step
function model for the pair potential @xmath is assumed, which neglects
the suppression of the pair potential in the superconductor on the scale
of a coherence length. The NS interface connects electrons and holes of
the same channel with a reflection amplitude depending on the reduced
chemical potential @xmath . In the limit @xmath , the BdG equations are
simplified by linearizing the dispersion relation around the effective
Fermi wave number @xmath . In this approximation made by Andreev,
incoming electrons are purely reflected into holes and vice versa. The
reflection matrix at the NS interface is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

depending on the channel independent, scalar Andreev amplitudes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting in ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.7 ), we obtain the multichannel spectral
conductance formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combined with equation ( 2.6 ), Eq. ( 2.12 ) provides the finite
voltage, finite temperature CVC of a disordered normal–superconducting
junction in the Andreev approximation. The spectral conductance depends
on the scattering matrices of the electrons at energies @xmath as a
signature of the presence of Andreev reflection. The dependence of this
formula on the phases of the reflection and transmission amplitudes
proves crucial in determining the resonance peaks in the conductance.
The elementary process, which contributes to these phases is the
propagation of an electron and a hole between the disorder region and
the NS interface.

If no inter-channel mixing takes place, i. e., the matrices @xmath and
@xmath are diagonal, the conductance @xmath reduces to the quasi
one-dimensional form

  -- -------- -- -- --
     @xmath         
  -- -------- -- -- --

@xmath is the reflection amplitude for a state coming in from the right
side of the scattering region (Fig. 2.1 ) and @xmath and @xmath denote
the reflection and transmission probabilities of the @xmath -th channel.

For voltages well above the gap, @xmath (still assuming @xmath ), the
Andreev reflection is strongly suppressed and drops according to @xmath
. The spectral conductance ( 2.12 ) asymptotically approaches the
expression for a normal junction,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

At voltages below the gap, we make use of @xmath and @xmath and obtain
the spectral conductance @xmath in the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

The reflection and transmission coefficients at @xmath are symmetrically
involved in this formula, which results in the symmetry of the CVC
discussed in the section above. In contrast, the spectral conductance (
LABEL:onechannel ) at voltages above the gap becomes increasingly
asymmetric as it asymptotically approaches the Landauer expression. The
sensitivity of ( 2.15 ) to the phase of the reflection amplitudes allows
for the distinction of zero and finite bias peaks in the double barrier
NS junction discussed below.

The linear response limit ( @xmath ) of ( 2.15 ) can be determined using
@xmath and @xmath and takes the form [ Beenakker 1992a ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.16)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 2.1.3 Double barrier NINIS junction

In this section we apply the above results to a double barrier NINIS
junction, which allows to study the interplay between normal- and
Andreev- levels in a Fabry–Perot type I @xmath NI @xmath interferometer.
First, we discuss the structure in the conductance of a single channel
NI @xmath NI @xmath S junction, which we trace back to the presence of
Andreev resonances. Second, we present numerical results for a
multichannel junction, showing that the typical resonance structure of a
single channel survives the summation over the channels. This stability
is a peculiarity of the superconducting system, absent in a normal NI
@xmath NI @xmath N double barrier junction.

Since the channels separate in the double barrier problem, we can make
use of the result ( LABEL:onechannel ) for the conductance @xmath .
@xmath depends on the phases @xmath of the reflection amplitudes @xmath
as well as on the complex amplitude @xmath of the Andreev reflection. We
use the notation @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for the reflection
amplitude, the phase factors being determined by the potential barriers
@xmath and @xmath and the propagation between them. We rewrite the
amplitude of the Andreev reflection as @xmath with the phase @xmath
below the gap and vanishing above. The conductance @xmath simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is always less or equal to the universal value @xmath . Note that
the Andreev reflection is suppressed above the gap ( @xmath ), while the
phase @xmath vanishes.
Below the gap the conductance exhibits resonances, which is maximal if
@xmath are equal and the scattering phase difference of the electrons
and holes compensates for the phase of the Andreev reflection, according
to the resonance condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us assume that the barrier at the NS interface vanishes, I @xmath ,
and denote the length of the interferometer by @xmath . In the limit of
a high potential barrier I @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are energy
independent and equal, and @xmath . Using the wave number @xmath (
@xmath is the Fermi velocity of channel @xmath ), the resonance
condition ( 2.18 ) yields the spectrum of Andreev levels,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which predicts resonances in the conductance of a typical width
proportional to the transmission @xmath of the barrier. The phase @xmath
varies between @xmath and @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and guarantees
the existence of at least one Andreev resonance for arbitrarily small
@xmath . In the @xmath limit, the weight of this resonance lines up with
the gap voltage and we recover the NIS junction, featuring a suppressed
subgap conductivity and a peak in the differential conductance at the
gap voltage. This peak can be understood in terms of the Andreev
resonance which moves to the gap energy for @xmath .

We now turn to double barrier NI @xmath NI @xmath S junction with
arbitrary barriers. Here @xmath represent the phases for the reflection
of electrons entering the double barrier scattering region from the
right (superconducting side). The corresponding reflection amplitudes
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the amplitudes of the left ( @xmath ) and the right (
@xmath ) barrier. The phase of this reflection amplitude plays the major
role in determining the structure of the conductance, as it controls the
existence of resonances according to ( 2.18 ). Let us fix the barrier I
@xmath and increase I @xmath slowly, keeping their strengths I @xmath I
@xmath . In this situation, the INI interferometer develops pronounced
Andreev resonances. For @xmath , the phase @xmath of the reflection
amplitude @xmath produces a linear energy dependence of the phase @xmath
, which changes by @xmath on the scale @xmath and results in (nearly)
equidistant resonances, in accordance with ( 2.19 ). As the strength of
I @xmath is increased, the resonances pair up as is illustrated in
Figure 2.2 . The phase function @xmath , as displayed in Figure 2.2
(solid line), can be used to determine the location of the resonances by
finding those combinations of energies @xmath , which have a phase
difference ⁴ ⁴ 4 The energy dependence of the Andreev reflection
amplitude produces slight deviations close to the gap energy. @xmath .
The period of @xmath reduced by half with respect to the period of
@xmath accounts for the pairing of the resonances.

When the strengths of the barriers become of the same order, I @xmath I
@xmath , the spectral weight of the INI interferometer is shared by
Andreev quasi-bound states of a mixed electron–hole character and normal
electron quasi-bound states. Due to the large gradient of the phase
close to the normal resonances, see Fig. 2.2 , the Andreev resonances
tend to be pinned to normal resonances at either @xmath or @xmath .
While the Andreev bound states contribute to the current, normal bound
states do not couple to the superconductor and thus do not participate
in the charge transport. This is reflected by the subgap symmetry of the
@xmath under reversal of voltage which is is observed for all barrier
strengths, see Fig. 2.2 .

As the barrier strength is increased further to I @xmath I @xmath , the
Andreev resonances are weakened and eventually disappear. Although the
normal resonances dominate in the INI interferometer in this regime,
only the weak Andreev resonances show up in the conductance, which thus
exhibits only a weak subgap structure. The phase function @xmath in
Figure 2.2 (dashed line) becomes nearly constant for @xmath , see ( 2.20
), and the phase condition for resonance ( 2.18 ) cannot be met.

A comparison of the double barrier systems NI @xmath NI @xmath S and NI
@xmath NI @xmath S, i.e., with inverse sequences of the barriers I
@xmath and I @xmath , is given if Fig. 2.2 . The transmission @xmath
(dotted line) is identical for both cases. Let us assume that I @xmath I
@xmath . In this first barrier sequence, we have a strong energy
dependence of the phase @xmath (solid line in Fig. 2.2 ), which implies
the existence of Andreev type resonances at finite bias. The electrons
entering the INI interferometer from the normal lead, are given enough
time to build up an Andreev resonance and preferably leave into the
superconductor. For the inverse barrier sequence, the barrier I @xmath
at the NS interface dominates. The weak energy dependence of the phase
@xmath of reflection allows no sharp resonances to build up (dashed line
in Fig. 2.2 ). This reflects the fact that the electrons which enter the
INI region leave through I @xmath into the normal lead before an Andreev
resonance can build up. In summary, the spectral density in the INI
interferometer changes radically with the coupling strengths of the
normal and superconducting leads. Normal resonances dominate when the
interferometer is coupled more strongly to the normal lead, whereas
Andreev resonances take over in weight when the coupling to the
superconductor is stronger. At any instant, however, only the Andreev
states participate in the charge transport.

We turn to the numerical analysis of a multichannel NINIS junction. With
Eq. ( LABEL:onechannel ) we extend the linear response study of Ref. [
Melsen 1994 ] to finite voltage. We investigate an NI @xmath NI @xmath S
junction with two @xmath -function barriers of typical strength @xmath
and corresponding reflection probability @xmath assuming values between
@xmath and @xmath . We vary the relative barrier strengths to cover the
range between the two limits I @xmath I @xmath and I @xmath I @xmath
discussed above. The distance between the barriers is chosen to be of
the order of or larger than the coherence length of the superconductor,
providing the forward channel with one to a few Andreev resonances. The
number of resonances increases with the incidence angle of the channels.
We chose leads with a cross section area of @xmath , which amounts to
about @xmath transverse channels. The ratio of the energy gap to the
Fermi energy is assumed to be @xmath . Each channel features the typical
conductance structure of paired Andreev resonances exposed above. Their
positions and widths depend on the ratio of the barrier strengths I
@xmath and I @xmath as well as the longitudinal kinetic energy of the
single channels. Remarkably, the overall conductance, which is obtained
through summation of single channel conductances, exhibits a
characteristic subgap structure signaling the presence of Andreev
resonances.

In contrast, the overall conductance of the corresponding NI @xmath NI
@xmath N junction is practically constant, the normal resonances of the
INI region having been averaged out.

The numerical study of a 3-dimensional NINS junction has shown that both
the positions and the number of resonances in the overall conductance
correspond to those in the forward channel [ Chaudhuri 1995 ] ⁵ ⁵ 5 This
is connected to the decrease of the transmission probability with
increasing incidence angle, and the non-isotropic distribution of the
channels over the incidence angles [ Chaudhuri 1995 ] , which is @xmath
. . In the NINIS junction, we do not find a direct correspondence of the
resonances of the total conductance with the forward channel nor with
any other specific channel, although a clear resonance structure still
survives the summation over the channels.

Let us concentrate on the conductance formula ( 2.15 ), valid at subgap
voltages, and on the properties of the CVC close to zero voltage. For I
@xmath I @xmath , the denominator of ( 2.15 ) changes rapidly with the
strong energy dependence of the phase of @xmath which is responsible for
the appearance of conductance peaks at finite voltage. The pronounced
structure in the conductance survives the summation over the channels as
displayed in Figures 2.3 and 2.4 (solid lines). The repulsion of the
Andreev levels around zero voltage produces a minimum in @xmath at zero
voltage. For I @xmath I @xmath , the phase of the reflection amplitudes
@xmath has negligible energy dependence and the numerator of ( 2.15 )
dictates the features of the conductance. The expansion of the product
@xmath about zero energy shows the existence of a zero bias maximum. The
zero bias anomaly shows up as a characteristic property of the overall
conductance, see Figures 2.3 and 2.4 (dotted lines). The zero bias
maximum coincides with the maximum of the conductance product @xmath of
the corresponding NININ junction at zero energy. Figs. 2.3 and 2.4
illustrate the crossover from zero to finite bias anomalies for two
different interbarrier distances @xmath as the strength of barrier I
@xmath is increased and I @xmath is kept fixed. For an interbarrier
distance larger than the coherence length of the superconductor, several
Andreev resonances show up (see Fig. 2.4 ). Note that the inversion of
the barrier sequence transforms the zero voltage conductance from a
local minimum to a local maximum, while keeping the same zero voltage
conductance.

The interference of multiple scattering processes between the scattering
region and the NS interface thus produces an interesting structure in
the differential conductance. Recently, experiments in disordered NS and
SmS junctions [ Kastalsky 1991 , Nguyen 1992 , Nitta 1994 , Bakker 1994
, Magnée 1994 ] have concentrated on the observation of zero and finite
bias anomalies. It has been understood theoretically [ Volkov 1993 ,
Marmokos 1993 , Yip 1995 , van Wees 1992 ] that these features are due
to the interplay between the barrier at the NS interface and disorder in
the normal lead. At small disorder, the differential conductance
exhibits a zero bias maximum, while at large enough disorder, a finite
bias peak is expected [ Yip 1995 ] at a voltage of the order of the
Thouless energy @xmath of the normal lead [ Edwards 1972 ] . This has
recently been confirmed in an experiment [ Poirier 1997a , Poirier 1997b
] . Here, we have found the existence of the analog features in a
ballistic double barrier NS junction (in addition, the double barrier
junction shows higher harmonics in the resonances of the conductance).
The ballistic point of view applied to the disordered NS junction thus
explains the finite bias anomaly as a superposition of resonances due to
quasi-bound Andreev states between the superconductor and the disorder.
This interpretation applies in the same way to recent experiments
showing a low-temperature reentrance in the conductance [ Petrashov 1995
, Charlat 1996 ] . The non-monotonicity is again due to the resonance
structure in the spectral conductance @xmath , which now appears as a
function of temperature.

#### 2.1.4 Discussion

We have described the current–voltage characteristics of NS junctions by
the scattering matrix approach and expressed it through the spectral
conductance, which takes into account the explicit voltage dependence of
the scattering problem. The spectral conductance is symmetric under sign
reversal of voltage in the in the subgap regime. We have derived Eq. (
LABEL:onechannel ) giving the spectral conductance in terms of the
normal scattering amplitudes. This result has enabled us to carry out a
study of a double barrier NINIS junction at finite voltage. As the ratio
of the barrier strengths of the INI interferometer is changed, and we go
over from normal to Andreev resonances, the conductance shows a
cross-over from a zero bias to a finite bias peak.

### 2.2 Finite voltage shot noise in normal-metal – superconductor
junctions

#### 2.2.1 Introduction

Shot noise arises from the current fluctuations in transport as a
consequence of the discrete nature of the carriers, first predicted by
Schottky for the vacuum tube [ Schottky 1918 ] . In a coherent conductor
the quantum fluctuations, which follow from the probabilistic nature of
the backscattering restricted by the Pauli principle, are reduced in
comparison to the Schottky result [ Lesovik 1989 , Büttiker 1992 ] . In
a disordered normal-metal–superconductor (NS) junction, the shot noise
is produced by the normal scattering processes as well as the imperfect
Andreev reflection [ Khlus 1987 , Muzykantskii 1994 , de Jong 1994 ,
Hessling 1996 ] . The Andreev reflection introduces fluctuations
proportional to the double electron charge, which may be iteratively
increased to give fluctuations of several charge quanta in biased SNS
junctions [ Averin 1996 ] . For a review, we refer the reader to [ de
Jong 1997 ] . In this chapter we study the shot noise at finite voltage
in a disordered NS junction as well as its structure due to the
iterative scattering processes between the disordered normal lead and
the NS interface. We derive a formula which expresses the differential
shot noise of the dirty NS junction in terms of the scattering matrix of
the normal lead and the (scalar) amplitude of Andreev reflection. In the
systems of a single barrier
normal-metal–insulator–normal-metal–superconductor (NINS) junction and a
double barrier NINIS junction, we explain the existence of a non-trivial
resonance structure. The results of chapter 2.2 have been published in [
Fauchère 1998 ] .

We consider a disordered NXS junction, shown in the inset of Fig. 2.5 ,
with an arbitrary elastic scattering region X in the normal lead, whose
effect on the noise is to be determined. We restrict ourselves to
voltages below the superconducting gap @xmath . The low-frequency power
spectrum of the current fluctuations is determined by the irreducible
current–current correlator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath is the second cumulant in time). The time-dependence of the
current operator is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the mean field approximation for the Hamiltonian @xmath we do not
account for the fluctuations of the order parameter in the S region. The
effective Hamiltonian is diagonalized by a Bogoliubov transformation [
Niño 1984 ] . After integration over the cross-section, the net current
operator can be expressed through the positive energy eigenfunctions,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.23)
  -- -- -- --------

which may be evaluated in the normal lead. The operators @xmath
belonging to the wavefunctions @xmath annihilate the scattering states
of the disordered NS junction (note @xmath ). We note that the symmetry
of the BdG eigenfunctions @xmath , @xmath with respect to sign reversal
of energy to @xmath , @xmath is the consequence of spin degeneracy in
Nambu space, allowing the the negative energy states to be eliminated in
favor of the positive energy states, see Appendix A .

At voltages below the superconducting gap ( @xmath ), the
quasi-particles are injected from the normal reservoir only, and the
wavefunctions depend on the @xmath global reflection matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath of the disordered NS junction, see Eq. (
2.3 ). The scattering states indexed by @xmath consist of an incident
@xmath (lectron) or @xmath (ole) like quasi-particle in channel @xmath
with energy @xmath superposed with the reflected electron and hole
states. The occupation numbers are given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution
@xmath .

The noise power ( 2.21 ) is determined by the transitions induced by the
current operator @xmath from initial states @xmath to intermediate
states @xmath and back, which differ only by their occupation with
respect to two single particle states with indices @xmath and @xmath .
E.g., the transition between an incident electron @xmath and an incident
hole state @xmath is produced by the matrix element between the
reflected electrons and holes of the two scattering states with respect
to the current operator, @xmath . Summed over the channels, the
transitions contribute to the fluctuations with the weight @xmath .
Following the quantum mechanical formalism outlined, we obtain the
low-frequency limit of the power spectrum [ Anantram 1996 , Martin 1996
] valid for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.24)
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

The first term describes the transitions between states of opposite
current sign, while the second represents the transitions between states
of equal current sign. At zero temperature, the second term is
suppressed by the Pauli principle and the first term produces the shot
noise [ Lesovik 1989 , Lesovik 1994 , Levitov 1996 ] . The thermal
fluctuations describing the Johnson-Nyquist noise [ Johnson 1927 ,
Nyquist 1928 ] are due to both terms. Eq. ( 2.24 ) is manifestly
invariant under sign reversal of voltage, see Chp. 2.1 .

#### 2.2.2 Interplay between normal scattering and Andreev reflection

We express the electron-hole reflection matrix @xmath in Eq. ( 2.24 ) in
terms of the normal reflection- and transmission matrices @xmath and
@xmath of the scattering (X) region and the amplitude of Andreev
reflection @xmath at the XS interface,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Eqs. ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.10 ), recalling @xmath , @xmath ). Inserting
@xmath in Eq. ( 2.24 ) provides us with a general multichannel
expression for the shot noise in a disordered NXS junction, explicit in
the normal scattering matrix and the Andreev reflection amplitude.

Next we restrict ourselves to the situation of a junction with uniform
transverse cross-section, which permits the separation of channels and
will be used in the single and double barrier systems below. We recall
that the differential conductances of the channels @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Eq. ( 2.15 ). At zero temperature, the shot noise ( 2.24 ) exhibits
the noise power

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the differential (low-frequency) shot noise of channel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (2.28)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is the reflection amplitude of channel @xmath in the matrix
@xmath describing the reflection from the right -hand side of the X
region, @xmath , and @xmath . The two energy dependencies of the
reflection probabilities @xmath and (the phases of) the reflection
amplitudes @xmath translate into the voltage dependence of the shot
noise. The term sensitive to the phases of the reflection amplitudes is
due to the states multiply scattered between the disorder and the NS
interface. Note the similarity of Eq. ( 2.28 ) to the conductance
formula ( LABEL:onechannel ). In the limit @xmath ( @xmath ) the phase
dependencies drop out of Eq. ( 2.28 ) and we recover the linear response
result [ de Jong 1997 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to describe the weak coupling of a normal lead to an NS
proximity sandwich, we consider a
normal-metal–insulator–normal-metal–superconducting (NINS) junction with
a potential barrier of low transmission ( @xmath ) placed at a distance
@xmath away from the perfect NS interface. The NINS junction serves as a
model system for a tunneling experiment from a metallic tip to a thin
film NS layer structure, which has permitted the observation of the
Rowell-McMillan oscillations [ Rowell 1966 ] . In this elementary model,
the reflection amplitudes @xmath have a roughly constant modulus @xmath
and an energy dependent phase @xmath , accumulated during the
propagation between the potential barrier and the NS interface ( @xmath
, @xmath denote the Fermi wave number and velocity of channel @xmath ).
Consequently the shot noise ( 2.28 ) for the channel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

depends only on the phase difference @xmath of electron and hole
propagation through the X ( @xmath IN) region. The resonance structure
of @xmath is intimately connected to the voltage (energy @xmath )
dependence of the differential conductance ( 2.15 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figures 2.6 (a) and 2.6 (b) show their generic dependence on @xmath .
The minima of the denominator [ @xmath ] correspond to the resonances of
the Andreev quasi-bound states. These conductance resonances are
repelled from zero voltage, since the phase of the Andreev reflection
@xmath has to be compensated by the phase difference of electron and
hole propagation @xmath . The shot noise ( 2.30 ) vanishes at these
resonances ( @xmath ). The noise maxima are found from @xmath at
energies doubly peaked close to the resonances. The peak separation
@xmath coincides with the width of the resonances.

Interestingly, this non-trivial structure survives in the multichannel
NINS junction, whose results are shown in Figs. 2.6 (d) and 2.6 (e). The
stability of the resonance structure is due to its pinning to the Fermi
energy. In contrast, the resonance structure of a potential well in a
normal conductor is washed out in the multichannel limit. As Figures 2.6
(b,e) show, the narrow double peak structure in the noise is smeared out
in the multichannel limit, and the noise @xmath takes a maximum rather
than a minimum at the resonance, retracing the shape of the conductance.

At large voltages ( @xmath ), the shot noise approaches a constant as a
consequence of the dephasing between the channels. The channel average
may be evaluated by averaging over the phase @xmath in Eqs. ( 2.30 ) and
( 2.31 ) and we obtain the result ( @xmath ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that both the shot noise and the conductance approach the
normal state values at voltages @xmath . This limiting behavior
demonstrates that the NIN junction is effectively decoupled from the NS
interface in the large voltage limit and dominates both noise and
conductance due to its low transparency.

Let us concentrate on the overall ratio of noise power to current @xmath
[ @xmath , @xmath ]. This ratio has already been used successfully in
determining the unit of the charge carriers in the Fractional Quantum
Hall Effect [ Glattli 1997 , de-Picciotto 1997 ] . While at small
voltages ( @xmath ) the noise carries the signature of the Cooper pairs
created by the Andreev reflection, at large voltages ( @xmath ) it
decays to the normal state value ( @xmath ). Interestingly, this decay
is immediate at the first Andreev resonance, as is seen from Figs. 2(c)
and (f). In fact, in a single channel, the energy integration is
equivalent to the integration over the phase @xmath , which at the
midpoint between two resonances @xmath has covered the period @xmath ,
thus producing @xmath at @xmath , see Fig. 2(c). In the transport
through a normal lead weakly coupled to a NS sandwich, we thus find two
characteristic regimes: At voltages below @xmath the one-particle
excitations in the NS structure are effectively gapped and we may only
couple to the superconducting condensate which introduces the charge
@xmath in the noise power. At voltages above the first Andreev
resonance, we may couple directly to a one-particle density of states in
the normal layer and we loose the signature of the superconductor at
once.

#### 2.2.3 Double barrier junction

In the study of normal versus superconducting junctions, it is of
interest to investigate the impact the quantum coherence has on the
macroscopic limit of transport (limit of an infinite number of channels)
and, in particular, to compare the behavior of a specific scattering
region connected to either a normal or a superconducting reservoir. We
consider an insulator–normal-metal–insulator (X @xmath INI)
interferometer which we connect to normal leads in a NININ junction and
to a superconducting lead in a NINIS junction. Besides the intrinsic
interest in the double barrier system as a paradigm, now to be combined
with a superconductor, it may also serve as a qualitative model for a
disordered conductor, due to its strong similarity in the transmission
distribution [ Dorokhov 1982 , Melsen 1994 ] . As we consider voltages
below the superconducting gap, we typically chose the thickness of the
interlayer to be @xmath .

The resonance structure of the INI interferometer results in a bimodal
distribution of its (overall) transmission probabilities @xmath . For
symmetric barriers it takes the form (infinite channel limit, @xmath ) [
de Jong 1997 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has its analog in a disordered conductor [ Dorokhov 1982 , Melsen
1994 ] . We recall that, in a NININ junction, the rich structure of this
distribution has no impact on the macroscopic transport properties. The
(linear) conductance and shot noise may be evaluated from the bimodal
distribution ( 2.33 ), @xmath , @xmath , and show no characteristics of
coherent transport [ Chen 1991 ] . The conductance follows from the
series resistance of the two barriers, and an incoherent model of a
double barrier junction gives the same suppressed noise @xmath as a
consequence of charge conservation [ Beenakker 1992b ] . When
considering the INI interferometer in a NINIS junction instead, we find
a non-trivial answer, both at small and large voltages. The linear
response follows from Eqs. ( 2.15 ), ( 2.28 ), and ( 2.33 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The ratio of shot noise to conductance is [ de Jong 1997 ] @xmath . A
comparison of the shot noise to conductance ratios in a single barrier
junction (X @xmath I or X @xmath IN) and a junction with disorder (X
@xmath D) is instructive, see Table 1. In the single barrier junction
the distribution of transmissions is peaked at @xmath . The noise is due
to the Schottky type fluctuations in nearly closed channels, and
consequently the noise ratios @xmath in the NIN and @xmath in the NIS
junction differ only by the charge quanta involved. In a junction with
disorder, the noise-to-conductance ratio is also doubled for the NDS
case, see Table 1. However, since in the bimodal distribution of the
transmissions the noise is produced by the channels with intermediate
transmission @xmath and the current by the open channels with @xmath ,
the doubling is a non-generic and thus yet unexplained feature. This is
demonstrated by the noise-to-conductance ratio of @xmath in the NINIS as
compared to @xmath in the NININ junction.

At finite voltage, the shot noise is described by Eq. ( 2.28 ) with the
reflection amplitudes @xmath of the double barrier interferometer. We
have evaluated this expression for a symmetric double barrier junction (
@xmath ) and display the results in Fig. 2.5 . At voltages of the order
of the Andreev levels @xmath , we find a resonance structure independent
of the number of channels. We observe again that the differential noise
follows the resonance peaks of the conductance. At large voltages (
@xmath ), the resonances disappear as the electrons and holes dephase,
and we approach the regime where the conductance and shot noise become
indistinguishable from the incoherent addition of the NIN and NIS
junctions.

#### 2.2.4 Discussion

In conclusion, we have expressed the differential shot noise in a
disordered NXS junction in Eq. ( 2.28 ) in terms of the normal and
Andreev scattering amplitudes. We have described the resonance structure
in the shot noise found at finite voltage in coherent transport. The
robustness of the resonance structure in the multichannel limit is owed
to its pinning to the Fermi energy. We have pointed out the possibility
of a non-trivial normal versus superconducting noise ratio in the NINIS
junction as as consequence of the bimodal distribution. Finally, we have
found a rapid decay of double shot noise in a NINS junction above the
Andreev minigap.

## Chapter 3 Magnetic response of a normal-metal – superconductor
structure: Nonlocality

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we turn to the magnetic response of a normal metal in
proximity to a superconductor. While the transport experiments discussed
in Chapter 2 probe the Andreev quasi-particles in an out-of-equilibrium
situation, which is kept up by the voltage difference across the leads,
the magnetic screening is a thermodynamic property of the condensate
wavefunction. Induced superconductivity, in fact, does not necessarily
imply supercurrents. Though the Andreev reflection may enhance the
conductance in a normal-metal – superconductor junction, the transport
currents remain nevertheless dissipative. In the response to an applied
magnetic field considered here, however, the Andreev quasi-particles
produce diamagnetic supercurrents. The magnetism is a property of the
@xmath phase diagram of the proximity system.

Here we study the linear current response to an applied magnetic field.
Combined with the self-consistent solution of the Maxwell equation this
allows to describe the diamagnetic phase of the @xmath phase diagram. To
be specific, we consider an normal-metal slab of thickness @xmath in
contact with a bulk superconductor, as shown in Fig. 3.1 . The
pioneering works in the magnetic response of hybrid NS structures go
back to the Orsay Group [ de Gennes 1964 , de Gennes 1966b ] . Using the
Ginsburg-Landau (GL) equations for superconductivity, see [ de Gennes
1966b , Geshkenbein 1988 ] , they gained a good understanding of the
rich phenomenology of these mostly dirty thin film systems. The normal
metal in proximity showed an increasingly diamagnetic response with
decreasing temperature, eventually approaching a perfect
Meissner-Ochsenfeld effect [ Meissner 1933 ] . Although they obtained
the correct qualitative picture, the GL equations were pushed beyond
their strict domain of validity. The progress in the fabrication
technology opened the way for interesting experiments on increasingly
clean NS proximity systems in the last two decades [ Oda 1980 , Mota
1982 , Bergmann 1987 , Mota 1989 , Visani 1990a , Mota 1994 , Onoe 1995
] . Their quantitative understanding requires a more accurate
microscopic description. Most importantly for this thesis was an
astonishing finding made by Mota and co-workers [ Visani 1990a ] in the
low-temperature behavior of normal-metal coated superconducting
cylinders. These Ag-Nb cylinders were shown to exhibit a paramagnetic
signal on top of the diamagnetic susceptibility. Before a closer
analysis of this fascinating experiment became possible — we will return
to it in Chapter 5 — a quantitative analysis of their experimental data
at higher temperature was needed for a characterization of the sample
with respect to the proximity contact and the impurity concentration. In
fact, the theory by [ de Gennes 1966b ] could not give an quantitative
description of the usual diamagnetic behavior. The work described in
this chapter has laid the basis for this understanding, tracing the
screening behavior back to the non-locality of the current-field
relations shown to be typical for the proximity effect.

A mile-stone in the theoretical development was the work by Zaikin [
Zaikin 1982 ] on the magnetic response of a clean normal-metal proximity
layer. Applying the quasi-classical Green’s function technique to this
problem, he demonstrated the power of this approach, which has been
predominantly used since [ Narikiyo 1989 , Higashitani 1995 , Belzig
1996a ] . Section 3.2 is devoted to the quasi-classical technique in the
proximity effect. Zaikin found a non-local current-field dependence in
this system, which exhibits a similarity to the Pippard equation [
Pippard 1953 ] . In section 3.3 we derive the general linear response
kernel for a NS sandwich with an arbitrary impurity concentration. We
find that the clean limit represents just one facet of the typical
nonlocal constitutive relation in the proximity effect. The rich
phenomenology is due to the self-consistency with the Maxwell equations
required by the screening problem. In section 3.4 , we study the
sensitivity of the nonlocality to the presence of impurities. The
superfluid density and the range of the current-field relations, both
diminishing with decreasing mean free path, are shown to affect the
screening ability in a contrary way and compete in the magnetic
response.

### 3.2 Quasi-classical equations and proximity effect

#### 3.2.1 Eilenberger equation

The basic set of equations appropriate for describing spatially
inhomogeneous superconductors was developed by Eilenberger [ Eilenberger
1968 ] and by Larkin and Ovchinnikov [ Larkin 1968 ] . Starting from the
widely used field theoretic method for superconductivity, see [
Abrikosov 1975 , Rickayzen 1980 , Mahan 1990 ] , by averaging over the
oscillations on the scale of the Fermi wavelength, a quasi-classical
Green’s function is obtained, which retains the full information on the
length scales of interest: the coherence length and the field
penetration depth. The @xmath matrix Green’s function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfies the Eilenberger equation ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath , @xmath throughout this
thesis.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the normalization condition @xmath . Here @xmath is the normal- and
@xmath , @xmath are the anomalous Green’s functions, depending on the
Matsubara frequency @xmath ( @xmath ), the center-of-mass coordinate
@xmath , and the direction of the Fermi velocity @xmath ( @xmath denote
the Pauli matrices, @xmath is the commutator). The Eilenberger equation
allows to describe spatially inhomogeneous superconductors in
equilibrium. The self-energy @xmath contains the off-diagonal pair
potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

as well as other contributions from impurity scattering or higher order
electron-electron interactions. The quasi-classical technique represents
a self-contained formalism, i.e, the self-energies can be expressed
through the quasi-classical Green’s functions themselves. Below we use
the impurity scattering self-energy in the Born limit,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath the scattering time and @xmath denotes the angular average
@xmath over @xmath . The order parameter is self-consistently determined
by ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath describes the effective coupling constant for the
attractive electron-electron interaction. The systems of Eqs. ( 3.2 )
and ( 3.5 ) are completed by the quasi-classical current expression,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the Gorkov formalism [ Abrikosov 1975 ] the current is separated into
a diamagnetic and a paramagnetic contribution. Eq. ( 3.6 ) contains both
contributions, even if it is formally similar to the paramagnetic
current in terms of the Gorkov-type Green’s function. This is due to the
renormalization procedure used in the quasi-classical theory and is
explained in appendix B .

The Eilenberger equation is valid on all length scales @xmath with
@xmath , and for magnetic fields such that the Larmor radius @xmath
exceeds the involved length scale @xmath ( @xmath being the cyclotron
radius of a particle with Fermi velocity). The quasi-classical Green’s
functions need to be supplemented by a set of boundary conditions [
Zaitsev 1984 , Kieselmann 1987 , Hara 1993 ] , because they are not
continuous at the interfaces of different materials. For more details on
the derivation, the symmetries and the validity of the Eilenberger
equations, we refer the reader to appendix B and several reviews on the
subject [ Serene 1983 , Shelankov 1985 , Rammer 1986 , Kopnin 1997 ] .

Let us illustrate the use of the quasi-classical equations for the
simple case of a homogeneous superconductor. The Green’s function takes
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ( @xmath ). Eq. ( 3.5 ) yields the usual gap equation for
the superconductor. Within a field @xmath the solution of ( 3.2 ) is
found by substituting @xmath in ( 3.7 ), assuming a slow variation of
the field on the scale @xmath larger than the superconducting coherence
length @xmath . The current-field relation that follows from Eq. ( 3.6
),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the local London relation with the superconducting density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

approaching the full electron density @xmath for @xmath . In the limit
of vanishing superconductivity @xmath we recover the trivial Green’s
function for the normal metal @xmath , and the current expression
vanishes. In the following section we apply the quasi-classical
formalism to the proximity effect in a normal metal slab.

#### 3.2.2 Clean NS slab

In this chapter, we consider a normal-metal slab in contact with a bulk
superconductor, see Fig. 3.1 . The normal layer ( @xmath ) is described
within the free electron gas approximation. We assume a perfect contact
between the metal and the superconductor as well as a specularly
reflecting metal boundary. A magnetic field @xmath is applied parallel
to the metal surface, driving screening currents @xmath along the
surface. The magnetic induction is described by the vector potential
@xmath . Taking a thickness @xmath , we can neglect the self-consistency
of the pair potential, and approximate the order parameter by a step
function @xmath .

The relevant length scales in the system are given by the geometric
thickness @xmath , the thermal coherence length @xmath , and the elastic
mean free path @xmath . The thermal length describes the distance over
which quasi-particle excitations in a typical energy interval given by
the temperature @xmath are mutually dephased. The above length scales
correspond to the respective energy scales @xmath of the Andreev levels,
the temperature @xmath and the impurity self-energy @xmath , all present
in the Eilenberger equation ( 3.2 ). In the following we first consider
a clean NS slab, i.e. the electrons propagate ballistically between the
NS interface and the metal-vacuum boundary ( @xmath ). The Green’s
functions in the normal layer, in the low temperature limit @xmath of
interest, take the form [ Zaikin 1982 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath ). The normal Green’s function is constant as a signature of
the extent of the quasi-particle over the whole normal layer. Carrying
out the analytical continuation @xmath and determining the poles of
@xmath yields the energies of the Andreev states bound to the normal
layer,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We recover the energies of Eq. ( 2.19 ) of the previous chapter (in the
limit @xmath ), which are split in direction @xmath and shifted by the
vector potential. Note the non-local field dependence of the bound state
energies.

From the anomalous Green’s function we can derive the pair correlation
function @xmath which satisfies @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We consider the case in the absence of fields @xmath here. Neglecting
the effect of the boundary at @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

At high temperatures @xmath , only the first Matsubara frequency @xmath
contributes to the sum ( 3.13 ), @xmath , while at zero temperature, the
decay shows no length scale, @xmath .

### 3.3 Magnetic screening

#### 3.3.1 Linear response kernel

When studying the magnetic response, the task is to determine the
current-field relation in the normal layer in functional dependence of
the vector potential j[A(x)] and solve for the screening currents
self-consistently with the Maxwell equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this chapter we focus on the magnetic response linear in the field.
While the ground-state wavefunction experiences a weak perturbation that
can be treated linearly, the screening of the magnetic induction is
strong and requires the self-consistent solution of the Maxwell
equation. Therefore the discussion of screening relies on the full
knowledge of the dispersive response function @xmath . While in a London
superconductor the response @xmath is local, implying a penetration
depth @xmath , in a Pippard superconductor with @xmath [ Tinkham 1996 ]
with @xmath the nonlocal response changes the penetration depth to
@xmath . Here we derive the current response in functional dependence of
the field for the NS slab geometry. We find that the current response in
the proximity effect is nonlocal in general.

The current functional linear in @xmath takes the generic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

of a convolution with the response kernel @xmath . In the following we
derive @xmath for the NS sandwich shown in Fig. 3.1 , expressing it
through the Green’s function in absence of fields @xmath . Inserting the
appropriate Green’s function @xmath , we are able to describe the
current in a normal metal layer with arbitrary impurity concentration,
ranging from the clean to the dirty limit. To calculate the linear
diamagnetic response, we separate the Green’s function into a (real)
zeroth order part and an (imaginary) first order part in @xmath (we drop
the Matsubara index @xmath in the following),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the absence of external fields Eq. ( 3.2 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We have introduced the effective frequency @xmath and pair potential
@xmath as diagonal and off-diagonal potentials, respectively. Equations
( 3.3.1 ) imply that @xmath , as @xmath has been chosen real. We
consider the solution of Eqs. ( 3.3.1 ) as given in the following. The
first-order parts obey the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath follows from the normalization @xmath . Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and (
3.20 ) can be mapped to two uncoupled Riccati equations and integrated
out formally in terms of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Determining the
current ( 3.6 ) we have extracted the kernel @xmath appearing in ( 3.16
). The derivation of the results given here is deferred to Appendix C ,
see also [ Belzig 1998 ] . Introducing a ’propagator’

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the properties @xmath and @xmath , the linear response kernel takes
the form

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The propagator ( 3.21 ) determines the ratio of the current response at
@xmath to the field at @xmath , thus containing the range of the
current–field relations. The inverse decay length of the propagator is
proportional to the off-diagonal part of the self-energy @xmath . The
factor @xmath is a measure of the superfluid density, vanishing in the
normal state @xmath . The three summands in ( 3.3.1 ) stem from the
quasi-particle trajectories connecting @xmath and @xmath , either
directly or by one reflection at the normal-metal boundary.

For illustration we reproduce the current response of a half-infinite
superconductor. Setting @xmath the solution of the Eilenberger equation
( 3.3.1 ) takes the simple form @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , see (
3.7 ). Inserting in ( 3.3.1 ) we obtain the linear-response kernel

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which describes the current response of a superconductor with arbitrary
impurity concentration [ Abrikosov 1975 ] , which here additionally
includes the effect of the boundary. For fields varying rapidly
spatially we arrive at a non-local current-field relation of the
Pippard-type [ Pippard 1953 ] , while for slowly varying fields the
kernel can be integrated out in Eq. ( 3.16 ), producing the local result
( 3.8 ). We recall here certain generic features of this kernel, which
are of importance below. In a clean superconductor ( @xmath ), the range
is given by the superconducting coherence length @xmath , while in a
dirty superconductor ( @xmath ) the range is given by the mean free path
@xmath , and is thus in both cases (nearly) temperature independent. We
discuss below how, in the proximity effect, the range of the kernel
varies from infinity to @xmath and @xmath , exhibiting a strong
temperature dependence, which leads to non-trivial screening properties.

#### 3.3.2 Clean limit

The linear response in the clean NS slab illustrates the nonlocality of
the current–field relation in the proximity effect. Inserting the clean
limit solution ( 3.10 ) (with @xmath ) into ( 3.3.1 ), we obtain
straightforwardly [ Zaikin 1982 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The temperature-dependent penetration depth that is given explicitly by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.25)
  -- -- -- --------

Here @xmath is the normal electron density producing the London length
typically @xmath . The propagator trivially becomes @xmath implying an
infinite kernel range. Interestingly, the thermal length @xmath does not
enter the kernel, as one might expect from the analogy to a clean
superconductor with range @xmath . The spatial extent of the
current–field dependence is thus cut off by the geometry @xmath . Eq. (
3.24 ) produces a constant current over the normal-metal layer,
depending on the average vector potential. Solving Maxwell’s equation (
3.15 ) with the boundary conditions @xmath (perfect superconductor) and
@xmath (applied magnetic field), we easily find for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The current @xmath screens the applied field on the geometric scale
@xmath . The magnetic induction @xmath changes sign inside the normal
metal approaching @xmath at the NS interface: the field is overscreened.
While the screening currents minimize the average vector potential to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

the average magnetization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

makes up only @xmath of the value for an ideal diamagnet. Thus the
nonlocality results in a less efficient expulsion of the applied field,
with overscreening as its signature. Overscreening is observed at low
temperature, as long as @xmath , the diamagnetic susceptibility leveling
off at @xmath . At high temperatures the susceptibility is suppressed
exponentially,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Fig. 3.2 (clean limit).

### 3.4 Sensitivity to impurities

For an arbitrary impurity concentration the screening problem has to be
solved numerically. First the Green’s function in the absence of fields
@xmath is determined, according to ( 3.3.1 ). For the discussion of a
stable algorithm therefore we refer the reader to [ Belzig 1999 ] .
Second, the linear response kernel ( 3.3.1 ) is evaluated and solved
self-consistently for @xmath with Maxwell’s equation. Depending on the
relative size of the thermal length @xmath , the mean free path @xmath ,
and the thickness @xmath we distinguish various regimes of either
ballistic or diffusive electron propagation which are shown in Fig. 3.3
. Note that the dividing line between ballistic and diffusive behavior
is not given by the simple relation @xmath (dotted line). Rather, the
range of the current–field relation @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath is
needed for an accurate characterization of the magnetic response. The
numerical results for the magnetic susceptibility @xmath as a function
of temperature are shown in Fig. 3.2 . The different curves show the
clean limit and the mean free paths @xmath . Clearly, a finite impurity
concentration has a strong influence on the susceptibility, even if
@xmath , and can either increase or decrease the diamagnetic screening,
depending on temperature. In the following, we explain Figs. 3.2 and 3.3
in detail.

#### 3.4.1 Ballistic regime

The ballistic regime is limited by @xmath , which ensures a ballistic
propagation of the electrons over the thickness or the thermal length of
the normal layer, respectively. As a limiting case, we have already
considered the clean limit ( @xmath ).

An estimation using the zeroth order Eilenberger equation Eq. ( 3.3.1 )
easily shows that the clean-limit solution ( 3.10 ) remains valid in the
absence of fields for

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

see Fig. 3.3 . Note that this includes the region @xmath , the finite
thickness preventing the small mean free path @xmath from becoming
effective. In the evaluation of the kernel, the off-diagonal potential
@xmath enters the propagator ( 3.21 ), yielding the kernel ( 3.3.1 ),
which approximately takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the exponentials may be expanded to first order. As a
result, we obtain two contributions to the current @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

According to ( 3.27 ) solving the screening problem in the clean limit,
we find @xmath . Taking ( 3.34 ) as a small perturbation, we obtain
@xmath , which becomes of the same order of magnitude as @xmath if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as @xmath , the range of the kernel is effectively @xmath and
the clean limit applies, see Fig. 3.3 . As @xmath — which is the case
for @xmath in general — the mean free path @xmath enters the kernel
range, as shown in Fig. 3.3 . The diamagnetic susceptibility is enhanced
at low temperature ( @xmath ), as Fig. 3.2 ( @xmath ) illustrates. The
screening currents are even sensitive to a mean free path @xmath . The
applied field is found to be screened on the effective penetration depth

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

in analogy to the effective penetration depth of a Pippard
superconductor @xmath , see e.g. [ Tinkham 1996 ] .

In the remaining part of the ballistic regime, see Fig. 3.3 (range
@xmath ), the full solution is not known analytically, but we may
produce an approximate solution, which characterizes well the numerical
results at high temperature ( @xmath ). Limiting ourselves to high
temperature with @xmath allows us to consider the Green’s function for
the first Matsubara frequency @xmath only. We restrict ourselves to the
forward direction @xmath . From Eq. ( 3.3.1 ) we find that @xmath
remains unchanged as in ( 3.10 ), and @xmath and @xmath obey the
approximate equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the solutions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here we have used @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are of order @xmath rather
than exponentially suppressed @xmath , @xmath as in the clean limit (
3.10 ). The correction to @xmath given by Eq. ( 3.39 ) increases the
superfluid density in the vicinity of the superconductor via the factor
@xmath in the kernel. The range of the propagator is modified by the
correction ( 3.38 ) to @xmath , leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The range of the kernel is now given by @xmath , which is strongly
temperature dependent, and the current flows in a layer of thickness
@xmath close to the NS interface,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus in the high temperature limit of Fig. 3.2 , as the mean free path
@xmath becomes smaller the diamagnetic susceptibility is enhanced.

#### 3.4.2 Diffusive regime

If impurity scattering dominates, as described by @xmath and @xmath ,
Eq. ( 3.3.1 ) can be reduced to the Usadel equation [ Usadel 1970 ] for
the isotropic part @xmath . Assuming @xmath the solution in the normal
metal takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the diffusion constant. Equation ( 3.42 ) shows that the
important energy scale is the Thouless energy @xmath [ Edwards 1972 ] .
The @xmath -function ( 3.42 ) features the decay length @xmath
reflecting the diffusive nature of the electron motion.

In the normal metal @xmath are necessary conditions for the Usadel
theory to be valid. However, the numerical solution of ( 3.3.1 ) shows
that the Usadel theory in the normal metal, which requires the Green’s
functions to be nearly isotropic, is only a good approximation for
@xmath : the dirty limit in Fig. 3.3 .

Using the fact that the zeroth-order Green’s function is nearly
isotropic and varies on a scale @xmath , we find for the kernel ( 3.3.1
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The prefactor contains the full temperature dependence here and defines
a space dependent penetration depth @xmath . Qualitatively, the range of
the kernel retains the same length scale @xmath as in the adjacent
ballistic regime, while the screening density is suppressed by the
impurities. In Fig. 3.2 we thus find that a small mean free path @xmath
produces an overall reduction of the susceptibility.

For @xmath the vector potential may be taken out of the integral in
Eq. ( 3.16 ) and after integration over the kernel we recover the
well-known local current-vector potential relation used in the Usadel
theory [ Usadel 1970 ] , with penetration depth @xmath . We note that as
long as @xmath , although the Green’s functions are nearly isotropic,
and in absence of the field are given by the Usadel theory, the current
response is nevertheless nonlocal. In Fig. 3.2 the magnetic
susceptibility for @xmath is compared to the local Usadel result (dirty
limit), showing that the latter overestimates the screening at high
temperature.

The high temperature ( @xmath ) behavior is characterized by screening
limited to a layer of thickness @xmath close to the superconductor, and
consequently the diamagnetic susceptibility is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

This estimate is in agreement with the Ginzburg-Landau theory [ de
Gennes 1966b ] as well as the numerical Usadel results [ Narikiyo 1989 ]
.

### 3.5 Discussion

There are two main differences in the observable properties of the
induced screening between the clean and the dirty limit. First, the zero
temperature value of the susceptibility @xmath saturates at @xmath in
the clean limit, while it reaches unity in the dirty limit. Second, the
asymptotic behavior at high temperature differs: in the clean limit
@xmath decays exponentially @xmath , while in the dirty limit it follows
an algebraic law @xmath . The intermediate behavior illustrated in Fig.
3.2 is determined by the competition of the nonlocality range and the
screening density. With increasing disorder, a reduction of the range
from @xmath to @xmath or @xmath enhances the screening, while a
reduction of the superfluid density weakens the diamagnetic currents. We
have found several ballistic and diffusive regimes shown in Fig. 3.3
with different characteristics. Remarkably, due to the absence of the
small scale @xmath in the proximity effect, the nonlocal kernel ( 3.3.1
) is crucial to the understanding of all the regimes.

Our results imply a non-monotonic dependence of the diamagnetic
susceptibility on the mean free path. Starting from a clean sample, with
decreasing purity first the range of the linear response kernel is
augmented and Meissner currents are enhanced, then the superfluid
density is reduced and the screening currents are suppressed. Assuming a
temperature-dependent scattering mechanism with decreasing mean free
path as a function of temperature, such as electron-electron or
electron-phonon interaction, we might speculate to observe a
non-monotonic (i.e. re-entrant) behavior of the susceptibility (here the
smallness of the scattering rate is compensated by the high sensitivity
of the non-local current-field relation). However, as is evident from
Eq. ( 3.21 ), the largest off-diagonal self-energy ( @xmath ) which
includes e.g. impurity scattering will provide a (low-temperature)
cutoff for this behavior.

Our results allows for a quantitative agreement with the experiments.
The fit of the experimental data for the diamagnetic susceptibility
gives an independent determination of the mean free path in these
samples, which has been compared to the results of the resistivity
measurements [ Müller-Allinger 1999 ] . The magnetic susceptibility
emerges as a sensitive indicator of the impurity concentration due to
the nonlocality of the constitutive relation.

## Chapter 4 Magnetic breakdown in a normal-metal – superconductor
proximity structure

### 4.1 Introduction

In this Chapter we extend the study of magnetism from the linear
response to the finite field regime. Recent experiments have
demonstrated the non-trivial screening properties of hybrid
normal-metal–superconductor structures, exhibiting a magnetic breakdown
at finite fields [ Oda 1980 , Mota 1982 , Bergmann 1987 , Visani 1990b ]
. The investigated samples have typical dimensions comparable to the
thermal length @xmath in the normal metal, attributing a key role to the
quantum coherence of the electrons coupled to the macroscopic phase of
the superconductor.

We consider a clean normal-metal slab of thickness @xmath in proximity
with a superconductor, as shown in Fig. 3.1 . The self-consistent study
of the finite field effect in a dirty NS sandwich within the framework
of the Ginsburg-Landau (GL) equation was carried out a long time ago by
the Orsay group [ de Gennes 1966b ] . Their work has provided the first
understanding of the magnetic breakdown, which denotes the breakdown of
the full magnetic flux expulsion in the normal layer, in analogy to the
critical field of the superconductor. A quantitative agreement of the GL
results with recent experiments is not achieved, as is discussed in [
Mota 1989 ] . This is not surprising considering the role of nonlocality
in the proximity effect, the local current-field relation of the GL
theory applying only to the dirty limit. The quasi-classical Green’s
function technique offers the possibility to describe the opposite clean
limit using the Eilenberger equations [ Eilenberger 1968 ] , which we
pursue here. In [ Zaikin 1982 ] the nonlinear response in the clean
limit has been obtained along these lines. Using numerical methods, in [
Belzig 1996a ] the non-linear field regime of the screening problem has
been investigated, and the two (meta)-stable solutions in both the clean
and the dirty limit have been determined (the dirty limit extends the GL
results to low temperature using the Usadel equations [ Usadel 1970 ] ).
In this chapter we determine the @xmath - @xmath ’phase’ diagram shown
in Fig. 4.1 of the normal metal layer in the clean limit, where the
bistable regime is particularly extended. In thermodynamic equilibrium,
we find a magnetic breakdown at @xmath , which is a first order
transition separating the phase of diamagnetic screening from the phase
of magnetic field penetration. The results presented here have been
published in [ Fauchère 1997 ] .

Recent experiments [ Mota 1989 , Mota 1994 ] have investigated the
magnetic response of metallic cylinders with a superconducting core,
finding data, which was claimed to be characteristic for the ballistic
limit [ Mota 1994 ] . This has motivated us to derive the analytic
dependence of the clean limit expression for the breakdown field @xmath
on temperature @xmath and thickness @xmath of the normal layer and to
compare it to the experiment. From the free energy of the normal layer,
which allows us to identify the two (meta)-stable states, we determine
the spinodals, the thermodynamic breakdown field @xmath and find the
jumps in magnetization and entropy at the transition. Furthermore, we
obtain a critical temperature which marks the upper limit of the
bistable regime (see Fig. 4.1 ). Finally, we relate our results for the
breakdown field to the signatures of the nonlocality in the ballistic
regime as they show up in the magnetic susceptibility @xmath and compare
them with the experimental data. The following discussion is divided
into four sections: the analysis of the constitutive relations (Sec. 4.2
), the solution of the magnetostatic problem (Sec. 4.3 ), the
determination of the breakdown field from the free energy (Sec. 
thermodynamics), and finally the comparison with the experiment (Sec.
4.5 ).

### 4.2 Constitutive relations

The quasi-classical Green’s function technique provides an appropriate
description of a metal with nearly spherical Fermi surface. In a finite
magnetic field, the vector potential @xmath can be included as a phase
factor along unperturbed trajectories, provided the dimensions of the
normal metal are smaller than the Larmor radius ( @xmath ). In the
ballistic limit, the quasi-classical @xmath matrix Green’s function
@xmath satisfies the Eilenberger equation ( @xmath , @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

discussed in Chapter 3 . We exclude impurity scattering here by assuming
@xmath .

We consider a normal metal slab of thickness @xmath on top of a bulk
superconductor as shown in the inset of Fig. 4.2 . The vector potential
@xmath describes a magnetic field @xmath applied parallel to the
surface, which induces screening currents @xmath . We make the usual
idealizations in the description of the NS sandwich: The superconducting
order parameter follows a step function @xmath ( @xmath real), no
attractive interactions being present in the normal layer. We assume a
perfect NS interface as well as specular reflection at the normal-metal
boundary.

In the subsequent analysis we restrict our attention to the magnetic
response of the normal layer. In the proximity effect, the macroscopic
coherence of the superconducting condensate induces correlated
electron-hole pairs in the normal layer through the process of Andreev
reflection. The basic process consists of an electron traveling forward
and a hole traveling backward along a quasi-classical trajectory as
shown in Fig. 4.2 (at discrete energies, bound Andreev states are found
along these trajectories). In the presence of a magnetic field, the area
enclosed by the trajectory (see Fig. 4.2 ) is threaded by the flux

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be expressed through the integral @xmath times a geometric
factor due to the inclination of the trajectory (the spherical angles
@xmath and @xmath parameterize the direction of the trajectory with
respect to the @xmath -axis). The current carried along a trajectory
depends on the phase factor @xmath acquired by the propagation of both
the electron and the hole along the Andreev loop, and we arrive at an
intrinsic non-local current–field dependence @xmath . The total current
is determined by the sum over the currents along the quasi-classical
trajectories, see ( 3.6 ), from which we obtain the current expression
for finite fields [ Zaikin 1982 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

The induced currents for each trajectory depend only on the flux @xmath
modulo the superconducting flux quantum @xmath , reflecting gauge
invariance. At small fields ( @xmath ), the current response is
diamagnetic for all trajectories and the proximity effect produces
screening currents in the normal metal. As the field increases to @xmath
, some of the more extended trajectories produce paramagnetic currents,
since the reduced flux @xmath they enclose becomes negative, and the net
diamagnetic current response is reduced. As we reach large fields (
@xmath ), the Andreev loops become mutually dephased due to a uniform
distribution of the reduced flux. The associated currents are randomly
dia- or paramagnetic and the net current vanishes. Note that the
proximity effect, i.e., the existence of the Andreev levels is not
destroyed in this limit, leading to a finite kinetic energy of the
currents induced by the magnetic field.

### 4.3 Magnetostatics

Owing to the independence of @xmath on @xmath , the Maxwell equation
@xmath and the constitutive equation ( 4.3 ) combined with the boundary
conditions @xmath and @xmath can be given a formal solution. We arrive
at a parabolic dependence for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

parameterized by @xmath , which in turn is determined through the
self-consistency condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The total magnetization @xmath (per unit surface) is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 4.6 ) contains the essential physics of the problem: For small
fields ( @xmath ), the current @xmath linearly suppresses the magnetic
induction to the @xmath at the NS boundary (overscreening). The current
is given by the linear response expression in this limit,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which depends on penetration depth @xmath , see (Eq. ( 4.15 )). When
inserted back into ( 4.6 ), the vector potential is found to be strongly
suppressed to @xmath , and we obtain a consistent diamagnetic solution
(i.e., @xmath ) for fields up to @xmath . At large fields, the current
vanishes ( @xmath ) and the magnetic field penetrates the normal layer.
From Eq.  ( 4.6 ) we find @xmath , consequently this metallic behavior
is expected down to magnetic fields @xmath , as follows from the
condition @xmath for the Andreev levels to be dephased. With @xmath the
diamagnetic and field penetration solution coexist in the regime @xmath
. These simple estimates for the limits of the bistable regime elucidate
the numerical data given in [ Belzig 1996a ] .

### 4.4 Thermodynamics

In the phase diagram of Fig. 4.1 the upper and lower bounds of the
bistable regime found from the above mean-field analysis are identified
with the spinodals of the transition, the super-cooled field @xmath and
the super-heated field @xmath . In the thermodynamic equilibrium, a
magnetic breakdown occurs at an intermediate field, connecting the
diamagnetic regime to the field penetration regime by a first order
transition. In the following, we determine this breakdown field and the
associated entropy and magnetization jump from the free energy.

The energy (per unit surface) of the currents @xmath is obtained via an
integration over the non-linear current expression,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath describes the difference in free energy between the metal layer
under proximity and in the normal state. @xmath is a monotonous and
strictly positive function, reflecting the absence of condensation
energy in the normal layer, and expresses the cost of the induced
proximity effect lying in the kinetic energy of the currents induced by
the vector potential. The free energy @xmath is constructed by adding
the electro-magnetic field energy and subtracting the vacuum field
contribution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We do not include the condensation energy and the kinetic energy of the
screening currents in the superconductor. The field dependent term of
the condensation energy might in fact be of the order of the free energy
in the normal layer and would be expected to produce numerical
corrections in the results, which are not accounted for by our idealized
choice of the order parameter @xmath . The kinetic energy of the
screening currents @xmath may be neglected.

After a Legendre transformation, we obtain the Gibb’s free energy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The field term in Eq. ( 4.11 ) describes the work necessary to expel the
magnetic field. The extrema of the free energy @xmath with respect to
@xmath reproduce the equation of state ( 4.6 ). Fig. 4.2 shows the free
energy @xmath as obtained from the parameterization of @xmath and @xmath
through @xmath . The breakdown field @xmath is determined by the
intersection of the free energies @xmath of the two (meta)-stable
solutions. We note that this procedure is equivalent to the Maxwell
construction in the magnetization curve @xmath of Fig. 4.2 .

In the following, we consider the free energy ( 4.4 ) in the two
temperature limits @xmath and @xmath and obtain ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The finite value of the superconducting gap @xmath is accounted for by
the dimensionless parameter @xmath .

The free energies of the two (meta)-stable states can be approximated by
their asymptotic forms in the limits @xmath and @xmath . In the
diamagnetic regime, the expansion in @xmath up to quadratic order of (
4.12 ) and ( 4.13 ) provide the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.14 ) is valid both in the low and high temperature limits using
the penetration depth @xmath at @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Note that the derivative @xmath applied to Eq. ( 4.14 )
produces the linear response constitutive relation of Eq. ( 4.8 ). The
Gibb’s free energy follows from Eqs. ( 4.10 ) and ( 4.14 ), using the
solution of the Maxwell equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.16 ) is dominated by the magnetization work necessary to expel
the field, which is parametrically larger (by @xmath ) than the kinetic
energy of the currents. We note that the scaling in the free energy (
4.16 ), @xmath , is parametrically independent of the nonlocality range
of the constitutive relation ( 4.4 ).

In the field penetration regime we approximate the free energy by its
asymptotic value at @xmath . In this limit we replace the strongly
oscillating functions of @xmath in ( 4.12 ) and ( 4.13 ) by their
average value @xmath and @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The magnetization energy vanishes in this limit. The corrections to the
free energy ( 4.17 ) are of relative order @xmath .

The magnetic breakdown field @xmath is determined by the intersection of
the two asymptotics of the free energy @xmath given by Eqs. ( 4.16 ) and
( 4.17 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We note three important features of this result: The temperature
dependence is a simple exponential with the exponent @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the thermal length. The amplitude of the breakdown field
scales inversely proportional to the thickness of the normal layer,
@xmath . In the limit @xmath the magnetic breakdown field saturates to a
value which is suppressed by the factor @xmath as compared to the
extrapolation of the high temperature result. The formula for the
breakdown field @xmath is similar to the critical field @xmath of a Type
I superconductor [ Blatter 1994 ] , the geometric scale @xmath replacing
the superconducting coherence length @xmath .

We arrive at the @xmath phase diagram shown in Fig. 4.1 . The first
order transition between the diamagnetic and the field penetration
regime takes place between the spinodals @xmath which delimit the
(meta)-stable regime. Their intersection marks the critical temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Below @xmath the penetration depth is small, @xmath , and
we observe a first order transition. Above the critical point @xmath ,
where @xmath , a continuous and reversible cross-over between the
diamagnetic and field penetration regime is expected.

The latent heat (at @xmath ) of the transition follows from Eqs. ( 4.16
), ( 4.17 ), and ( 4.19 ) using @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is related to the magnetization jump

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

via the Clausius-Clapeyron equation.

In the derivation of the breakdown field we have used the asymptotic
expansions of the free energies in @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Their quality at the transition point is determined by the range of
overlap between the diamagnetic and the field penetration regimes in
Fig. 4.2 , which is governed by the parameter @xmath . In the
diamagnetic phase, the corrections are of the order of @xmath , and
similarly in the field penetration regime. The expansion thus breaks
down at @xmath , which is the critical point of the transition line. We
note that the total magnetization changes from its diamagnetic value
@xmath to the strongly suppressed value @xmath at the transition,
reflecting its strong first order character.

### 4.5 Experiment

The breakdown field has been measured in fairly clean Ag-Nb cylinders
recently [ Mota 1989 , Mota 1994 ] . Let us compare our results from the
clean limit theory with the experimental data. We neglect the difference
in geometry, cylindrical for the sample and planar in the theoretical
model.

In Fig. 4.3 we show the two data sets for the breakdown field data
obtained on heating and cooling a sample of thickness @xmath exhibiting
hysteresis. We note that the theoretical values of the super-cooled and
super-heated fields @xmath and @xmath are not reached in the
experiments, as the phase transition is smoothed by the breakdown of
local (Andreev) current loops, see Fig. 4.2 . The data saturates at low
temperatures, in qualitative agreement with our theoretical analysis.
Given the electron density in Ag, @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath , the
breakdown field is determined by Eq. ( 4.18 ) and ( 4.19 ). Due to the
idealization of our model, which assumes a step function for the order
parameter, as well as the difference between the planar and cylindrical
geometry, we expect a numerical factor correcting the amplitude of
@xmath . Making use of the scaling factor @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.18 ) and (
4.19 ), we calibrate the theoretical result to fit the zero temperature
value @xmath , as shown in Fig. 4.3 . The theoretical prediction for the
high temperature behavior then follows from Eq. ( 4.19 ) and is shown as
a solid line in Fig. 4.3 . Eq. ( 4.19 ) accurately reproduces the
logarithmic slope @xmath of the experimental data, thus correctly
tracing the signature of the Andreev levels. The amplitude of @xmath
deviates from the data by the constant ratio @xmath , which can be
attributed to the presence of a barrier at the NS interface, see below.

A further agreement between theory and experiment is found in the
scaling of the breakdown field with sample thickness @xmath , which was
reported to be @xmath , in accordance with Eq. ( 4.19 ) (the
experimental study involved @xmath samples [ Mota 1994 ] with
thicknesses ranging from @xmath to @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 We acknowledge
unpublished data provided by B. Müller-Allinger and A. Mota, ETH Zürich.
). Similarly, the critical temperature determined in the experiment [
Mota 1989 ] exhibits the same scaling @xmath , in agreement with Eq. (
4.20 ) ( @xmath ).

For comparison, we cite the dirty limit result, which follows from the
GL equations [ de Gennes 1966b ] ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.23)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a fitting parameter for the penetration depth
at the NS interface. Both the exponential dependence on @xmath and the
independence of the overall amplitude on @xmath clearly deviate from the
experimental data.

The good agreement between the clean limit theory and experiment for the
breakdown field does not trivially generalize to other physical
quantities, however. In particular, the linear susceptibility @xmath
sensitively depends on the non-locality of the constitutive relation
@xmath . From Eqs. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.8 ) we obtain the susceptibility

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.24)
  -- -- -- --------

which exhibits a temperature dependence with the following
characteristics: @xmath decays exponentially @xmath at large
temperatures, twice as fast as the breakdown field. The susceptibility
takes half its maximal value at @xmath , which roughly coincides with
the critical temperature @xmath . The logarithmic derivative at @xmath
is predicted to be @xmath . Below the critical point, the susceptibility
saturates as the penetration depth decreases below the sample thickness
( @xmath ). Due to the non-locality, the penetration depth drops out of
the expression for @xmath and we are in the regime of over-screening. In
Fig. 4.3 we show the linear susceptibility according to the clean limit
predictions ( 4.24 ) (there is no fitting parameter). The experimental
data fails to show the typical saturation of the susceptibility expected
below the critical temperature. At low temperature the experimental
value clearly exceeds the maximal diamagnetic value @xmath found in the
clean limit. The decay at large temperature is slower than the decay of
the breakdown field, while Eq. ( 4.24 ) predicts a decay with twice the
logarithmic slope, see Fig. 4.3 . This discrepancy finds a natural
explanation in the different sensitivity of @xmath and @xmath to the
degree of nonlocality in the constitutive relation, as we discuss in the
following section.

Let us consider the influence of an insulating barrier at the NS
interface. The consequences of a finite reflectivity at the NS interface
on the linear current response has been analyzed in [ Higashitani 1995 ]
. Their results allow for the reflection coefficient @xmath to be
included in the penetration depth @xmath by redefining the factor @xmath
, in Eq. ( 4.15 ); @xmath remains unchanged. Inserting the modified
penetration depth into Eq. ( 4.24 ) we obtain the linear susceptibility.
The additional factor @xmath does not change the characteristic shape of
the susceptibility (saturation, logarithmic slope at @xmath ,
exponential decay), but only lowers the position of the half-value of
@xmath to @xmath . The finite reflection does not remedy the qualitative
discrepancy between the susceptibility in theory and experiment, in
consistency with the above considerations. Considering the structure of
the equations we may expect the dependence on the reflection @xmath to
enter in a similar fashion into the breakdown field @xmath . Eq. ( 4.24
) inserted in Eq. ( 4.19 ) gives the high temperature behavior, while
the zero temperature result of Eq. ( 4.18 ) remains unchanged. We fit
the breakdown field data by using first an overall scaling factor needed
to adjust @xmath and second, a finite reflectivity, which only enters at
high temperatures. The fit of the high temperature behavior provides us
with an estimate of the reflectivity @xmath of the NS interface, see
Fig. 4.3 (dashed line).

### 4.6 Discussion

We have calculated the clean limit expression for the breakdown field
separating the diamagnetic phase and the field penetration phase by a
first order transition. We have determined the spinodals, the critical
temperature as well as the latent heat of the transition.

In Chapter 3 we found that the solution of the screening problem
crucially depends on the nonlocality range. The high sensitivity to
impurities is a consequence of the self-consistency problem with the
Maxwell equations. In the ballistic regime @xmath the linear screening
was found to be enhanced as compared to the clean limit, at low
temperature due to the kernel range @xmath and at high temperature due
to the range @xmath . Here the clean limit result for the breakdown
field has been found to be in good agreement with the experimental data
on fairly clean samples ( @xmath ). We resolve this apparent discrepancy
by showing the the self-consistent screening problem drops out of the
derivation of the breakdown field: The breakdown field @xmath is
obtained from matching the magnetization energy @xmath in the
diamagnetic phase with the kinetic energy in the penetrating field
@xmath . The magnetization energy overshadows the kinetic energy of the
currents in the diamagnetic phase, which contain the solution of the
screening problem. Thus the breakdown field is remarkably stable towards
a finite impurity concentration. A correction to the breakdown field of
order @xmath is expected from the kinetic term in the field penetration
phase at temperatures @xmath . We note that the high temperature
corrections, which are relevant beyond @xmath hardly affect the
breakdown field, as @xmath and @xmath coincide. The inclusion of a
finite reflection at the NS interface permits an accurate fit of the
breakdown field and gives an estimate for the quality of the NS
interface.

## Chapter 5 Paramagnetic instability of Andreev electrons

### 5.1 Introduction

A normal metal in contact with a superconductor exhibits the phenomenon
of proximity — the superconductor exports its coherent state across the
interface into the normal metal. On a microscopic level, this phenomenon
is described through the Andreev reflection of the normal-metal
quasi-particles at the NS interface, converting normal- to supercurrent.
Proximity superconductivity exhibits a rich phenomenology and has
attracted considerable interest recently [ Kouwenhoven 1997 ] . A
particularly puzzling finding is the ultra-low-temperature reentrance
observed in normal-metal coated superconducting cylinders [ Visani 1990a
] , where, contrary to expectation, the fully diamagnetic cylinder
develops a paramagnetic response at low temperatures. Recently, it has
been speculated that some novel kind of persistent current states
circling the cylinder might be responsible for this phenomenon [ Bruder
1998 ] , but closer inspection of the experimentally measurable
quantities reveals that the predicted effect is by orders of magnitude
too small [ Fauchère 1999a ] . In this chapter, we demonstrate that the
presence of a repulsive electron-electron interaction in the normal
metal naturally leads to the appearance of a paramagnetic instability at
very low temperature, offering a possible explanation of the reentrance
effect in the NS cylinders.

For simplicity, we consider a clean normal-metal slab of thickness
@xmath ( @xmath ), in perfect contact with a bulk, conventional
superconductor. The proximity effect is mediated by the Andreev
reflection at the interface with the superconductor, which binds the
quasi-particles states to the normal layer for @xmath . In the usual
free electron gas description of the normal metal, the Andreev bound
states are found at @xmath ( @xmath ; @xmath ) producing a linear
suppression of the DOS [ de Gennes 1963 , Saint-James 1964 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

close to the Fermi level @xmath ( @xmath ). In the following we assume
that the electron-electron interaction in the normal layer, which
follows from the delicate balance between the phonon-mediated- and the
Coulomb-interaction, is repulsive. As a consequence, a finite order
parameter @xmath is induced in the metal, opposite in sign as compared
to @xmath in the superconductor, see Ref. [ de Gennes 1964 ] . The NS
junctions then behaves like a Josephson junction with a phase difference
@xmath , trapping quasi-particle states at the Fermi energy close to the
NS interface. The local density of states @xmath exhibits a peak at zero
energy on top of the Andreev density of states, as shown in Fig. 5.1 .
This peak involves a macroscopic number of states with density @xmath ,
which in the following we call the @xmath -states.

The change in the DOS crucially affects the response of the proximity
metal. The linear current response @xmath can be divided into two
contributions @xmath , the diamagnetic current @xmath giving the rigid
response of the bulk density @xmath and the paramagnetic current @xmath
following from the deformation of the wavefunction at the Fermi surface
[ Schrieffer 1988 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for slowly varying fields @xmath ( @xmath is the Fermi occupation
number). While in a bulk superconductor the paramagnetic current is
quenched by the energy gap at low temperatures producing a net
diamagnetic response, the paramagnetic current of a bulk normal metal
cancels the diamagnetic current exactly. In the non-interacting metal
under proximity, the linear density of states suppression @xmath is
still sufficient to suppress the paramagnetic current at zero
temperature [ Zaikin 1982 ] . Including a repulsive interaction places
the system in the opposite limit: The sharp DOS peak at the Fermi level
produces a paramagnetic signal which over -compensates the diamagnetic
response. Such a paramagnetic response naturally leads to an
instability: The free energy @xmath can be lowered via a non-zero
magnetic induction induced by spontaneous currents along the NS
interface. The interface currents are associated with an orbital
magnetization @xmath producing a low-temperature reentrance in the
magnetic susceptibility.

### 5.2 Zero energy bound states

In the following we present a quantitative analysis of the paramagnetic
instability induced by the @xmath -states. The magnetic induction @xmath
parallel to the surface is described by the vector potential @xmath
which drives the currents @xmath . The electron-electron interaction in
the superconductor is accounted for by an effective coupling constant
@xmath and similarly @xmath in the normal metal, see also [ Zhou 1995 ,
Nazarov 1996 ] . Two self-consistency problems have to be solved: First,
we evaluate the order parameter @xmath accounting for the different
coupling constants in the superconductor and the normal metal, and
obtain the local DOS @xmath . Second, we determine the current
functional @xmath which we solve together with Maxwell’s equation to
find the spontaneous interface currents.

We use the quasi-classical description following from the Eilenberger
equation, see ( 3.2 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the 2 @xmath 2 matrix @xmath have been defined in Chp. 3.1 . Eq. (
5.3 ) is completed by the self-consistency relation for the pair
potential ( @xmath is the angular average),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The self-consistent numerical solution of Eqs.  ( 5.3 ) and ( 5.4 ) is
shown in the inset of Fig. 5.1 . The course of the order parameter in
the normal layer is asymptotically given by @xmath , as expected from
the @xmath -function in the non-interacting case @xmath [ Falk 1963 ] .
@xmath decays from a value @xmath at the NS interface, to @xmath at the
outer boundary. Close to the NS interface, the local DOS

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

exhibits a pronounced peak at zero energy, as shown in Fig. 5.1 . At the
outer metal boundary @xmath the DOS is suppressed linearly, as in the
noninteracting case [ de Gennes 1963 ] . Such a pseudogap is typical in
proximity induced superconductivity [ Hara 1993 , Frahm 1996 ] . We note
that a peak structure as a consequence of interactions could be related
to one found for a Luttinger liquid in proximity with a superconductor [
Fazio 1996 ] .

In order to proceed with analytical results, we approximate the order
parameter by a step function,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath enters as a parameter. The Green’s function in the normal
layer @xmath can be determined exactly and takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (we consider the limit @xmath ). The
second term in ( 5.6 ) describes the @xmath -states at the NS interface.
The poles of the Green’s function at @xmath yield the bound state
energies. For @xmath the bound states given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

down-shifted by @xmath with respect to the Andreev states of the free
electron gas. Below the gap @xmath we find the @xmath -states at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

exponentially close to Fermi energy. All trajectories with @xmath
possess a bound state at @xmath , thus producing the macroscopic weight
of the zero energy DOS peak: For @xmath the number of @xmath -states per
unit surface @xmath is equal to the number of transverse levels @xmath ,
while for @xmath it is reduced to @xmath via the reduction of the
available solid angle @xmath .

### 5.3 Spontaneous currents and magnetization

We derive the current-field relations at low temperatures, assuming
@xmath . This implies a thermal length @xmath larger than the thickness
@xmath and no thermal smearing on the scale @xmath . Only the
trajectories with @xmath contribute to the current at low temperatures.
We describe them in the limit @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The current in the presence of a slowly varying vector potential @xmath
, follows from Eq. ( 5.9 ) after replacing @xmath by @xmath and
inserting it into the quasi-classical current expression, see ( 3.6 ).
In addition to the diamagnetic current

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

[ @xmath denotes the London length], we obtain the paramagnetic current

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath . Here, @xmath denotes the flux quantum, and the
coherence length in the normal metal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives the extent of the @xmath -states. Under the assumption @xmath we
set @xmath . At temperatures @xmath the paramagnetic current @xmath is
linear in @xmath and @xmath , a signature of the thermally smeared zero
energy DOS peak, and competes with the diamagnetic current on the scale
@xmath . At @xmath , Eq. ( 5.11 ) is nonlinear in the field and
generates the spontaneous paramagnetic current. This paramagnetic
interface current results from the energy splitting of the @xmath
-states in the field, @xmath , allowing the system to gain energy by
shifting the DOS below the Fermi surface ¹ ¹ 1 A similar mechanism
producing spontaneous currents is discussed by Honerkamp et al. [
Honerkamp 1998 ] . For @xmath , the paramagnetic current is reduced by
the factor @xmath in Eq. ( 5.11 ). The surface current @xmath is in
agreement with the current estimate @xmath based on the number of @xmath
-states at zero energy. Eq. ( 5.11 ) thus always produces a net
paramagnetic response at low temperature and fields.

The evaluation of the induced magnetization requires the self-consistent
solution of Maxwell’s equation @xmath together with the current
functional @xmath . The solution of the screening problem requires the
full dispersive relation between @xmath and @xmath . According to the
study of Chp. 3 , the coherence length in the normal metal @xmath gives
the nonlocality range, as @xmath is the off-diagonal self-energy in (
3.2 ). Eq. ( 5.11 ) represents the long wavelength limit @xmath . For
simplicity, here we use Eq. ( 5.11 ) under the assumption of local
response. Including the nonlocality in the constitutive relations does
not alter the spontaneous interface currents qualitatively.

The magnetization curves @xmath , which follow from Eq.  ( 5.11 ) are
shown in Fig. 5.2 . Approaching from large fields, Fig. 5.2 shows two
paramagnetic branches @xmath with a linear diamagnetic slope exhibiting
a spontaneous magnetization in zero field. They result from the
superposition of the paramagnetic magnetization @xmath and the Meissner
response to the applied field @xmath . As the field is decreased
(increased) past @xmath , the branch @xmath ( @xmath ) becomes
meta-stable. The spontaneous magnetization @xmath appears below a second
order transition point @xmath and saturates at low temperatures, as
shown in the inset of Fig. 5.2 . The magnetization curve includes a
diamagnetic branch @xmath , which arises from the competition between
the paramagnetic instability and the thermal smearing and is
thermodynamically unstable.

In the following we give a semi-quantitative analysis of the
magnetization @xmath , first at zero temperature and field [ @xmath ],
proceeding to finite temperatures [ @xmath ], and finally including an
applied magnetic field @xmath [ @xmath ]. The boundary conditions are
given by @xmath and @xmath . We concentrate on the most relevant limit
where @xmath . At @xmath , according to Eq. ( 5.11 ), the paramagnetic
interface current @xmath remains unscreened until being matched by
@xmath , producing a vector potential @xmath on the scale @xmath . The
vector potential @xmath saturates beyond @xmath , as the para- and
diamagnetic currents cancel each other. Assuming that the @xmath -states
extend up to the outer metal surface ( @xmath ), the induced
magnetization @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that although the spontaneous currents increase as @xmath (
@xmath ) they are screened exponentially beyond the extent of the @xmath
-states in this limit, giving a magnetization @xmath . We assume @xmath
in the following.

At finite temperature, the spontaneous magnetization is suppressed by
the factor @xmath , which itself depends on the magnetization via @xmath
, implying the implicit equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spontaneous magnetization appears below a second order transition at
@xmath , saturating at low temperatures, as shown in the inset of Fig.
5.2 . The transition temperature is equal in magnitude to the energy
splitting of the DOS peak @xmath .

Under an applied magnetic field @xmath , the Meissner current @xmath
screens both the spontaneous interface current and the applied field. At
zero temperature we deal with a linear problem and the magnetization is
given by the superposition @xmath of the spontaneous magnetic moment
@xmath and the Meissner response @xmath . As the temperature increases,
@xmath decreases and the meta-stable regime shrinks. At @xmath the
spontaneous magnetization in zero field has disappeared, the signature
of the paramagnetic currents remains, however, reducing the diamagnetic
susceptibility @xmath at small fields. At large temperature @xmath we
recover the pure Meissner response.

Note that the two meta-stable branches @xmath and @xmath in the
magnetization curve, see Fig. 5.2 , imply a first order transition with
changing field at @xmath . The first order transition is similar to the
magnetic breakdown occurring in the same system at large fields between
the fully diamagnetic phase and a field penetration phase [ Fauchère
1997 ] . The rotation of the magnetic moments to the energetically more
favorable polarization will show the hysteretic behavior typical for a
first order transition. The transition from @xmath to @xmath implies a
paramagnetic slope in the thermodynamic @xmath -magnetization @xmath ,
which will link the meta-stable solutions @xmath in Fig. 5.2 and cross
the origin at @xmath . In summary, we find that on approaching @xmath
from above, the diamagnetic susceptibility @xmath is reduced, exhibiting
a low-temperature reentrance. Below @xmath , the spontaneous interface
currents produce a net paramagnetic susceptibility @xmath .

### 5.4 Discussion

In the following we discuss our results in the context of the
experiments by Mota and co-workers, who have measured the magnetic
response of normal-metal coated superconducting cylinders at low
temperatures [ Visani 1990a , Mota 1989 ] . In the previous chapters 3
and 4 we have established a quantitative understanding of the magnetic
response of these samples at higher temperatures, studying the screening
at small impurity concentration and the magnetic breakdown at finite
field. The samples are typically characterized by a mean free path
@xmath and an interface transparency of order unity. The Nb-Ag and Nb-Cu
cylinders show an anomalous paramagnetic signal in the magnetic response
in the low-temperature – low-field corner of the @xmath phase diagram [
Visani 1990a , Mota 1994 ] . A direct comparison with our theory
requires the magnetization curve @xmath which has not yet been measured.
The observed @xmath -susceptibility @xmath as a function of temperature
shows an increase at low temperature [ Mota 1997 ] . The measured @xmath
-susceptibilities @xmath and @xmath exhibit a reentrance both as a
function of temperature and field [ Visani 1990a ] . The reentrance is
accompanied by an out-of-phase response signaling dissipation and by
hysteresis in the field dependence. These features are in qualitative
agreement with our results for the magnetization curve. We find that
theory and experiment agree in order of magnitude for @xmath , implying
a transition temperature @xmath and a spontaneous magnetization @xmath .
A more quantitative comparison with experiment requires a
self-consistent treatment of the spontaneous currents with the pair
potential, accounting for the nonlocality of the current-field relation
and its sensitivity to disorder.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the inclusion of a finite
electron-electron repulsion in a proximity coupled normal-metal layer
naturally produces spontaneous interface currents leading to a
paramagnetic reentrance in the magnetic response: The sign change in the
coupling across the NS interface leads to the trapping of @xmath -states
at the Fermi energy. The frustrated NS junction relaxes through the
generation of spontaneous interface currents, inducing a paramagnetic
moment. The spontaneous magnetization implies a first order transition
in zero field in the low-temperature sector of the @xmath phase diagram.
A non-trivial issue remains the requirement that the electron-electron
interaction be repulsive at the low energy scales involved. Interesting
consequences of this assumption have been discussed in the context of
the proximity effect [ de Gennes 1964 ] and most recently in relation to
the low temperature transport in mesoscopic NS structures [ Petrashov
1995 , Nazarov 1996 ] . In fact, the noble metal coatings used in the
experiments of Mota and co-workers [ Visani 1990a ] appear to be the
most plausible candidates for a repulsive electron-electron interaction.
Turning the argument around, in the light of our findings the
experimental observation of a paramagnetic reentrance can be taken as an
indication of the presence of a repulsive interaction in these
materials.

## Chapter 6 Nonlocality in Josephson junctions: Anomalous current –
flux periodicity

### 6.1 Introduction

The equilibrium transport in Josephson junctions is caused by the
quantum interference of the two overlapping reservoir wavefunctions [
Josephson 1962 ] . The supercurrent is driven by the nonlocal phase
difference between the superconducting leads. This is of particular
interest in superconductor–normal-metal–superconductor (SNS) junctions,
where the thickness of the interlayer can be much larger than the
superconducting coherence length @xmath , without suppressing the
Josephson current. The transport relies on the coherence of the
quasi-particle population between the superconductors, on the mesoscopic
scale of the thermal and phase coherence lengths of the normal metal [
Likharev 1991 ] .

In early studies on SNS junctions [ Kulik 1970 ] the supercurrents were
already expressed in terms of the quasi-particles which are bound to the
interlayer due to the Andreev reflection. These bound states consist of
a forward propagating electron and a back propagating hole and carry the
current of the double electron charge @xmath , which is converted from
an to supercurrent at the NS interfaces. Recently, there has been a
renewed interest in those states as they can be brought out of
equilibrium in a controlled fashion [ Octavio 1983 , Averin 1995 ,
Gorelik 1998 , Lehnert 1999 ] . Due to the advances in nanofabrication
technology, which have achieved a good coupling of a two-dimensional
electron gas (2DEG) to superconducting reservoirs [ Takayanagi 1995a ,
Takayanagi 1995b ] , ballistic properties of these quasi-particles like
the quantization of supercurrent [ Beenakker 1991 ] have been observed.

In the present chapter we determine the critical-current–flux relation
in a ballistic SNS junction. The current-carrying quasi-particles
traversing the weak link are sensitive to the Aharonov-Bohm phase,
producing a nonlocal dependence of the current density on the magnetic
induction in the junction and the superconducting phase difference. As a
consequence, the nonlocality and the finite size junction produce an
anomalous doubling of the critical-current–flux periodicity @xmath .

The motivation for our work is drawn from an experiment on S-2DEG-S
junctions [ Heida 1998 ] of width @xmath comparable to length @xmath ,
where the a @xmath periodicity was found instead of the usual @xmath . A
first attempt to explain this finding is due to [ Barzykin 1998 ] ;
considering the point-contact geometry of Fig. 1(a) with open boundary
condition in the metal, they indeed recover a @xmath periodicity for a
geometric ratio @xmath . However, the experiment in [ Heida 1998 ] is
carried out in the strip geometry of Fig. 1(b) and involves dimensions
@xmath of the same order. Here we determine the critical current @xmath
as a function of flux, taking proper account of the reflecting
boundaries in the normal-metal characteristic for the strip geometry of
Fig. 6.1 (b). We find that the periodicity of the critical current
changes from @xmath to @xmath as the flux through the junction
increases, i.e., as a function of field. At low temperatures the
crossover to the @xmath periodic current appears at a flux @xmath , thus
explaining the result of Heida et al. [ Heida 1998 ] , who found a
@xmath periodic pattern for all fields in devices with @xmath . The
results of this chapter have been accepted for publication [ Ledermann
1999 ] .

### 6.2 Current density pattern

In our study, we neglect the screening of the applied fields by the
supercurrent in the normal-metal layer, which is justified for a small
critical current @xmath . The scale over which the fields can be
screened is given by the Josephson length

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the effective length of the junction, extended by the
penetration depth @xmath in the superconductors. We assume that the
Josephson vortex distance [ Tinkham 1996 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the smaller length scale, @xmath . Expressing the critical current by
the screening density @xmath introduced in Chp. 3 , @xmath , we find
that the field regime of interest lies above the ’critical field’ of the
normal interlayer, @xmath . We consider the SNS-junction sketched in
Fig. 6.1 . In the quasi-classical Green’s function technique, the
current density ( 3.6 ) in a point @xmath results from the contributions
over all quasi-particle trajectories connecting the two NS interfaces
through @xmath . In a junction of infinite width, the trajectories
involve no reflection at the boundaries. In the case of a finite
junction, boundary conditions at the normal-metal–vacuum boundary have
to be applied, which we idealize through the assumption of specular
reflections. Furthermore, we adopt the usual approximations: perfect
Andreev reflections at the SN-interfaces and a coherence length @xmath
in the two superconductors with @xmath , allowing for a step-like
approximation of the order parameter @xmath [ Kulik 1970 ] . The
quasi-classical Green function is calculated by matching the partial
solutions in N and S at the interfaces. For the current density @xmath ,
we arrive at a generalization of the results given by Svidzinskii and
co-workers [ Antsygina 1975 ] . For finite temperatures with @xmath ,
the current @xmath takes the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

while in the low temperature limit, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the length of a trajectory with slope @xmath ,
and the zero temperature critical current density is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ( 6.5 ), @xmath denotes the electron density in the normal metal, and
we have assumed @xmath as usual. While in the low temperature limit all
harmonics @xmath ( @xmath ) contribute to the current density [ Ishii
1970 ] , at finite temperatures, the thermal smearing of the Andreev
levels leads to a suppression of the higher harmonics @xmath and only
the first term @xmath survives. An individual trajectory contributes
with a weight @xmath at finite- and @xmath in the low temperature limit.
In a wide junction, @xmath takes the form ¹ ¹ 1 In the discussion of the
point-contact geometry, Barzykin and Zagoskin make use of the above
results, but limit the integration in ( 6.3 ) and ( 6.4 ) to those
trajectories connecting the superconducting contacts [ Barzykin 1998 ] .
[ Antsygina 1975 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the more general result derived here, @xmath is given by the gauge
invariant phase difference

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the phase difference between the two
superconductors and @xmath is the path which goes through the point
@xmath with slope @xmath . Combining the current expressions ( 6.3 ) or
( 6.4 ) and ( 6.7 ) with the Maxwell equation @xmath , we obtain the
transverse vector-potential @xmath allowing to solve the full screening
problem. The solution of the screening problem has only been carried out
for a tunnel junction so far [ Owen 1967 ] .

In the following, we neglect screening and concentrate on junctions with
the strip geometry of Fig. 6.1 (b), including the (reflecting)
trajectories @xmath in ( 6.3 ) and ( 6.4 ). We express the gauge
invariant phase difference ( 6.7 ) in terms of the flux @xmath enclosed
by @xmath and the reference path @xmath and obtain,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where for negligible screening @xmath and @xmath is the properly
weighted enclosed area, see Fig. 6.1 (d). Note the analogy of this
result to the Aharonov-Bohm phase picked up by an Andreev loop in a SN
structure, see Fig. 4.2 . The surface @xmath is calculated as a function
of the number of reflections the trajectory @xmath undergoes (in the
following called the ‘order’ of the trajectory). The point-contact
geometry of Fig. 6.1 (a) then is described by the order-zero
trajectories alone [ Barzykin 1998 ] , while in the strip geometry of
Fig. 6.1 (b), higher orders have to be included.

The geometrical pattern in the current density @xmath depends strongly
on the sample dimensions @xmath and @xmath , the normal metal coherence
length @xmath , and the applied field @xmath . At finite temperature,
the current density in @xmath draws its weight from trajectories with
@xmath , allowing us to introduce the transverse nonlocality range
@xmath (in the low temperature limit, @xmath and we define @xmath ).
This range of nonlocality has to be compared to the scale @xmath of
transverse variations in @xmath (see Fig. 6.2 ): For weak nonlocality,
@xmath , the flow is uniform along @xmath with amplitude @xmath and
changes direction on a distance @xmath along the @xmath -axis. This
contrasts with the strongly nonlocal case @xmath which is found with
increasing field, where the current density forms domains of left-and
right-going circular flow. While the local case is similar to that in a
tunnel junction, the pattern in the non local situation reminds of the
usual vortex structure in a superconductor, see Fig. 6.3 . For finite
temperatures with @xmath , the current density of the order-zero
trajectories is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For weak nonlocality, @xmath , the exponent remains approximately
constant in the normal part, @xmath , leading to a uniform current flow,
while for strong nonlocality, @xmath , @xmath grows as @xmath approaches
the interfaces, @xmath , such that the current concentrates in the
middle of the junction. For @xmath , the higher order trajectories lead
to a refinement of the current pattern, see Fig. 6.3 . Similar results
are obtained in the low temperature limit, see [ Ledermann 1998 ] .

### 6.3 Critical current – flux dependence

The ratio @xmath and its associated characteristic current pattern
manifest themselves in the (pseudo)-periodicity of the critical current,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

versus flux @xmath in the junction. In the case of weak nonlocality,
@xmath , the relevant contribution to the critical current comes from
the order-zero trajectories resulting in a @xmath periodicity. For
strong nonlocality, @xmath , higher orders are relevant and lift the
order-zero result as shown in Fig. 6.4 — the periodicity of the critical
current changes to @xmath . For a critical current @xmath the cross-over
@xmath lies within the negligible screening regime. To be specific, we
discuss in detail the orders 0, 1, and 2 for the case of finite
temperatures with @xmath (the qualitative arguments for @xmath are
similar).

For @xmath , the critical current due to the order-zero trajectories
takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For the first-order trajectories, we numerically find a
@xmath (pseudo-) periodic contribution as well. Both components vanish
with field @xmath . The second- and all following even-order
trajectories exhibit a large current amplitude of order @xmath on a
scale @xmath in the junction center @xmath , a consequence of the @xmath
-independence of the gauge invariant phase difference @xmath along
trajectories through @xmath . Their contribution scales @xmath and
therefore dominates over the zeroth- and first-order terms at large
enough fields — as the strongly nonlocal limit with @xmath is reached,
the periodicity changes to @xmath . Samples with a small width @xmath
are always in the strongly nonlocal limit and their current pattern is
@xmath periodic throughout the entire field axis. At low temperatures,
the condition @xmath transforms into the geometric requirement @xmath .
The same arguments apply for the @xmath , where the zero-order current
is given by [ Heida 1998 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

While Eq. ( 6.13 ) trivially implies a @xmath periodicity when taking
the absolute value, more generally Eq. ( 6.12 ) only produces a @xmath
periodicity when accounting for the lifting by the higher order
contributions. We give a complete classification of the regimes of
simple or double flux periodicity, depending on the nonlocality range
@xmath , and the Josephson vortex distance @xmath in Table 6.1 .

### 6.4 Discussion

We have demonstrated that the current density and the critical current
in a clean SNS-junction with strip geometry depend on the ratio @xmath
between the nonlocality range @xmath and the vortex distance @xmath .
The period of the critical current changes with increasing field from a
@xmath periodicity for @xmath to a @xmath pseudo-periodicity for strong
nonlocality @xmath .

Recently, Heida et al. [ Heida 1998 ] observed such a @xmath periodicity
in strip like ( @xmath ) S-2DEG-S junctions made from Nb electrodes in
contact with InAs operating at low temperatures @xmath K. As the total
flux through the junction is difficult to determine in the experiment,
Heida et al. had to infer their @xmath periodic structure from a fit on
four samples with different ratios @xmath ranging from 0.9 to 2.2. In
Fig. 6.5 , we present the results of our numerical calculations for the
strip geometry, where we have properly taken into account the finite
penetration depth of the flux into the superconducting banks. While
geometries with @xmath clearly exhibit a @xmath periodicity throughout
the entire field region, a @xmath -component starts to develop at low
fields in wide junctions. The comparison with the data of Heida et al. (
@xmath ) gives a satisfactory description of the pseudo-periodic
structure.

For further experimental studies on wider junctions, we predict a
crossover from a @xmath - to a @xmath -periodicity with increasing
fields. The cross-over is accompanied by the detachment of the current
pattern form the superconducting leads, which form a vortex structure
shown in Fig. 6.3 .

## Chapter 7 Quiet SDS Josephson junctions for quantum computing

### 7.1 Introduction

Quantum computers take advantage of the inherent parallelism of the
quantum state propagation, allowing them to outperform classical
computers in a qualitative manner. Although the concept of quantum
computation has been introduced quite a while ago [ Feynman 1996 ] ,
wide spread interest has developed only recently when specific
algorithms exploiting the character of coherent state propagation have
been proposed [ Ekert 1996 ] . Here we deal with the device aspect of
quantum computers, which is flourishing in the wake of the recent
successes achieved on the algorithmic side. Two conflicting difficulties
have to be faced by all hardware implementations of quantum computation:
while the computer must be scalable and controllable, the device should
be almost completely detached from the environment during operation in
order to maximize phase coherence. The most advanced propositions are
based on trapped ions [ Cirac 1995 , Monroe 1995 ] , photons in cavities
[ Turchette 1995 ] , NMR spectroscopy of molecules [ Gershenfeld 1997 ]
, and various solid state implementations based on electrons trapped in
quantum dots [ Loss 1998 , Burkard 1999 ] , the Coulomb blockade in
superconducting junction arrays [ Shnirman 1997 , Shnirman 1998 , Averin
1998 ] , or the flux dynamics in Superconducting Quantum Interference
Devices (SQUIDs) [ Bocko 1997 ] . Nanostructured solid state quantum
gates offer the attractive feature of large scale integrability, once
the limitations due to decoherence can be overcome [ Haroche 1996 ] .

In this chapter we propose a new device concept for a (quantum) logic
gate exploiting the unusual symmetry properties of unconventional
superconductors. The basic idea is sketched in Fig. 1: connecting the
positive (100) and negative (010) lobes of a @xmath -wave superconductor
with a @xmath -wave material produces the famous @xmath -loop with a
current carrying ground state characteristic of @xmath -wave symmetry [
Wollman 1993 , Sigrist 1995 ] . We make use of an alternative geometry
and match the @xmath -wave superconductors (S) to the (110) boundaries
of the @xmath -wave (D) material. As a consequence, the usual Josephson
coupling @xmath vanishes due to symmetry reasons and we arrive at a
bistable device, where the leading term in the coupling takes the form
@xmath with minima at @xmath ( @xmath denotes the gauge invariant phase
drop across the junction). In our design we need the minima at the
positions @xmath — the necessary shift is achieved by going over to an
asymmetric SDS’ junction with a large DS’ coupling, see Fig. 1. The
static DS’ junction shifts the minima of the active SD junction by the
desired amount @xmath . A similar double-periodic junction has recently
been realized by combining two @xmath -wave superconductors oriented at
a @xmath angle [ Il’ichev 1998 ] .

The ground states of our SDS’ junction are degenerate and carry no
current, while still being distinguishable from one another: e.g.,
connecting the junction to a large inductance loop, the @xmath state is
easily identified through the induced current. It is this
double-periodicity and the associated degeneracy in the ground state of
the SDS’ junction which we want to exploit here for quantum computation:
combining the SDS’ junction, a capacitor, and a conventional @xmath
-wave junction into a SDS’ SQUID loop, we construct a bistable element
which satisfies all the requirements for a qubit, the basic building
block of a quantum computer. This work has been submitted for
publication [ Ioffe 1998 ] .

### 7.2 Device functionality

In the following we give a detailed account of the operational features
of our device. Consider a small-inductance ( @xmath ) SQUID loop with
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the (Josephson) critical current of the
loop and @xmath is the quantum unit of flux. Such a loop cannot trap
magnetic flux ( @xmath ) and the gauge invariant phase differences
@xmath and @xmath across the two junctions are slaved to each other, as
the uniqueness of the wave function requires that @xmath . Combining a
SDS’ junction with a coupling energy @xmath and a conventional @xmath
-wave junction (coupling @xmath ) into a SDS’ SQUID loop, we obtain a
potential energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

exhibiting two minima at @xmath , see Fig. 2. The switch @xmath allows
us to manipulate their energy separation, choosing between minima which
are either degenerate or separated by @xmath .

In the quantum case, the phase fluctuates as a consequence of the
particle–phase duality [ Tinkham 1996 ] . The phase fluctuations are
driven by the electrostatic energy required to move a Cooper pair across
the junction and are described by the kinetic energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the loop capacitance. The dynamics of @xmath is
manipulated by inserting a large switchable (switch @xmath ) capacitance
@xmath into the loop acting in parallel with the capacitances @xmath and
@xmath of the @xmath - and @xmath -wave junctions. Note that the
Lagrangian @xmath of our loop is formally equivalent to that of a
particle with ‘mass’ @xmath moving in the potential @xmath .

With the switch settings @xmath on and @xmath off , see Fig. 2(a), the
loop capacitance is large and the junction exhibits a doubly degenerate
ground state which we characterize via the phase coordinate @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Closing the switch @xmath , see Fig. 2(b), the
degeneracy is lifted and while @xmath becomes the new ground state, the
@xmath -state is shifted upwards by the energy @xmath of the @xmath
-wave junction, the latter being frustrated when @xmath . On the other
hand, opening the switch @xmath , see Fig. 2(c), completely isolates the
@xmath -wave junction and leads to the new ground and excited states
@xmath separated by the tunneling gap @xmath . The latter relates to the
barrier @xmath and the capacitance @xmath of the @xmath -wave junction
via [ Tinkham 1996 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Closing the switch @xmath , the capacitance is increased by @xmath and
the tunneling gap is exponentially suppressed. Using the above three
settings, we can perform all the necessary single qubit operations:

Idle-state: The switch settings @xmath - on and @xmath - off define the
qubit’s idle-state. While the large capacitance @xmath inhibits
tunneling, the degeneracy of @xmath and @xmath guarantees a parallel
time evolution of the two states. This idle-state is superior to other
designs, where the two states of the qubit have different energies and
one has to keep track of the relative phase accumulated between the
basis states.

Phase shifter: Closing the switch @xmath separates the energies of the
basis states @xmath and @xmath by an amount @xmath . Using a spinor
notation for the two-level system, the relative time evolution of the
two states is described by the Hamiltonian @xmath , with @xmath a Pauli
matrix. Keeping the switch @xmath on during the time @xmath , the time
evolution of the two states is given by the unitary rotation @xmath with
@xmath .

Amplitude shifter: Assume we have prepared the loop in the ground state
@xmath and wish to produce a superposition by shifting some weight to
the @xmath state. Opening the switch @xmath in the loop, see Fig. 2(c),
the time evolution generated by the Hamiltonian @xmath of the open loop
induces the rotation @xmath with @xmath . The system then oscillates
back and forth between @xmath and @xmath with frequency @xmath and
keeping the switch @xmath open for an appropriate time interval @xmath
we obtain the desired shift in amplitude (note that the qubit remains
isolated from the environment during these Rabi oscillations).

Imposing the condition @xmath on the coupling energies, we make sure
that the two states @xmath and @xmath are well defined while
simultaneously involving only the low energy states @xmath and @xmath of
the system. Furthermore, all times involved should be smaller than the
decoherence time @xmath , requiring @xmath .

The present setup differs significantly from the conventional (large
inductance) SQUID loop design, where the low-lying states are
distinguished via the different amount of trapped flux and their
manipulation involves external magnetic fields @xmath or biasing
currents @xmath citeblatter:qtunneling. SQUID loops of this type are
being used in the design of classical Josephson junction computers [
Likharev 1991 ] and have been proposed for the realization of quantum
computers, too, see [ Bocko 1997 ] . However, this setup suffers from
the generic problem that the flux moving between the loops leads to a
magnetic field mediated long-ranged interaction between the individual
loops and further produces an unwanted coupling to the environment. By
contrast, our device remains decoupled from the environment, the
operating states do not involve currents, and switching between states
can be triggered with a minimal contact to the external world — we
therefore call our qubit implementation a ‘ quiet ’ one.

Next, we discuss how to perform two-qubit operations within an array of
SDS’ SQUID loops. A two-qubit state is a coherent superposition of
single qubit states and can be expressed in the basis @xmath , where
@xmath denote the phases on the @xmath -wave junctions of the first (
@xmath ) and second ( @xmath ) qubit, respectively. Unitary operations
acting on these states are represented as @xmath unitary matrices.
Single-qubit operations @xmath acting on the second qubit take the
block-matrix form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and a similar block form selecting odd and even rows and columns defines
the single-qubit operations on the first qubit. As all logic operations
on two qubits can be constructed from combinations of single-qubit
operations and the Controlled-NOT gate [ Ekert 1996 ] it is sufficient
to define the operational realization of the latter. The Controlled NOT
gate performs the following action on two qubits: with the first
(controller) qubit in state @xmath and the second (target qubit) in
state @xmath the operation shall leave the target qubit unchanged if
@xmath , while flipping it between @xmath and @xmath when @xmath , in
matrix notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above Controlled NOT operation can easily be constructed from the
two-qubit ‘phase shifter’: Connecting two individual qubits in their
idle-state over a @xmath -wave junction into a SQUID loop, the states
@xmath and @xmath become separated from the states @xmath and @xmath by
the energy @xmath of the @xmath -wave junction. Keeping the two qubits
connected during the time @xmath introduces a phase shift @xmath between
the two pairs of states,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Controlled NOT gate ( 7.5 ) then can be constructed from the
phase-shifter ( 7.6 ) via the following sequence of single- and
two-qubit operations (see [ Loss 1998 ] for a similar realization of the
CNOT gate),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the single qubit operations @xmath rotate the qubit @xmath by an
angle @xmath around the axis @xmath ( @xmath acting on @xmath ) while
leaving the other qubit unchanged.

A key element in our design are the switches and a valid suggestion is
the single electron transistor discussed in the literature [ Joyez 1994
] . Here we propose a quiet switch design optimally adapted to our SDS’
qubits. The underlying idea is to insert a SQUID loop which allows to
either stiffen or relax the phase, thus producing a phase switch.
Combining a SDS’ junction with energy @xmath , a @xmath -junction with
@xmath , and a @xmath -wave junction with @xmath into a (small
inductance) SQUID loop, see Fig. 2(d), we obtain the following switching
behavior: The phase @xmath on the SDS’ junction frustrates the remaining
junctions, the loop’s energy-phase relation is a constant, @xmath , and
the switch is open. A voltage pulse coming down the signal lines and
switching the SDS’ junction into the @xmath state changes the phase
relation between the @xmath - and the @xmath -wave junctions and closes
the switch: the energy @xmath implies the current-phase relation @xmath
that stiffens the phase. The appropriate voltage pulses can be generated
by driving an external SDS’ SQUID loop unstable.

### 7.3 Discussion

The quiet device concept proposed above heavily relies on the double
periodicity of the SD junction. As the second harmonic is strongly
suppressed in a SID tunnel junction, a more feasible suggestion for the
realization of a @xmath junction is the SND sandwich, where the
superconductors are separated by a thin metallic layer N. For a clean
metallic layer, the coupling energies for the @xmath -th harmonic are
large and of order @xmath , producing the well known saw-tooth shape in
the current-phase relation [ Ishii 1970 ] ( @xmath denotes the Fermi
velocity in the N layer while @xmath and @xmath are its width and area).
In reality, it seems difficult to deposit a clean metallic film on top
of a @xmath -wave superconductor and we have to account for the
reduction in the coupling @xmath due the finite scattering length @xmath
in the metal layer. Using quasi-classical techniques to describe a dirty
SN @xmath D junction, we obtain a second harmonic coupling energy @xmath
, where @xmath denotes the scattering length in the normal metal, @xmath
is the quantum resistance, and @xmath is the Thouless energy.

The second important device parameter is the tunneling gap @xmath ,
which depends quite sensitively on the coupling to the environment. The
usual reduction in the tunneling probability produced by the environment
[ Caldeira 1983 ] is modified if the system is effectively gapped at low
energies [ Ambegaokar 1982 ] . This is the case for our SNDN’S’ junction
where the low-energy quasi-particle excitations in the metal are gapped
over the Thouless energy @xmath [ Golubov 1988 ] . The dynamics of the
junction is only affected by the presence of virtual processes involving
energies larger than @xmath , leading to a renormalized capacitance
@xmath (cf. [ Schön 1990 ] ) and resulting in the reduced tunneling gap

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath of order unity. Consistency requires that the tunneling
process is ‘massive’ and hence slow, @xmath . With a tunneling time
@xmath ( @xmath tunneling action) we find that the constraint @xmath is
satisfied. The condition @xmath requires the tunneling gap @xmath to be
small, but large enough in order to allow for reasonable switching
times, requiring @xmath to be of order 10. With typical device
dimensions @xmath Å, @xmath Å, and @xmath , this condition can be
realized. Finally, the operating temperature @xmath is limited by the
constraint @xmath , guaranteeing that our device operates in the quantum
regime, and the requirement @xmath that thermal quasi-particle
excitations be absent. The first condition takes the form @xmath and is
the more stringent one. Using the above parameters and a typical value
@xmath cm/s, we obtain a Thouless energy @xmath K and hence @xmath K.

In conclusion, we have discussed a novel device concept for logic gates
in superconducting computers. The SDS’ SQUID loop realizes a number of
attractive features which are potentially relevant both in classical
Josephson computers based on RSFQ logics as well as in superconducting
quantum computers. The most obvious advantage over previous designs is
the quietness of the device: The SDS’ SQUID loop is a naturally bistable
device and does not involve external bias currents or magnetic fields.
Second, the basic states of the loop do not involve currents or trapped
flux, hence long-range interactions between various elements of the
computer are eliminated. Third, the qubits do not accumulate phase
differences during idle time. And fourth, all operations can be carried
out via simple switching processes.

## Chapter 8 Conclusions and Outlook

In this thesis, we have discovered the variety of facets of mesoscopic
superconductivity induced by proximity, ranging from the non-equilibrium
transport to the thermodynamic screening properties. A tremendous
progress in nanofabrication technology and the perfection of
low-temperature cryostats in the last two decades have made the small
scales of the Andreev or Thouless energies accessible to experiment.
Proximity induced superconductivity combines the macroscopic phase of
the superconductor to the quantum coherence of the microscopic electron
wavefunctions, allowing for the observation of single-particle
properties on a macroscopic scale. The term ’mesoscopic’ coins the
importance of the phase coherence of the involved quasi-particles
preserving quantum interference effects.

The study of mesoscopic superconductivity has repeatedly lead us to the
microscopic process of the Andreev reflection (AR) governing the
quasi-particle exchange across the normal-metal–superconductor contact.
The AR pins the single-particle physics to the Fermi level, combining
electrons above and holes below symmetrically. The non-trivial AR
phase-shift @xmath translates into the suppression of the quasi-particle
spectrum at the Fermi energy, the resonance structure in transport and
the diamagnetic response in magnetism. These phenomena are understood in
the idealized free electron gas description of the proximity metal, in
good quantitative agreement with experiments.

In this concluding chapter, we give a perspective on open questions and
future work on Andreev physics. On one hand we discuss some specific
problems that can be addressed based on the framework provided in this
thesis and are of direct relevance to experiments. On the other hand, we
focus on some questions which appear of long term interest, in
connection to our work and the present developments in the field of
mesoscopic superconductivity.

(i) The scattering matrix approach used in chapter 2 gives a direct
theoretical access to the finite voltage shot noise in NS junctions. The
numerical realization of disorder average based on the shot noise
expression would allow for a quantitative comparison with shot noise
experiments on diffusive NS junctions presently in progress [ Jehl 1999
, Kozhevnikov 1999 ] .

(ii) In chapters 3 and 6 we have found several signatures of
non-locality in the proximity effect, which have just started to be
traced experimentally [ Heida 1998 ] . We predicted a finite field
cross-over from a @xmath to a @xmath current–flux periodicity in
ballistic SNS junctions, and the detachment of the current pattern as we
reach the non-local regime. Future experiments on more extended
ballistic junctions will require the self-consistent solution of the
screening problem, where the over-screening and the sensitivity to
impurity or boundary scattering crystallizes in the
critical-current–flux relation. Non-locality is also an issue in High-
@xmath superconductors, where the quasi- particle gap vanishes due to
the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter, see [ Kogan 1996 ] .

(iii) The experimental feasibility of ballistic SNS weak links provides
an access to non-equilibrium phenomena: The superconducting reservoirs
act as a confining potential on the Andreev quasi-particle population
which can be driven out of equilibrium in a controlled fashion [ Scheer
1998 ] . This allows for the observation of supercurrents at large
temperatures [ Lehnert 1999 ] or the manipulation of the Josephson
relation by a repopulation of the Andreev levels [ Baselmans 1999 ] .
The study of phase relaxation processes in this system are within
experimental reach.

(iv) The rapidly developing area of quantum computing relies on the
existence of phase coherent devices as it exploits the time evolution of
a quantum two-level system (qubit). The Josephson junctions offer
themselves as a scalable, solid state implementation of a qubit, by
making use of the quantization of the charge [ Shnirman 1997 ] or of the
phase in mesoscopic weak links, see chapter 7 . Before speculating on
the efficient use of quantum algorithms, the near future challenge lies
in the experimental realization of single- and two-qubit operations and
in the theoretical investigation of the phase coherence problem, as it
arises from the coupling with the environment.

(v) In chapters 4 and 5 we have addressed the nonlinear magnetic
response in proximity structures, revealing a rich behavior in the
low-temperature low-field corner of the @xmath phase diagram. The
breakdown of the diamagnetic state studied in Chp. 4 was found to agree
quantitatively with experimental data [ Mota 1989 ] . The polarization
of the spontaneous moments discussed in Chp. 5 (see also below) imply a
similar phase boundary at zero field. We predict a latent heat as a
signature of both first order transitions.

Much of the underlying motivation for the detailed study of the orbital
magnetism in this thesis was provided by the paramagnetic reentrance
observed in the susceptibility of normal-metal coated superconducting
cylinders [ Visani 1990a ] . While the studies within the free electron
gas approximation of Chps. 3 and 4 could not account for the
low-temperature anomaly, they allowed a good characterization of the
typical mean free path and the quality of the NS interface, see also [
Müller-Allinger 1999 ] . The effect of the cylindrical topology had
already been previously considered in [ Belzig 1995 ] using the
quasi-classical technique, as well as more recently in [ Bruder 1998 ] ,
failing to produce either a non-monotonic temperature dependence or the
order of magnitude observed in experiment. This prompted us to consider
the possibility of a repulsive electron-electron interaction in the
normal metal in Chp. 5 . We found that a repulsive coupling constant in
the normal metal layer frustrates the NS contact by a phase difference
@xmath across it. A density of states peak is accumulated at the Fermi
energy due to the @xmath -states trapped at the NS interface. This peak
induces an paramagnetic instability towards spontaneous interface
currents which naturally give rise to magnetic moments. The
experimentally observed signatures being the paramagnetic reentrance in
the susceptibility, a hysteretic behavior, dissipative response and
creep qualitatively support our interpretation in terms of spontaneous
magnetic moments and indicate the presence of repulsive
electron-electron interactions in these material (Ag, Cu). In order to
test our ideas, the following points merit consideration.

(vi) The local spectroscopy of the NS contact by means of a (scanning)
tunneling microscope should reveal a (split) density of states peak at
the chemical potential.

(vii) The experimental measurement of the @xmath -magnetization curve
would provide a direct evidence for our findings. For a quantitative
comparison, the numerical solution of the Eilenberger equation is
required, accounting for the self-consistency of the pair potential, the
non-locality of the current–field relations that enter the Maxwell
equation, and the presence of impurity scattering.

(ix) Recent theoretical work also addresses the low-temperature
corrections to the proximity effect due to interactions [ Zhou 1995 ,
Nazarov 1996 ] . First experiments on ferromagnet–superconductor
junctions show non-trivial behavior [ Giroud 1998 ] challenging our
understanding within the free electron gas approximation. A density of
states peak at the Fermi level may affect the transport properties
beyond the perturbative level that has been considered so far.

As experiments progress to ultra-low temperatures we unravel new facets
of Andreev physics. The correlations induced by the proximity to a bulk
superconductor could allow for the observation of metallic
electron-electron interaction effects on a macroscopic scale. The
low-temperature anomalies provide the opportunity to determine both the
size and the sign of the coupling in these materials.

## Appendix A Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations

We diagonalize the BCS-Hamiltonian for superconductivity by a Bogoliubov
transformation, considering a spatially inhomogeneous system. The
transformation is carried out by determining the quasiparticle
wavefunctions that fulfill the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) equations. We
show that the symmetry in the solutions of the (BdG) equations with
respect to reversing the energies @xmath is a consequence of the spin
degeneracy. Making use of the spin-reversal symmetry, we express the
Hamiltonian, the density, and the current operators in terms of the
quasiparticle operators @xmath , and arrive at the current expression
used in chapter 2 .

The mean-field, spin singlet BCS Hamiltonian for superconductivity can
be expressed in the form ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the Nambu spin-up annihilation operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The pair potential is given by @xmath (coupling constant @xmath ), the
colon ( @xmath ) denoting normal ordering with respect to @xmath and
@xmath . The Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) can be diagonalized by a basis
transformation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with the eigenfunctions @xmath of the BdG equations (which follow from
the insertion of the Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) into @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath are annihilation operators of spin-up states and thus
the excitations are all described in terms of spin-up quasi-particles.
In order to preserve the (fermionic) commutation relations we need a
complete orthonormal set of wavefunctions of the hermitian operator in (
A.5 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

(involving both positive and negative energy eigenstates) [ Niño 1984 ]
.

Consider the spin-reversal transformation @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath linear ( @xmath , @xmath ). Noting that the order parameter
@xmath is invariant under the transformation ( A.8 ), it is easily seen
that the Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) is spin-reversal symmetric, @xmath (this
symmetry extends also to finite magnetic field, if the Zeeman splitting
is neglected). By means of spin-reversal we may attribute to each
quasi-particle operator @xmath a linearly independent operator @xmath
through

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.9)
  -- -- -- -------

@xmath describes an excitation with opposite energy @xmath (according to
@xmath ). From Eqs. ( A.9 ) and ( A.4 ) we infer the effect of
spin-reversal on the electron-hole wavefunction,

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.10)
  -- -- -- --------

We arrive at a complete set of quasi-particle excitations in spin-up
space, which are grouped into pairs @xmath with energies @xmath , as a
direct consequence of spin degeneracy. Note that within the Nambu
picture, all quasi-particles carry spin up [spin @xmath and spin @xmath
(instead of spin @xmath )], explaining the opposite energy of the
related wavefunction ( A.10 ). The Hamiltonian ( A.1 ) takes the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ground state is realized by filling all the negative energy
quasi-particle states.

The spin-reversal symmetry allows us to express all equations using only
half of the eigenstates, i.e., one representative @xmath from each pair
of states @xmath . In the following we choose the positive energy
eigenstates, expressing the negative energy eigenstates through ( A.10
). We keep the positive energy states for the spin-up quasi-particles (
@xmath ), and reinterpret the related quasi-particle states of opposite
(negative) energy as spin-down excitations ( @xmath ). The Bogoliubov
transformation ( A.3 ) then takes the well-known form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Hamilton operator is expressed by @xmath , displaying the spin
degeneracy in the usual fashion. In the same way, we give the density
and current operators in both representations, using all (indexed by
@xmath ) or only the positive energy eigenstates (indexed by @xmath ),
respectively ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The current operator is easily generalized to finite magnetic field. We
note that current and density operators obey the continuity equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, in the presence of the pair potential @xmath the single
quasi-particle currents are not conserved. However, as the right hand
side of ( A.17 ) vanishes when taking the self-consistent expectation
value, the total current is conserved, the quasi-particle currents being
balanced by the current of the condensate. The Andreev reflection
represents a good example, where the quasi-particle current of @xmath
entering the superconductor decays and is converted to supercurrent.

## Appendix B Quasi-classical Green’s function technique

Here we give give a short, but self-contained derivation of the
Eilenberger equation ( 3.2 ) and the corresponding quasi-classical
current expression ( 3.6 ). We show how the renormalization procedure
takes care of the cancellation of bulk diamagnetic and Fermi surface
paramagnetic currents in the normal metal. Eq. ( 3.6 ) depends on the
quasi-classical Green’s function at the Fermi surface and its deviation
from the normal state. The treatment given here follows the spirit of [
Kopnin 1997 ] .

### b.1 Eilenberger equations

We define the @xmath matrix Green’s function in imaginary time [ @xmath
]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the Nambu-space operator ( A.2 ) in the Heisenberg picture with
respect to the spin-symmetric Hamiltonian ( A.1 ). @xmath fulfills the
equation of motion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the matrix operator

  -- -- -- -------
           (B.3)
  -- -- -- -------

@xmath , and the contraction is defined by @xmath . Similarly, the
conjugate equation of motion takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following we assume homogeneity in time @xmath . We also want to
neglect the @xmath term in ( B.3 ). While the Green’s function @xmath
varies on the Fermi wavelength @xmath , the vector potential varies on a
much larger scale, which we denote by @xmath . With

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and typically @xmath , we find that the term @xmath is negligible in
comparison to @xmath under the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the Larmor radius, which is the cyclotron radius of
an electron traveling at Fermi velocity @xmath .

The quasi-classical approximation is best done in the Fourier
representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the equation of motion for the first Gorkov Green’s function in (
B.1 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Introducing the center-of-mass and relative coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and their conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that @xmath varies on scale @xmath , while @xmath varies on the
much larger scale @xmath . Eq. ( B.8 ) translates to [ @xmath ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

In the quasi-classical approximation, we retain only contributions for
@xmath , assuming a smooth variation of @xmath and @xmath on Fermi
wavelength ( @xmath ), and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Transforming back to the real space center-of-mass coordinate and
carrying out a Fourier expansion in time, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fast oscillations of @xmath on Fermi wavelength are described by the
@xmath term. The above procedure is carried out similarly for the
Green’s functions @xmath and @xmath , obtaining the quasi-classical
equation of motion for the matrix Green’s function @xmath and its
conjugate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where ( @xmath )

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.16)
  -- -- -- --------

and the gradient @xmath is to be taken with a negative sign when acting
to the left in ( B.15 ). We have thus arrived at first-order
differential equations with respect to the center-of-mass coordinate
@xmath , the dependence of which accounts for the inhomogeneity of the
slowly varying potential and field. The momentum dependence of @xmath
lies at the Fermi surface @xmath .

We are now ready to define the quasi-classical Green’s function by the
integral over the momentum energy @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

keeping the dependence on the momentum direction as denoted by the Fermi
velocity @xmath . To provide a cutoff for the high energy contributions
at @xmath , we use the integration path @xmath shown in Fig. B.1 (
@xmath ). From the subtraction of the equation of motion ( B.14 ) and
its conjugate ( B.15 ), appropriately multiplied with @xmath , we
eliminate the @xmath term in ( B.16 ) and after integration over the
momentum energy we find the Eilenberger equation

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The quasi-classical equations need to be complemented by a normalization
condition, as the source term on the right hand side of ( B.14 ) and (
B.15 ) has been canceled by the subtraction. The normalization is
provided by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

as follows from the homogeneous solution and the fact that @xmath is a
constant of motion of ( B.1 ). The following symmetry relations for the
quasi-classical Green’s functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

simplify the solution of ( B.1 ). Eq. ( B.20 ) follows from the
definition ( B.17 ) and Eq.  ( B.21 ) directly from the equation of
motion ( B.1 ). The quasi-classical Green’s function takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For convenience, we redefine the pair potential @xmath and obtain the
form of the equations used in this thesis, see ( 3.2 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.2 Quasi-classical current expression

The current density in terms of the usual Green’s function (with respect
to center-of-mass and relative momentum) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term in ( B.24 ) gives the paramagnetic current which is
induced by the perturbation of the Green’s function @xmath in the
presence of an applied field and lives at the Fermi surface. The second
term in ( B.24 ) gives the diamagnetic current giving the rigid response
of the bulk density @xmath to the vector potential. In the normal state
@xmath , the paramagnetic current is known to cancel the diamagnetic
current up to small correction of the order of Landau diamagnetism, see
e.g. [ Tinkham 1996 ] . Using this fact, we easily find that the current

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be expressed by the deviation of the Green’s function from the
normal state value ( @xmath is the density of states). Splitting the
integration of the momentum energy @xmath along the paths @xmath and
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The high energy contribution in ( B.27 ) vanishes as the Green’s
function @xmath only deviates from @xmath at energies of the order
@xmath . Inserting the Fourier expansion in time into the first we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having introduced the high-energy cutoff by @xmath we can exchange the
Matsubara sum and the energy integration, which otherwise would have
lead to a divergence, see [ Abrikosov 1975 ] . Using the definition of
the quasi-classical Green’s functions ( B.17 ), the current takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quasi-classical Green’s function for the normal state @xmath that is
found from @xmath conveniently drops out of Eq. ( B.29 ) and we obtain
the quasi-classical current expression ( 3.6 ).

## Appendix C Response kernel

Starting from Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.20 ) we derive the linear response
kernel @xmath . The transformation of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
introduced in [ Schopohl 1995 , Schopohl 1998 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

decouples the full equations of motions ( 3.2 ) to two Riccati
differential equations. For the zeroth order equations we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

After linearization of ( C.1 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.20 ) are decoupled to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As a consequence of Eq. ( C ) we find @xmath and the same for @xmath ,
implying @xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath , we only have to consider
one of the two equations (e.g. the first one). Equation ( C ) is an
inhomogeneous first-order differential equation, which can be integrated
analytically. Assuming that @xmath and @xmath do not change sign as a
function of @xmath , with the help of ( 3.3.1 ) the solution can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this equation @xmath is an arbitrary reference point and the constant
@xmath has to be determined by the appropriate boundary conditions.
@xmath satisfies the relations of a propagator, @xmath and @xmath . Now
we determine the constant @xmath for a system of size @xmath . We assume
specular reflection at two boundaries at @xmath and ideal interfaces
between different materials inside the system. The appropriate boundary
conditions are the continuity of the Green’s function along the
classical trajectories, i.e., @xmath at @xmath for the specular
reflection and @xmath at the NS interface. The same conditions are valid
for @xmath and @xmath . We thus obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The current is determined by Eq. ( 3.6 ), expressed by the solution ( C
). We obtain the following general result for the linear current
functional,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the kernel @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Equation ( C ) gives the exact linear-response kernel of any
quasi-one-dimensional system, consisting of a combination of normal and
superconducting layers extending from @xmath to @xmath . The kernel is
expressed in terms of the quasi-classical Green’s functions in absence
of the fields, which may be specified for the particular problem of
interest. We note two characteristic features of Eq. ( C ): The factor
@xmath measures the deviation from the normal state Green’s function
@xmath , which produces no screening current. The propagator @xmath
shows up in six summands which represent all the ballistic paths from
@xmath to @xmath , accounting for multiple reflection at the walls at
@xmath and @xmath . Thus the first two summands connecting @xmath and
@xmath directly constitute the bulk contribution, while the additional
four summands are specific to a finite system (assuming specular
reflection at the boundary). We note that a form similar to ( C ) may be
derived for non-ideal interfaces between the normal and superconducting
layers, if the appropriate boundary conditions following [ Zaitsev 1984
] are taken into account.

For the NS system considered in Chapter 3 , the linear response kernel (
C ) may be simplified using @xmath and @xmath as @xmath ( @xmath ),
obtaining

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --
