##### Contents

-    1 The problem of irreversibility
    -    1.1 The phenomenon of the macroscopic irreversibility
    -    1.2 Phase volume and dynamics of ensembles
    -    1.3 Macroscopically definable ensembles and quasiequilibria
    -    1.4 Irreversibility and initial conditions
    -    1.5 Weak and strong tendency to equilibrium, shaking and short
        memory
    -    1.6 The essence of irreversibility in two words
    -    1.7 Equivalence between trajectories and ensembles in the
        thermodynamic limit
    -    1.8 Subjective time and irreversibility
-    2 Geometrization of irreversibility
    -    2.1 Quasiequilibrium manifold
    -    2.2 Thermodynamic projector
    -    2.3 Quasiequilibrium approximation
-    3 Natural projector and models of nonequilibrium dynamics
    -    3.1 Natural projector
    -    3.2 One-dimensional model of nonequilibrium states
    -    3.3 Stability of quasiequilibrium manifolds
    -    3.4 Curvature and entropy production: Entropic circle and first
        kinetic equations
-    4 The film of non-equilibrium states
    -    4.1 Equations for the film
    -    4.2 Thermodynamic projector on the film
    -    4.3 Fixed points and “right asymptotics” for the film equation
    -    4.4 Coarse-graining projector
    -    4.5 Choice of the coarse-graining projector, and layer-by-layer
        linearization
    -    4.6 The failure of the simplest Galerkin approximations for
        conservative systems
    -    4.7 Possible ways beyond the simplest Galerkin approximations
    -    4.8 The film: Second order Kepler models
    -    4.9 Minimal second order models: entropic parable, and entropic
        circle
    -    4.10 The finite models: termination at the horizon points
    -    4.11 The transversal restart lemma
    -    4.12 The time replacement, and the invariance of the
        thermodynamic projector
    -    4.13 Correction to the infinite models
    -    4.14 The film, and the macroscopic equations
    -    4.15 New in the separation of the relaxation times
-    5 Conclusion
-    6 Appendix
    -    6.1 The method of invariant manifolds
    -    6.2 Construction of the invariant sections
    -    6.3 The entropic thermodynamic projectors
    -    6.4 Method of invariant manifold for the positively invariant
        manifolds with fixed edge

## Introduction

The goal of this paper is to discuss the nonlinear problems of
irreversibility, and to revise the previous attempts to solve them. The
interest to the problem of irreversibility persists during decades. It
has been intensively discussed in the past, and nice accounts of these
discussions can be found in the literature (see, for example, [ 1 , 2 ,
4 , 3 ] ). Here, we intend to develop a more geometrical viewpoint on
the subject. The paper consists of two parts. First, in section 1 , we
discuss in an informal way the origin of the problem, and demonstrate
how the basic constructions arise. Second, in section 2 , we give a
consistent geometric formalization of these constructions. Our
presentation is based on the notion of the natural projection introduced
in section 3 . We discuss in detail the method of natural projector as
the consistent formalization of Ehrenfest’s ideas of coarse-graining.

In section 3.2 we introduce a one-dimensional model of nonequilibrium
states. In the background of many derivations of nonequilibrium kinetic
equations there is present the following picture: Above each point of
the quasiequilibrium manifold there is located a huge subspace of
nonequilibrium distributions with the same values of the macroscopic
variables, as in the quasiequilibrium point. It is as if the motion
decomposes into two projections, above the point on the quasiequilibrium
manifold, and in the projection on this manifold. The motion in each
layer above the points is highly complicated, but fast, and everything
quickly settles in this fast motion.

However, upon a more careful looking into the motions which start from
the quasiequilibrium points, we will observe that, above each point of
the quasiequilibrium manifold it is located just a single curve, and all
the nonequilibrium (not-quasiequilibrium) states which come into the
game form just a one-dimensional manifold.

The novel approach developed in section 3 allows to go beyond
limitations of the short memory approximations through a study of
stability of the quasiequilibrium manifold.

The one-dimensional models of nonequilibrium states form a film of
nonequilibrium states over the quasiequilibrium manifold. In section 4
we present a collection of methods for the film construction. One of the
benefits from this new technic is the possibility to solve the problem
of macro-kinetic in cases when there are no autonomous equations of
macro-kinetic for moment variables. The notion of the invariant film of
non-equilibrium states, and the method of its approximate construction
transform the the problem of nonequilibrium kinetics into a series of
problems of equilibrium statistical physics. To describe a dynamics of
nonequilibrium ensemble one should find series of deformed equilibrium
ensembles.

In Appendix a short presentation of the method of invariant manifold for
kinetic problems is given.

The most important results of the paper are:

1.  The notion of macroscopically definable ensembles is developed.

2.  The primitive macroscopically definable ensembles are described.

3.  The method for computing trajectories of primitive macroscopically
    definable nonequilibrium ensembles is elaborated. These trajectories
    are represented as series of deformed equilibrium ensembles and
    simple quadratic models between them.

Let us give here an introductory description of these results.

The notion of macroscopically definable ensembles consists of three
ingredients:

1.  Macroscopic variables, the variables which values can be controlled
    by us ;

2.  Quasiequilibrium state, the conditional equilibrium state for fixed
    values of the macroscopic variables;

3.  Natural dynamics of the system.

We use the simplest representation of the control: For some moments of
time we fix some values of the macroscopic variables (of all these
variables, or of part of them; for the whole system, or for
macroscopically defined part of it; the current “natural”, or some
arbitrary value of these variables), and the system obtains
corresponding conditional equilibrium state. We can also keep fixed
values of some macroscopic variables during a time interval.

These control operations are discrete in time. The continuous control
can be created by the closure: the limit of a sequence of
macroscopically definable ensembles is macroscopically definable too.

The role of the macroscopic variables for the irreversibility problem
became clear to M. Leontovich and J. Lebowitz several decades ago [ 5 ,
6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] . But this was the first step. Now we do need the
elaborate notion of ensembles which can be obtained by macroscopic
tools. The Maxwell Demon gives the first clear picture of a difference
between macroscopic and microscopic tools for ensembles control (there
are books devoted to analysis of this Demon [ 10 , 11 ] ). Nevertheless,
the further step to the analysis of the notion of macroscopic
definability in context of constructive transition from microdynamics to
macrokinetics equations had not done before the paper [ 12 ] . Our
analysis pretends to be an analogue of the Church-Turing thesis [ 13 ,
14 ] . This thesis concerns the notion of an effective (or mechanical)
method in mathematics. As a “working hypothesis”, Church proposed: A
function of positive integers is effectively calculable only if
recursive.

We introduce a class of “macroscopically definable ensembles” and
formulate the thesis: An ensemble can be macroscopically obtained only
if macroscopically definable in according to the introduced notion. This
is a thesis about success of the formalization, as the Church-Turing
thesis, and nobody can prove or disprove it in rigorous sense, as well,
as this famous thesis.

Another important new notion is the “macroscopically definable
transformation” of the ensemble: If one get an ensemble, how can he
transform it? First, it is possible just let them evolve, second, it can
be controlled by the macroscopic tools on the defined way (it is
necessary just to keep values of some macroscopic variables during some
time).

The primitive macroscopically definable ensembles are ensembles with
quasiequilibrium initial states and without further macroscopic control.
These ensembles are prepared macroscopically, and evolve due to natural
dynamics. The significance of this class of ensembles is determined by
the hypothesis about the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles :
Any macroscopically definable ensemble can be approximated by primitive
macroscopically definable ensembles with appropriate accuracy. Now we
have no other effective way to decribe the nonequilibrium state.

The primitive macroscopically definable ensembles form the manifold in
the space of ensembles. We call this manifold the “film of
nonequilibrium states”. The equation for the film and the equation for
the ensemble motion on the film are written down.

The film of nonequilibrium states is the trajectory of the manifold of
initial quasiequilibrium states due to the natural (microscopic)
dynamics. For every value of macroscopic variables this film gives us a
curve. The curvature of this curve defines kinetic coefficients and
entropy production.

The main technical problem is the computation of this curve for
arbitrary value of the macroscopic variables. We represent it as a
sequence of special points and second-order polynomial (Kepler) models
for trajectory between these points. The method elaborated for the
computation is the further development of the method for initial layer
problem in the Boltzmann kinetics [ 15 , 16 ] . For dissipative
Boltzmann microkinetics it was sufficient to use the first-order models
(with or without smoothing). For conservative microkinetics it is
necessary to use the highest-order models. Application of this method to
the lattice kinetic equations gave the following possibilities:

-   To create the Lattice-Boltzmann kinetics with @xmath -theorem [ 17 ]
    ;

-   To transform the Lattice-Boltzmann method into the numerically
    stable computational tool for fluid flows and other dissipative
    systems out of equilibrium [ 18 ] ;

-   To develop the Entropic Lattice Boltzmann method as a starting basis
    for the formulation of a new class of turbulence models based on
    genuinely kinetic principles [ 19 ] .

Now we extend the method elaborated for dissipative systems [ 15 , 16 ]
to the higher-order models for conservative systems. The iteration
method for improvement of obtained approximations is proposed too. It is
a version of the Method of invariant manifold for kinetic problems,
developed in the series of papers [ 20 , 21 ] (the almost exhaustive
review of these works can be find in the paper [ 22 ] ) . The summary of
this method is given in Appendix.

The constructing of the method of physically consistent computation is
the central part of our paper. It is neither a philosophical opus, nor
only discussion of foundations of science.

The main results of this paper were presented in the talk given on the
First Mexican Meeting on Mathematical and Experimental Physics, Mexico
City, September 10-14, 2001, and in the lectures given on the V Russian
National Seminar “Modeling of Nonequilibrium systems”, Krasnoyarsk,
October 18-20, 2002 [ 48 ] .

## 1 The problem of irreversibility

### 1.1 The phenomenon of the macroscopic irreversibility

The “stairs of reduction” (Fig. 1 ) lead from the reversible
microdynamics to irreversible macrokinetics. The most mysterious is the
first step: the appearance of irreversibility.

The best way to demonstrate the problem of irreversibility is the
following Gedankenexperiment : Let us watch the movie: It’s raining,
people are running, cars rolling. Let us now wind this movie in the
opposite direction, and we will see a strange and funny picture: Drops
of the rain are raising up to the clouds, which next condensate into the
vapor on the pools, on the surfaces of rivers, people run with their
backs forward, cars behave also quite strange, and so forth. This cannot
be, and we “know” this for sure, we have never seen anything like this
in our life. Let us now imagine that we watch the same movie with a
magnitude of @xmath so that we can resolve individual particles. And all
of the sudden we discover that we cannot see any substantial difference
between the direct and the reverse demonstration: Everywhere the
particles are moving, colliding, reacting according to the laws of
physics, and nowhere there is a violation of anything. We cannot tell
the direct progressing of the time from the reversed. So, we have the
irreversibility of the macroscopic picture under the reversibility of
the microscopic one.

Rain, people, cars - this all is too complicated. One of the most simple
examples of the irreversible macroscopic picture under the apparent
reversibility of the microscopic picture (the “thermal ratchet”) is
given by R. Feynman in his lectures on the character of physical law [
23 ] . We easily label it as self-evident the fact that particles of
different colors mix together, and we would see it as a wonder the
reverse picture of a spontaneous decomposition of their mixture.
However, itself an appreciation of one picture as usual, and of the
other as unusual and wonderful - this is not yet the physics. It is
desirable to measure somehow this transition from order to disorder.

### 1.2 Phase volume and dynamics of ensembles

Let there be @xmath blue and @xmath white particles in a box, and let
the box is separated in two halves, the left and the right. Location of
all the particles in the box is described by the assembly of @xmath
vectors of locations of individual particles. The set of all the
assemblies is a “box” in the @xmath -dimensional space. A point in this
@xmath -dimensional box describes a configuration. The motion of this
point is defined by equations of mechanics.

“Order” is the configuration in which the blue particles are all in the
right half, and all the white particles are in the left half. The set of
all such configurations has a rather small volume. It makes only @xmath
of the total volume of the @xmath -dimensional box. If @xmath , this is
of the order of one per million of the total volume. It is practically
unthinkable to get into such a configuration by chance. It is also
highly improbable that, by forming more or less voluntary the initial
conditions, we can observe that the system becomes ordered by itself.
From this standpoint, the motion goes from the states of “order” to the
state of “disorder”, just because there are many more states of
“disorder”.

However, we have defined it in this way. The well known question of
where is more order, in a fine castle or in a pile of stones, has a
profound answer: It depends on which pile you mean. If “piles” are
thought as all configurations of stones which are not castles, then
there are many more such piles, and so there is less order in such a
pile. However, if these are specially and uniquely placed stones (for
example, a garden of stones), then there is the same amount of order in
such a pile as in the fine castle. Not a specific configuration is
important but an assembly of configurations embraced by one notion.

This transition from single configurations to their assemblies
(ensembles) play the pivotal role in the understanding of
irreversibility: The irreversible transition from the ordered
configuration (blue particles are on the right, white particles are on
the left) to the disordered one occurs simply because there are many
more of the disordered (in the sense of the volume). Here, strictly
speaking, we have to add also a reference to the Liouville theorem: The
volume in the phase space which is occupied by the ensemble does not
change in time as the mechanical system evolves. Because of this fact,
the volume @xmath is a good measure to compare the assemblies of
configurations. However, more often the quantity @xmath is used, this is
called the entropy.

The point which represents the configuration, very rapidly leaves a
small neighborhood and for a long time (in practice, never) does not
come back into it. In this, seemingly idyllic picture, there are still
two rather dark clouds left. First, the arrow of time has not appeared.
If we move from the ordered initial state (separated particles)
backwards in time, then everything will stay the same as when we move
forward in time, that is, the order will be changing into the disorder.
Second, let us wind the film backwards, let us shoot the movie about
mixing of colored particles, and then let us watch in the reverse order
their demixing. Then the initial configurations for the reverse motion
will only seem to be disordered. Their “order” is in the fact that they
were obtained from the separated mixture by letting the system to evolve
for the time @xmath . There are also very few such configurations, just
the same number as of the ordered (separated particles) states. If we
start with these configurations, then we obtain the ordered system after
the time @xmath . Then why this most obvious consequence of the laws of
mechanics looks so improbable on the screen? Perhaps, it should be
accepted that states which are obtained from the ordered state by a time
shift, and by inversion of particle’s velocities (in order to initialize
the reverse motion in time), cannot be prepared by using macroscopic
means of preparation. In order to prepare such states, one would have to
employ an army of Maxwell’s daemons which would invert individual
velocities with sufficient accuracy (here, it is much more into the
phrase “sufficient accuracy” but this has to be discussed separately and
next time).

For this reason, we lump the distinguished initial conditions, for which
the mixture decomposes spontaneously (“piles” of special form, or
“gardens of stones”) together with other configurations into
macroscopically definable ensembles . And already for those ensembles
the spontaneous demixing becomes improbable. This way we come to a new
viewpoint: (i). We cannot prepare individual systems but only
representatives of ensembles. (ii) We cannot prepare ensembles at our
will but only “macroscopically definable ensembles”. What are these
macroscopically definable ensembles? It seems that one has to give some
constructions, the universality of which can only be proven by the time
and experience.

### 1.3 Macroscopically definable ensembles and quasiequilibria

The main tool in the study of macroscopically definable ensembles is the
notion of the macroscopic variables, and of the quasiequilibria. In the
dynamics of the ensembles, the macroscopic variables are defined as
linear functionals (moments) of the density distribution of the
ensemble. Macroscopic variables @xmath usually include hydrodynamic
fields, density of particles, densities of momentum, and density of the
energy, also the list may include stress tensor, reaction rates and
other quantities. In the present context, it is solely important that
the list the macroscopic variables is identified for the system under
consideration.

A single system is characterized by a single point @xmath in the phase
space. The ensemble of the systems is defined by the probability density
@xmath on the phase space. Density @xmath must satisfy a set of
restrictions, the most important of which are: Nonnegativity, @xmath ,
normalization,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

and that the entropy is defined, that is, there exists the integral,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

(Function @xmath is continuously extended to zero values of @xmath :
@xmath ). Here @xmath is the invariant measure (phase volume).

The quasiequilibrium ensemble describes the “equilibrium under
restrictions”. It is assumed that some external forcing keeps the given
values of the macroscopic variables @xmath , with this, “all the rest”
comes the corresponding (generalized) canonic ensemble @xmath which is
the solution to the problem:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the entropy, @xmath is the set of macroscopic variables.

The thesis about the macroscopically definable ensembles .
Macroscopically definable ensembles are obtained as the result of two
operations:

(i). Bringing the system into the quasiequilibrium state corresponding
to either the whole set of the macroscopic variables @xmath , or to its
subset.

(ii). Changing the ensemble according to the microscopic dynamics (due
to the Liouville equation) during some time @xmath .

These operations can be applied in the interchanging order any number of
times, and for arbitrary time segments @xmath . The limit of
macroscopically definable ensembles will also be termed the
macroscopically definable. One always starts with the operation (i).

In order to work out the notion of macroscopic definability, one has to
pay more attention to partitioning the system into subsystems. This
involves a partition of the phase space @xmath with the measure @xmath
on it into a direct product of spaces, @xmath with the measure @xmath .
To each admissible (“macroscopic”) partition into sub-systems, it
corresponds the operation of taking a “partial quasiequilibrium”,
applied to some density @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is some subset of macroscopic variables (not necessarily
the whole list of the macroscopic variables). In Eq. ( 4 ), the state of
the first subsystem is not changing, whereas the second subsystem is
brought into the quasiequilibrium. In fact, the problem ( 4 ) is a
version of the problem ( 3 ) with additional “macroscopic variables”,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

The extended thesis about macroscopically definable ensembles allows to
use also operations ( 4 ) with only one restriction: The initial state
should be the “true quasiequilibrium” that is, macroscopic variables
related to all possible partitions into subsystems should appear only
after the sequence of operations has started with the solution to the
problem ( 3 ) for some initial @xmath . This does not exclude a
possibility of including operators ( 5 ) into the list of the basic
macroscopic variables @xmath . The standard example of such an inclusion
are few-body distribution functions treated as macroscopic variables in
derivations of kinetic equations from the Liouville equation.

Irreversibility is related to the choice of the initial conditions. The
extended set of macroscopically definable ensembles is thus given by
three objects:

(i). The set of macroscopic variables @xmath which are linear (and, in
an appropriate topology, continuous) mappings of the space of
distributions onto the space of values of the macroscopic variables;

(ii). Macroscopically admissible partitions of the system into
sub-systems;

(iii). Equations of microscopic dynamics (the Liouville equation, for
example).

The choice of the macroscopic variables and of the macroscopically
admissible partitions is a distinguished topic. The main question is:
what variables are under the macroscopic control? Here the macroscopic
variables are represented as formal elements of the construction, and
the arbitrariness is removed only at solving specific problems. Usual we
can postulate some properties of macroscopic variables, for example,
symmetry with respect to any permutation of equal micro-particles.

We have discussed the prepared ensembles. But there is another statement
of problem too: Let us get an ensemble. The way how we get it may be
different and unknown, for example, some demon or oracle ¹ ¹ 1 In the
theory of computation, if there is a device which could answer questions
beyond those that a Turing machine can answer, then it would be called
oracle. can give it to us. How can we transform this ensemble by
macroscopic tools? First, it is possible just let them evolve, second,
it can be controlled by the macroscopic tools on the defined way (it is
necessary just to keep values of some macroscopic variables during some
time).

The thesis about the macroscopically definable transformation of
ensembles . Macroscopically definable transformation of ensembles are
obtained as the result of two operations:

(i). Bringing the system into the quasiequilibrium state corresponding
to either the whole set of the macroscopic variables @xmath , or to its
subset.

(ii). Changing the ensemble according to the microscopic dynamics (due
to the Liouville equation, for example) during some time @xmath .

These operations can be applied in the interchanging order any number of
times, and for arbitrary time segments @xmath . The limit of
macroscopically definable transformations will also be termed the
macroscopically definable. The main difference of this definition
(macroscopically definable transformation) from the definition of the
macroscopically definable ensembles is the absence of restriction on the
initial state, one can start from arbitrary ensemble.

The class of macroscopically definable ensembles includes the more
simple, but important class. Let us reduce the macroscopic control to
preparation of quasiequilibrium ensemble: we just prepare the ensemble
by macroscopic tools and then let them evolve due to natural dynamics
(Liouville equation, for example). Let us call this class the primitive
macroscopically definable ensembles . These ensembles appear as results
(for @xmath ) of motions which start from the quasiequilibrium state (at
@xmath ). The main technical results of our work concern the computation
of the manifold of primitive macroscopically definable ensembles for a
given system.

The importance of this class of ensembles is determined by the following
hypothesis: The hypothesis about the primitive macroscopically definable
ensembles . Any macroscopically definable ensemble can be approximated
by primitive macroscopically definable ensembles with appropriate
accuracy. In some limits we can attempt to say: “with any accuracy”.
Moreover, this hypothesis with “arbitrary small accuracy” can be found
as the basic but implicit foundation of all nonequilibrium kinetics
theories which pretend to demonstrate a way from microdymamics to
macrokinetics, for example in Zubarev nonequilibrium statistical
operator theory [ 3 ] , etc. This hypothesis allow to describe
nonequilibrium state as a result of evolution of quasiequilibrium state
in time. Now we have no other way to decribe the nonequilibrium state ²
² 2 There exists a series of papers with discussion of Hamiltonian
systems in so-called force thermostat, or, in particular, isokinetic
thermostat (see, for example, the review of D. Ruelle [ 24 ] ). These
thermostats were invented in computational molecular dynamics for
acceleration of computations, as a technical trick. From physical point
of view this is a theory about a friction of particles on the space, the
“ether friction” (the “ether” is a theoretical substrate in the ancient
physics). Of course, this theory is mathematically consistent and
perhaps it may be useful as the theory of special computations methods,
but a bridge between this theory and physics is desirable.

The hypothesis about the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles
is real hypothesis, it can hold for different systems with different
accuracy, it can be true or false. In some limits the set of primitive
macroscopically definable ensembles can be dense in the set of all
macroscopically definable ensembles, or can be not dense, etc. There is
the significant difference between this hypothesis and the thesis about
macroscopically definable ensembles. The thesis can be accepted, or not,
the reasons for acceptance can be discussed, but nobody can prove or
disprove the definition, even the definition of the macroscopically
definable ensembles.

### 1.4 Irreversibility and initial conditions

The choice of the initial state of the ensemble plays the crucial role
in the thesis about the macroscopically definable ensembles. The initial
state is always taken as the quasiequilibrium distribution which
realizes the maximum of the entropy for given values of the macroscopic
variables. The choice of the initial state splits the time axis into two
semi-axes: moving forward in time, and moving backward in time, the
observed non-order increases (the simplest example is the mixing of the
particles of different colors).

In some works, in order to achieve the “true nonequilibrium”, that is,
the irreversible motion along the whole time axis, the quasiequilibrium
initial condition is shifted into @xmath in time. This trick, however,
casts some doubts, the major being this: Most of the known equations of
macroscopic dynamics which describe irreversible processes have
solutions which can be extended backwards in time only for finite times
(or cannot be extended at all). Such equations as the Boltzmann kinetic
equation, diffusion equation, equations of chemical kinetics and like do
not allow for almost all their solutions to be extended backward in time
for indefinitely long. All motions have a “beginning” beyond which some
physical properties of a solution will be lost (often, positivity of
distributions), although formally solutions may even exist, as in the
case of chemical kinetics.

### 1.5 Weak and strong tendency to equilibrium, shaking and short
memory

One aspect of irreversibility is the special choice of initial
conditions. Roughly speaking, the arrow of time is defined by the fact
that the quasiequilibrium initial condition was in the past.

This remarkably simple observation does not, however, exhaust the
problem of transition from the reversible equations to irreversible
macroscopic equations. One more aspect deserves a serious consideration.
Indeed, distribution functions tend to the equilibrium state according
to macroscopic equations in a strong sense: deviations from the
equilibrium tends to zero in the sense of most relevant norms (in the
@xmath sense, for example, or even uniformly). On the contrast, for the
Liouville equation, tendency to equilibrium ocures (if at all) only in
the weak sense: mean values of sufficiently “regular” functions on the
phase space do tend to their equilibrium values but the distribution
function itself does not tend to the equilibrium with respect to any
norm, not even point-wise. This is especially easy to appreciate if the
initial state has been taken as the equipartition over some small
bounded subset of the phase space (the “phase drop” with small, but
non-zero volume). This phase drop can mix over the phase space, but for
all the times it will remain “the drop of oil in the water”, the density
will always be taking only two values, @xmath and @xmath , and the
volume of the set where the density is larger than zero will not be
changing in time, of course. So, how to arrive from the weak convergence
(in the sense of the convergence of the mean values), to the strong
convergence (to the @xmath or to the uniform convergence, for example)?
In order to do this, there are two basic constructions: The
coarse-graining (shaking) in the sense of Ehrenfests’, and the short
memory approximation.

The idea of coarse-graining dates back to P. and T. Ehrenfests, and it
has been most clearly expressed in their famous paper of 1911 [ 25 ] .
Ehrenfests considered a partition of the phase space into small cells,
and they have suggested to alter the motions of the phase space ensemble
due to the Liouville equation with “shaking” - averaging of the density
of the ensemble over the phase cells. In the result of this process, the
convergence to the equilibrium becomes strong out of the weak. It is not
difficult to recognize that ensembles with constant densities over the
phase cells are quasiequilibria; corresponding macroscopic variables are
integrals of the density over the phase cells (“occupation numbers” of
the cells). This generalizes to the following: alternations of the
motion of the phase ensemble due to microscopic equations with returns
to the quasiequilibrium manifold, preserving the values of the
macroscopic variables. It is precisely this construction which serves
for the point of departure for many of the constructions below.

Another construction is the short memory approximation. The essence of
it is the following: If one excludes microscopic variables and assumes
quasiequilibrium initial conditions, then it is possible to derive
integro-differential equations with retardation for the macroscopic
variables (the way to do this is not unique). The form of the resulting
equations is approximately this:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an operator (generally speaking, nonlinear) acting on
@xmath . Once this equation is obtained, one assumes that the kernels of
these integro-differential equations decay at a sufficiently high rate
into the past (for example, exponentially, as @xmath ). This can be
interpreted in the spirit of Ehrenfests’: Every motion which has begun
sufficiently recently (the “memory time” @xmath before now) can be
regarded as being started from the quasiequilibrium. Thus, after each
time @xmath has elapsed, the system can be shaken in the sense of
Ehrenfests - the result should not differ much.

### 1.6 The essence of irreversibility in two words

(i) The direction of the arrow of time is defined by the fact that only
“macroscopically definable ensembles” can be taken as initial
conditions, that is, only quasiequilibrium ensembles and what can be
obtained from them when they are exposed to the true microscopic
dynamics, or when partial quasiequilibria are taken in positive time. We
are created in such a way that we prepare and control (in part) the
present, and observe what happens in the future. (In a sense, this is a
definition of the subjective time).

(ii) Microscopic dynamics can give only the weak convergence to the
equilibrium, convergence of mean values. Macroscopic variables tend to
the equilibrium in the strong sense. The passage from micro to macro
occurs here with the help of Ehrenfests’ coarse-graining procedure or
its analogs.

One might feel uneasy about the second of these points because the
procedure of coarse-graining is not the result of the equations of
motion, and therefore it is somehow voluntary. The only hope to lift
this arbitrariness is that it may well happen that, in the limit of a
very large number of particles, the perturbation caused by the
coarse-graining can be made arbitrary small, for example, by increasing
the time interval between coarse-graining.

### 1.7 Equivalence between trajectories and ensembles in the
thermodynamic limit

In the preceding sections we were speaking about the dynamics of
ensembles. This apparently contradicts the fact that the dynamics of a
classical system goes along a single trajectory. Two arguments make it
possible to proceed from the trajectories to ensembles:

(i) High sensitivity of trajectories to external perturbations when the
number of particles is large. Arbitrary weak noise results in the
stochastization of the motion.

(ii) In the thermodynamic limit, it is possible to partition the system
into an arbitrary large number of small but still macroscopic
sub-systems. Initial conditions in the sub-systems are independent from
one sub-system to another, and they cannot be assigned completely
voluntary but are taken from some distribution with a fixed sum of mean
values (an analog of the macroscopic definability of ensembles). For
spatially inhomogeneous systems, such small but still macroscopic
subsystems are defined in small and “almost homogeneous” volumes.

### 1.8 Subjective time and irreversibility

In our discussion, the source of the arrow of time is, after all, the
asymmetry of the subjective time of the experimentalist. We prepare
initial conditions, and after that we watch what will happen in the
future but not what happened in the past. Thus, we obtain kinetic
equations for specifically prepared systems. How is this related to the
dynamics of the real world? These equations are applicable to real
systems to the extent that the reality can be modeled with systems with
specifically prepared quasiequilibrium initial conditions. This is
anyway less demanding than the condition of quasi-staticity of processes
in classical thermodynamics. For this reason, versions of nonequilibrium
thermodynamics and kinetics based on this understanding of
irreversibility allowed to include such a variety of situations, and
besides that, they include all classical equations of nonequilibrium
thermodynamics and kinetics.

## 2 Geometrization of irreversibility

### 2.1 Quasiequilibrium manifold

Let @xmath be a linear space, and @xmath be a convex subset, with a
nonempty interior @xmath . Let a twice differentiable concave functional
@xmath be defined in @xmath , and let @xmath is continuous on @xmath .
According to the familiar interpretation, @xmath is the entropy, @xmath
is an appropriate space of distributions, @xmath is the cone of
nonnegative distributions from @xmath . Space @xmath is chosen in such a
way that the entropy is well defined on @xmath .

Let @xmath be a closed linear subspace of space @xmath , and @xmath be
the natural projection on the factor-space. The factor-space @xmath will
further play the role of the space of macroscopic variables (in
examples, the space of moments of the distribution).

For each @xmath we define the quasiequilibrium, @xmath , as the solution
to the problem,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

We assume that, for each @xmath , there exists the (unique) solution to
the problem ( 6 ). This solution, @xmath , is called the
quasiequilibrium, corresponding to the value @xmath of the macroscopic
variables. The set of quasiequilibria @xmath forms a manifold in @xmath
, parameterized by the values of the macroscopic variables @xmath (Fig.
2 ).

Let us specify some notations: @xmath is the adjoint to the @xmath
space. Adjoint spaces and operators will be indicated by @xmath ,
whereas notation @xmath is earmarked for equilibria and quasiequilibria.

Furthermore, @xmath is the result of application of the functional
@xmath to the vector @xmath . We recall that, for an operator @xmath ,
the adjoint operator, @xmath is defined by the following relation: For
any @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, @xmath is the differential of the functional @xmath , @xmath is
the second differential of the functional @xmath . Corresponding
quadratic functional @xmath on @xmath is defined by the Taylor formula,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

We keep the same notation for the corresponding symmetric bilinear form,
@xmath , and also for the linear operator, @xmath , defined by the
formula,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, on the left hand side there is the operator, on the right hand
side there is the bilinear form. Operator @xmath is symmetric on @xmath
, @xmath .

Concavity of @xmath means that for any @xmath the inequality holds,
@xmath ; in the restriction onto the affine subspace parallel to @xmath
we assume the strict concavity, @xmath if @xmath , and @xmath .

A comment on the degree of rigor is in order: the statements which will
be made below become theorems or plausible hypotheses in specific
situations. Moreover, specialization is always done with an account for
these statements in such a way as to simplify the proofs.

Let us compute the derivative @xmath . For this purpose, let us apply
the method of Lagrange multipliers: There exists such a linear
functional @xmath , that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

or

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

From equation ( 9 ) we get,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have indicated the space in which the unit operator is acting.
Next, using the latter expression, we transform the differential of the
equation ( 8 ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

and, consequently,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

Notice that, elsewhere in equation ( 12 ), operator @xmath acts on the
linear functionals from @xmath . These functionals are precisely those
which become zero on @xmath (that is, on @xmath ), or, which is the
same, those which can be represented as functionals of macroscopic
variables.

The tangent space to the quasiequilibrium manifold in the point @xmath
is the image of the operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath (the annulator of @xmath ) is the set of linear functionals
which become zero on @xmath . Another way to write equation ( 13 ) is
the following:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

This means that @xmath is the orthogonal completement of @xmath in
@xmath with respect to the scalar product,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

The entropic scalar product ( 15 ) appears often in the constructions
below. (Usually, this becomes the scalar product indeed after the
conservation laws are excluded). Let us denote as @xmath the tangent
space to the quasiequilibrium manifold in the point @xmath . An
important role in the construction of quasiequilibrium dynamics and its
generalizations is played by the quasiequilibrium projector, an operator
which projects @xmath on @xmath parallel to @xmath . This is the
orthogonal projector with respect to the entropic scalar product, @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is straightforward to check the equality @xmath , and the
self-adjointness of @xmath with respect to entropic scalar product ( 15
). Thus, we have introduced the basic constructions: quasiequilibrium
manifold, entropic scalar product, and quasiequilibrium projector (Fig.
3 .

### 2.2 Thermodynamic projector

The construction of the quasiequilibrium allows for the following
generalization: Almost every manifold can be represented as a set of
minimizers of the entropy under linear constraints. However, in general,
these linear constraints will depend on the point on the manifold.

So, let the manifold @xmath be given. This is a parametric set of
distribution function, however, now macroscopic variables @xmath are not
functionals on @xmath or @xmath but just parameters defining the point
on the manifold. The problem is how to extend definitions of @xmath onto
a neighborhood of @xmath in such a way that @xmath will appear as the
solution to the variational problem:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

For each point @xmath , we identify @xmath , the tangent space to the
manifold @xmath in @xmath , and subspace @xmath , which depends smoothly
on @xmath , and which has the property, @xmath . Let us define @xmath in
the neighborhood of @xmath in such a way, that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

The point @xmath will be the solution of the quasiequilibrium problem (
17 ) if and only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

That is, if and only if @xmath . It is always possible to construct
subspaces @xmath with the properties just specified, at least locally,
if the functional @xmath is not identically equal to zero on @xmath .

The construction just described allows to consider practically any
manifold as a quasiequilibrium. This construction is required when one
seeks the induced dynamics on a given manifold. Then the vector fields
are projected on @xmath parallel to @xmath , and this preserves intact
the basic properties of the quasiequilibrium approximations.

It was proven [ 26 , 22 ] the theorem of uniqueness of the the
thermodynamic projector : There exists the unique operator which
transforms the arbitrary vector field equipped with the given Lyapunov
function into a vector field with the same Lyapunov function (and also
this happens on any manifold which is not tangent to the level of the
Lyapunov function).

Thermodynamic projector is constructed in the following way: Assume that
the manifold @xmath is given, @xmath and @xmath is the tangent space to
the manifold @xmath in the point @xmath . Let us describe the
construction of the thermodynamic projector onto tangent space @xmath in
the point @xmath .

Let us consider @xmath that is a subspace of @xmath and which is
annulled by the differential @xmath in the point @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath , then the thermodynamic projector is the orthogonal projector
on @xmath with respect to the entropic scalar product @xmath ( 15 ).
Suppose that @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath with respect to the entropic
scalar product @xmath , and @xmath . These conditions define vector
@xmath uniquely.

The projector onto @xmath is defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the orthogonal projector with respect to the entropic
scalar product @xmath . For example, if @xmath a finite-dimensional
space, then the projector ( 21 ) is constructed in the following way.
Let @xmath be a basis in @xmath , and for definiteness, @xmath .

1) Let us construct a system of vectors

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , and hence @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a basis in @xmath .

2) Let us orthogonalize @xmath with respect to the entropic scalar
product @xmath ( 15 ). We have got an orthonormal with respect to @xmath
basis @xmath in @xmath .

3) We find @xmath from the conditions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

and, finally we get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath , then the projector P is simply the orthogonal projector with
respect to the entropic scalar product. This is possible, for example,
if @xmath is the global maximum of entropy point (equilibrium). Then

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath and @xmath is not equilibrium ( @xmath is tangent to the to
the level of the entropy), then the dynamic @xmath can be projected on
@xmath with preservation of dissipation only if @xmath in this point.

### 2.3 Quasiequilibrium approximation

Let a kinetic equation be defined in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

(This can be the Liouville equation, the Boltzmann equation, and so on,
dependent on which level of precision is taken for the microscopic
description.) One seeks the dynamics of the macroscopic variables @xmath
. If we adopt the thesis that the solutions of the equation ( 26 ) of
interest for us begin on the quasiequilibrium manifold, and stay close
to it for all the later times, then, as the first approximation, we can
take the quasiequilibrium approximation. It is constructed this way: We
regard @xmath as the quasiequilibrium, and write,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this, the corresponding to @xmath point on the quasiequilibrium
manifold moves according to the following equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the quasiequilibrium projector ( 16 ). It is instructive
to represent solutions to equations of the quasiequilibrium
approximation ( 28 ) in the following way: Let @xmath be the shift
operator along the phase flow of equation ( 26 ) (that is, @xmath is
solution to equation ( 26 ) at the time @xmath with the initial
condition @xmath at @xmath ). Let us take the initial point @xmath , and
set, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The
sequence @xmath will be termed the Ehrenfest’s chain . We set, @xmath .
Then, @xmath , where @xmath is the solution to the quasiequilibrium
approximation ( 28 ), as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Let us notice that the way the entropy evolves in time according to the
Ehrenfests’ chain is defined in the limit @xmath solely by the way it
evolves along trajectories of the kinetic equation ( 26 ). Indeed,
@xmath is the point of maximum of the entropy on the subspace defined by
equation, @xmath . Therefore, for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . This simple observation has a rather
important implication: Let us denote as @xmath the entropy production
due to the original kinetic equation ( 26 ), and as @xmath its
derivative due to the quasiequilibrium system ( 28 ). Then,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

Let us give a different formulation of the latter identity. Let us term
function @xmath the quasiequilibrium entropy . Let us denote as @xmath
the derivative of the quasiequilibrium entropy due to the
quasiequilibrium approximation ( 27 ). Then,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

From the identity ( 29 ), it follows the theorem about preservation of
the type of dynamics:

(i) If, for the original kinetic equation ( 26 ), @xmath at @xmath ,
then the entropy is conserved due to the quasiequilibrium system ( 28 ).

(ii) If, for the original kinetic equation ( 26 ), @xmath at @xmath ,
then, at the same points, @xmath , @xmath due to the quasiequilibrium
system ( 27 ).

The theorem about the preservation of the type of dynamics ³ ³ 3 This is
a rather old theorem, one of us had published this theorem in 1984
already as textbook material ( [ 27 ] , chapter 3 “Quasiequilibrium and
entropy maximum”, p. 37, see also the paper [ 28 ] ), but from time to
time different particular cases of this theorem are continued to be
published as new results. demonstrates that, if there was no dissipation
in the original system ( 26 ) (if the entropy was conserved) then there
is also no dissipation in the quasiequilibrium approximation. The
passage to the quasiequilibrium does not introduce irreversibility (the
reverse may happen, for example, there is no dissipation in the
quasiequilibrium approximation for hydrodynamic variables as obtained
from the Boltzmann kinetic equation; though dissipation is present in
the Boltzmann equation, it occurs in different points but on the
quasiequilibrium manifold of local Maxwellians the entropy production is
equal to zero). The same statement also hold for the thermodynamic
projectors described in Section 2.2 . On the other hand, the entropy
production in the quasiequilibrium state is the same, as for the
quasiequilibrium system in the corresponding point, hence, if the
initial system is dissipative, then quasiequilibrium entropy production
is nonnegative.

Usually, the original dynamics ( 26 ) does not leave the
quasiequilibrium manifold invariant, that is, vector field @xmath is not
tangent to the quasiequilibrium manifold in all its points @xmath . In
other words, the condition of invariance ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

is not satisfied. The left hand side of the invariance condition ( 31 )
is of such an outstanding importance that it deserves a separate name.
We call it the defect of invariance , and denote it as @xmath . It is
possible to consider the invariance condition as an equation, and to
compute corrections to the quasiequilibrium approximation @xmath in such
a way as to make it “more invariant”. In those cases where the original
equation ( 26 ) is already dissipative, this route of corrections,
supplemented by the construction of the thermodynamic projector as in
Section 2.2 , leads to an appropriate macroscopic kinetics [ 21 ] .

However, here, we are mainly interested in the route “from the very
beginning”, from conservative systems to dissipative. And here solving
of the invariance equation does not help since it will lead us to, while
“more invariant”, but still conservative dynamics. In all the approaches
to this problem (passage from the conservative to the dissipative
systems), dissipation is introduced in a more or less explicit fashion
by various assumptions about the “short memory”. The originating point
of our constructions will be the absolutely transparent and explicit
approach of Ehrenfests.

## 3 Natural projector and models of nonequilibrium dynamics

### 3.1 Natural projector

So, let the original system ( 26 ) be conservative, and thus, @xmath .
The idea of Ehrenfests is to supplement the dynamics ( 26 ) by
“shakings”. Shakings are external perturbations which are applied
periodically with a fixed time interval @xmath , and which lead to a
“forgetting” of the small scale (nonequilibrium) details of the
dynamics. For us here the shaking is the replacement of @xmath with the
quasiequilibrium distribution @xmath . In the particular case which was
originally considered in by Ehrenfests, the macroscopic variables @xmath
were the averages of @xmath over cells in the phase space, while @xmath
was the cell-homogeneous distribution with with the constant density
within each cell equal to the corresponding cell-average of @xmath . As
we have already mentioned it, in the limit @xmath , one gets back the
quasiequilibrium approximation - and the type of the dynamics is
preserved. In this limit we obtain just the usual projection of the
vector field @xmath ( 26 ) on the tangent bundle to the quasiequilibrium
manifold. So, the natural question appears: What will happen, if we will
not just send @xmath to zero but will consider finite, and even large,
@xmath ? In such an approach, not just the vector fields are projected
but segments of trajectories. We shall term this way of projecting the
natural . Let us now pose the problem of the natural projector formally.
Let @xmath be the phase flow of the system ( 26 ). We must derive a
phase flow of the macroscopic system, @xmath (that is, the phase flow of
the macroscopic system, @xmath , which we are looking for), such that,
for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

That is, when moving along the macroscopic trajectory, after the time
@xmath we must obtain the same values of the macroscopic variables as if
we were moving along the true microscopic trajectory for the same time
@xmath , starting with the quasiequilibrium initial condition (Fig. 5 ).

It is instructive to remark that, at finite @xmath , the entropy growth
follows immediately from equation ( 32 ) because @xmath . The difference
of the values of the entropy is of the order @xmath , for the time
@xmath , thus, the first non-vanishing order in the entropy production
will be of the order of @xmath . Let us find it.

We shall seek @xmath in terms of a series in @xmath . Let us expand
@xmath and both the sides of the equation ( 32 ) in powers of @xmath to
second order, and find the expansion coefficients of @xmath [ 30 ] ⁴ ⁴ 4
In this well known work [ 30 ] Lewis expanded only the right hand side
of equation ( 32 ), and did not do the same also with the left hand
side. There were some hidden reason for this “inconsistency”: it was
impossible to obtain the Boltzmann equation without such a deformation
of expansion. We stress that our approach of matched expansion for
exploring the coarse-graining condition is, in fact, the exact (formal)
statement that the unknown macroscopic dynamics which causes the shift
of @xmath on the left hand side of equation ( 32 ) can be reconstructed
order-by-order to any degree of accuracy, whereas the low-order
truncations may be useful for certain physical situations. A thorough
study of the cases beyond the lower-order truncations is of great
importance which is left for future work. :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using these expansions in the condition for natural projector ( 32 ), we
get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereupon,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the approximation @xmath is the quasiequilibrium, and using this
fact in the expression for @xmath , after some transformation, we
derive,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, the final form of the equation for the macroscopic variables
@xmath may be written:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is remarkable the appearance of the defect of invariance in the
second term (proportional to @xmath ): If the quasiequilibrium manifold
is invariant with respect to the microscopic dynamics, then @xmath is
quasiequilibrium.

Let us compute the production of the quasiequilibrium entropy @xmath due
to macroscopic equations ( 33 ), neglecting the higher-order term @xmath
.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We notice that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath is a projector, and also because the thermodynamic
condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which follows from the definition of quasiequilibrium ( 6 ). Next, by
our assumption, the system ( 26 ) conserves the entropy,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us differentiate the latter identity:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, due to the right hand side of equation ( 33 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used notation for entropic scalar product ( 15 ). Finally,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereas projector @xmath is self-adjoint in the entropic scalar product
( 15 ). Thus, @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, the quasiequilibrium entropy increases due to equation of
macroscopic dynamics ( 33 ) in those points of the quasiequilibrium
manifold where the defect of invariance is not equal to zero. This way
we see how the problem of the natural projector (projected are not
vector fields but segments of trajectories) results in the dissipative
equations. For specific examples see [ 29 ] where the second term in
equation ( 33 ) results in viscous terms in the Navier-Stokes equations,
diffusion and other dissipative contributions. However, it remains the
undetermined coefficient @xmath . Formula ( 35 ) gives the entropy
production just proportional to the time interval between subsequent
coarse-graining. Of course, this could be true only for small enough
@xmath , whereas we are mostly interested in the limit @xmath . It is
only in this limit where one can get rid of the arbitrariness in the
choice of @xmath present in equations ( 33 ) and ( 35 ). In order to do
this, we need to study more carefully the structure of the trajectories
which begin on the quasiequilibrium manifold.

### 3.2 One-dimensional model of nonequilibrium states

In the background of many derivations of nonequilibrium kinetic
equations there is present the following picture: Above each point of
the quasiequilibrium manifold there is located a huge subspace of
nonequilibrium distributions with the same values of the macroscopic
variables, as in the quasiequilibrium point. It is as if the motion
decomposes into two projections, above the point on the quasiequilibrium
manifold, and in the projection on this manifold. The motion in each
layer above the quasiequilibrium points is extremely complicated, but
fast, and everything quickly settles in this fast motion.

However, upon a more careful looking into the motions which begin in the
quasiequilibrium points, we will observe that, above each point of the
quasiequilibrium manifold it is located just a single curve, and all the
nonequilibrium (not-quasiequilibrium) states which come into the game
form just a one-dimensional manifold. It is namely this curve the
construction of which we shall be dealing with in this section.

This is the curve of the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles .
These ensembles appear as the result (for @xmath ) of motions which
start from the quasiequilibrium state (at @xmath ).

For each value of the macroscopic variables @xmath , and for each time
@xmath , we define @xmath by the following equality:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

In other words, @xmath are those values of macroscopic variables which
satisfy @xmath for the natural projector ( 32 ). Of course, it may well
happen that such @xmath exists not for every pair @xmath but we shall
assume here that for every @xmath there exists such @xmath that there
exists @xmath for @xmath .

A set of distributions, @xmath , forms precisely the desired curve of
nonequilibrium states with given values of @xmath . Notice that, for
each @xmath , it holds, @xmath . The set @xmath for all possible @xmath
and @xmath is positive invariant: If the motion of the system starts on
it at some time @xmath , it stays on it also at @xmath . If the
dependence @xmath is known, equations of motion in the coordinate system
@xmath have a simple form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The simplest way to study @xmath is through a consideration of a
sequence of its derivatives with respect to @xmath at fixed @xmath . The
first derivative is readily written as,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

By the construction of the quasiequilibrium manifold (we remind that
@xmath ), for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, to first order in @xmath , we have, as expected.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us find @xmath to the accuracy of the order @xmath . To this end, we
expand all the functions in equation ( 36 ) to the order of @xmath .
With

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where function @xmath is yet unknown, we write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The latter somewhat lengthy expression simplifies significantly under
the action of @xmath . Indeed,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Accordingly, to second order in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that, besides the dynamic contribution of the order of @xmath
(the last term), there appears also the term @xmath ( 39 ) which is
related to the curvature of the quasiequilibrium manifold along the
quasiequilibrium trajectory.

Let us address the behavior of the entropy production in the
neighborhood of @xmath . Let @xmath (that is, @xmath ). The production
of the quasiequilibrium entropy, @xmath , equals, by definition,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

Equation ( 41 ) gives the rate of entropy change under the motion of the
projection of the state onto the quasiequilibrium manifold if the true
trajectory goes through the point @xmath . In order to compute the right
hand side of equation ( 41 ), we use essentially the same argument, as
in the proof of the entropy production formula ( 35 ). Namely, in the
point @xmath , we have @xmath , and thus @xmath . Using this, and the
fact that entropy production in the quasiequilibrium approximation is
equal to zero, equation ( 41 ) may be written,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

To the linear order in @xmath , the latter expression reads:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the identity ( 34 ), we obtain in equation ( 43 ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

Because @xmath , we have @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, finally, the entropy production in the formalism developed here,
to the linear order reads,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

### 3.3 Stability of quasiequilibrium manifolds

The notion of stability does not cause essential difficulties when it
goes about an invariant manifold, it is stable if, for any @xmath ,
there exist such @xmath that a motion which has started at @xmath at the
distance (in some appropriate sense) less than @xmath from the manifold
will not go away further than @xmath at any @xmath .

However, this is not so for a non-invariant manifold, and, probably, it
is not possible to give a useful for all the cases formalization of the
notion of stability of the quasiequilibrium manifold , in the spirit of
motions going not far away when started sufficiently close to the
manifold (indeed, what is here “sufficiently close” and “not far”?). In
spite of that, expression ( 3.2 ) gives important opportunity to measure
the stability. Indeed, let us consider how the entropy production
depends on @xmath , that is, let us study the function,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is natural to expect that @xmath initially increases, and then it
saturates to some limiting value. The question is, however, how function
@xmath behaves at @xmath , is it concave or is it convex in this point?
If function @xmath is concave, @xmath , then the speed with which it
grows reduces immediately, and one can even estimate the limiting value,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the first Padé approximate:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ------

Concavity of @xmath at @xmath ( @xmath ) is analogous to a soft
instability: The motion does not run too far away, and it is possible to
estimate where it will stop, see equation ( 47 ). However, if @xmath ,
then this is analogous to a hard instability, and none of the estimates
like ( 47 ) work. Thus, everything is defined by the sign of the scalar
product,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

If this expression is negative, then the Padé estimate ( 47 ) gives:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the opposite case, if the sign of the expression ( 48 ) is positive ,
we call the quasiequilibrium manifold unstable .

Equation ( 49 ) allows us to estimate the parameter @xmath in the
equations of the method of natural projector. To this end, we make use
of equation ( 35 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereupon,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

if the denominator assumes negative values. In this case, there are no
free parameters left in equation ( 33 ).

Above, the parameter @xmath , or the time of “leaving the initial
quasiequilibrium condition”, has been appearing explicitly in the
equations. Except for the case of linear quasiequilibrium manifolds
where the formal limit @xmath can be addressed to derive generalized
fluctuation-dissipation relations [ 31 ] , this may be not the best way
to do in the general, nonlinear case.

### 3.4 Curvature and entropy production: Entropic circle and first
kinetic equations

In a consequent geometric approach to the problem of constructing the
one-dimensional model of nonequilibrium states it is sufficient to
consider the entropic parameter, @xmath . Within this parameterization
of the one-dimensional curve of the nonequilibrium states, one has to
address functions @xmath , rather than @xmath ( 46 ), whereas their Padè
approximates can be constructed, in turn, from expansions in @xmath .

In order to give an example here, we notice that the simplest geometric
estimate amounts to approximating the trajectory @xmath with a second
order curve. Given @xmath and @xmath ( 3.2 ), we construct a tangent
circle (in the entropic metrics, @xmath , since the entropy is the
integral of motion of the original equations). For the radius of this
circle we get,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let us represent the microscopic motion as a circular motion along this
entropic circle with constant velocity @xmath . When the microscopic
motion passed the quarter of the circle, the entropy production started
to decrease and it became zero after the halve of the circle. Hence,
after passing the quarter of the circle, this model should be changed.
The time of the motion along the quarter of the model entropic circle
is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

After averaging on the @xmath of this circle circular motion we obtain
the macroscopic equations ⁵ ⁵ 5 This averaging makes sense for
conservative microdynamics, and for dissipative microdynamics the model
of uniform circular motion along the entropic circle should be improved
by taking into account the acceleration along the circle.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath .

Equations ( 53 ) contain no undetermined parameters. This is the
simplest example of the general macroscopic equations obtained by the
natural projector. The coefficients ( @xmath , etc.) can be corrected,
but the form is more universal. The entropy production for equations (
53 ) is proportional both to the defect of invariance and to the radius
of curvature:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

This equation demonstrates the thermodynamical sense of curvature of the
curve of nonequilibrium states. The combination @xmath is the
dissipation. (It should be remained that all the scalar products and
norms are entropic ).

## 4 The film of non-equilibrium states

### 4.1 Equations for the film

The set @xmath in a space @xmath generates a surface parameterized by
“two variables”: A scalar, @xmath and value of macroscopic variables,
@xmath with condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

We call this surface the film of non-equilibrium states or simply the
film. It consists of the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles ,
the results (for @xmath ) of motions which start from the
quasiequilibrium state (at @xmath ).

For each @xmath the section of the film is defined: the set, @xmath for
given @xmath It is parameterized by the value of @xmath For @xmath the
section of the film coincides with the quasiequilibrium manifold. The
film itself can be considered as a trajectory of motion of the section
under variation of @xmath (Fig. 6 ). It is not difficult to write down
equations of this motion using definition of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is shift in time in accordance with the original dynamical
system, @xmath is defined with equation ( 36 ).

For small @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath Hence,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

Initial condition for equation ( 58 ) is the quasiequilibrium

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

Equation ( 58 ) under initial condition ( 59 ) defines the film of
non-equilibrium states in the space @xmath This film is a minimal
positive invariant set (i.e invariant with respect to shift @xmath by
positive times @xmath ), including the quasiequilibrium manifold, @xmath
The kinetics we are interested in occurs only on this film.

Investigation of non-equilibrium kinetics can be separated into two
problems:

i) Construction of the film of non-equilibrium states: solution of
equation ( 58 ) under initial conditions ( 59 ).

ii) Investigation of the motion of the system on the film.

Naturally, it should be assumed that the film will be constructed only
approximately. Therefore, the second problem should be separated in two
again:

ii1) Construction of projection of initial vector field, @xmath on the
approximately found film, and construction of equations for @xmath and
@xmath

ii2) Investigation and solution of equations for @xmath and @xmath

It should be especially emphasized that existence of the film is not
significantly questionable (though, of course, the deriving of the
theorems of existence and uniqueness for ( 58 ), ( 59 ) can turn into a
complicated mathematical problem). In contrast, existence of kinetic
coefficients (viscosity etc.), and generally, the fast convergence of
@xmath to a certain dependence @xmath is essentially a hypothesis which
is not always true.

Below we will be solving, mainly, the problem of construction of
equations: problems ii1) and ii2). And we will begin with the problem
ii2). Thus, let the film be approximately constructed.

### 4.2 Thermodynamic projector on the film

We need the projector in order to project the vector field on the
tangent space. The idea of thermodynamic projector [ 20 ] consists of a
description of every manifold (subject to certain requirements of
transversality) as the quasiequilibrium one. For this, one constructs a
projection of a neighborhood of the manifold on it, and later, the
required projector is obtained by linearization.

The projection of the neighborhood on the manifold should satisfy
essentially only one condition: a point of manifold must be the point of
maximum of the entropy on its preimage. If the preimage of point @xmath
is a domain in the affine subspace, @xmath then required condition is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is already the linear subspace in @xmath .

For such projections, a dissipative vector field is projected into a
dissipative one, and a conservative vector field (with the entropy
conservation) is projected into a conservative one, i.e. the entropy
balance is exact. Thus, let the film, @xmath be defined. Let us
construct for it a thermodynamic projector.

Under small variation of variables @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

After simple transformations we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

From this formulae we obtain thermodynamic projector for @xmath , @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

For conservative systems the second term in ( 63 ) vanishes and we
obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

The equation for @xmath corresponding to ( 64 ) has the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

It should be supplemented with the equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

or for @xmath in accordance with ( 62 ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is defined in accordance with ( 65 ). The numerator in ( 67
) has a simple meaning: it is the rate of the entropy production by
dynamic equations ( 65 ) when @xmath is constant (for frozen @xmath ).
Expression ( 67 ) can be obtained from the condition of the constant
entropy for the motion on the film in accordance with ( 65 , 67 ).
Equations ( 65 , 67 ) describe dynamics on the film (Fig. 7 ).

Let us further assume that condition ( 38 ) is satisfied:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In expressions ( 62 , 65 , 67 ) the denominator, @xmath , is present.
For @xmath this expression vanishes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

@xmath therefore @xmath for @xmath For @xmath indeterminate forms @xmath
appear in expressions ( 62 - 64 , 66 , 67 ). Let us resolve the
indeterminate forms and calculate the corresponding limits.

Two indeterminate forms are present:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

and right hand side of equation ( 67 ). Let us evaluate the
indeterminate form ( 69 ) with the L’Hôpital rule. We obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

using identity ( 34 ), similar to ( 35 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In such a way, for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

Similarly, after simple calculations we obtain that:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

The fact that for @xmath the action of the thermodynamic projector on
@xmath becomes trivial, @xmath can be obtained (without calculations)
from the construction of @xmath in vicinity of zero. We have chosen this
dependence in such a way that @xmath becomes transverse to the film for
@xmath This follows from the condition ( 38 ). Let us emphasise,
however, that derivation of the formulas ( 64 - 67 ) themselves was not
based on ( 38 ), and they are applicable to any ansatz, @xmath not
necessarily with the right behavior near the quasiequilibrium (if one
needs such ansatzes for anything).

### 4.3 Fixed points and “right asymptotics” for the film equation

What is the dynamics of the film in accordance with equation ( 58 )? A
naive expectation that @xmath tends to the stable point of equation ( 58
) leads to strange consequences. Stable point ( 58 ) is the invariant
manifold @xmath . On this manifold

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

i.e. the projection of the vector field, @xmath onto @xmath coincides
with @xmath Were the condition @xmath satisfied for @xmath the dynamics
would become more and more conservative. On the limit manifold @xmath
the entropy should be conserved. This could lead to unusual
consequences. The first of them is limited extendability backwards “in
the entropy”.

Let us consider the set of points @xmath for given @xmath Because of the
existence of the limit, @xmath for @xmath the difference, @xmath is
bounded on the half-axis, @xmath this means that it is impossible to get
into the values of macroscopic variables, @xmath from the
quasiequilibrium initial conditions, @xmath for that @xmath Assuming
additionally a smoothness of @xmath and @xmath we see that it is
impossible to get into @xmath neighborhood of the quasiequilibrium
state, @xmath (over macro-variables) from the outside, from the
quasiequilibrium initial conditions @xmath if @xmath where @xmath is
@xmath dependent threshold of the entropy. Thus, possible stable points
of the equation ( 58 ), regardless of their obvious interest, likely
demonstrate exotic possibilities. The following “right asymptotics”
correspond to our qualitative expectations for large @xmath Namely, it
is expected that for the quite large @xmath @xmath becomes, within a
good precision, a function of @xmath and later does not depend on @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the entropy production:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

and, correspondingly, @xmath

Already simple examples (linear in @xmath ) demonstrate that it is not
so simple to construct such an asymptotic. Moreover, for reasonably
built systems it probably does not exist. Indeed, let @xmath , we search
for “the right asymptotic” in the form @xmath We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Acting with the operator @xmath on the first equation, we obtain @xmath
further, acting with the operator @xmath we obtain @xmath and so on.

Thus,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

Space @xmath is @xmath invariant, therefore, it is possible to pass from
the initial dynamics, @xmath to the dynamics in the factor-space. This
does not change the dynamics of macroscopic variables because of the
definition of @xmath ( 77 ).

In such a way, instead of the right asymptotic equations, ( 76 ) leads
us again to the equation of the invariant manifold ( @xmath @xmath
determines the invariant manifolds.)

### 4.4 Coarse-graining projector

A construction of an exact projection of the microscopic dynamics on the
macroscopic is meaningless, it has meaning only as an intermediate
result. Really, generically, such a projection (finite segment of the
trajectory @xmath ) contains practically all the information about the
Liouville equation. This is a bit too much.

Moreover, there are no invariant manifolds with the dissipative dynamics
for the finite-dimensional conservative systems. The conclusion is:
every time explicitly, or sometimes implicitly, coarse-graining, or
replacing of the system with something different, takes place.

For example, there is no invariant manifold for the Liouville equation
parameterized with the one-particle distribution function with
dissipative dynamics on this manifold. The derivation of the Boltzmann
equation requires some limit transitions.

A few ways of coarse-graining are known, but essentially only two exist.
The first one is related to distinguishing a manifold, @xmath and a
projector, @xmath on it; the manifold, @xmath with the projector, @xmath
separate the “microscopic” ( @xmath ) from the macroscopic, @xmath In
particular, @xmath Then, a “new microscopic dynamic” is parameterized:
instead of @xmath the equality

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

is used.

Equation ( 78 ) determines, for example, quite different system of
relations in the chain of derivatives @xmath @xmath @xmath (original
system can contain no such relations). For construction of “right
asymptotics” relation ( 76 ) is much more appropriate then the correct
initial relation: for example, instead of @xmath in ( 77 ) one can get
@xmath , and the kernel @xmath always contains the kernel @xmath

If the coarse-graining projector, @xmath and manifold, @xmath are
postulated, then the hypothesis of existence of the thermodynamic limit
consists of existence of the limit:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

Nevertheless, one should not expect a precise fulfillment of equality (
79 ), this is still the case of exact projection (on @xmath ). For
@xmath one can expect realistically only the smallness of the remainder:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

and its elimination for @xmath where @xmath is number of particles.

For a more precise formalization of this condition one should estimate
@xmath under @xmath for example, such as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

and, further, investigate the thermodynamic limit @xmath .

So far, however, the number of particles was not taken into
consideration, and we dealt with only one fixed system. In this case we
can’t help but to assume that the value of @xmath ( 81 ) is
“sufficiently small”. We notice that the problem of determining the
dynamic for the thermodynamic limit of infinite systems is a very
difficult problem. For infinite system even determining the energy,
entropy, and other characteristics is not clear. We are talking not
about the limit does not exist (the number of particles is always
finite), but about the asymptotics for large @xmath , therefore,
strictly speaking, one needs not only to know the limits, but to
estimate the reminding terms too.

The second coarse-graining method consists of a decomposition of the
system into small subsystems, and introduction of two incomparable time
scales: micro and macro. The main assumption is that during an
arbitrarily small macroscopic time period a small part of the system
passes the micro-evolution within an infinitely long time. This leads to
a quasi-chemical description: within each period a number of elementary
atomic processes (events) takes place. For example, the derivation of
the Boltzmann equation in frames of all formalisms is, in fact, reduced
to this. We will return to considering this approach, but for now we’ll
concern ourselves with the coarse-graining projector for the film.

### 4.5 Choice of the coarse-graining projector, and layer-by-layer
linearization

The simplest choice of the coarse-graining projector is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

For many problems, for example, to investigate the invariance defect (
78 ) it is not necessary to place the manifold @xmath in the initial
space @xmath , it is sufficient to investigate @xmath

In the cases when one needs, after all, to have corresponding elements
of @xmath , a good choice could be the quasiequilibrium manifold
corresponding to @xmath . The quasiequilibrium manifolds have an evident
but important property. Let

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

be a sequence of linear mappings, where @xmath are mappings “on”, their
images are whole corresponding spaces.

Let, furthermore, @xmath be a quasiequilibrium manifold in @xmath
corresponding to @xmath @xmath be a quasiequilibrium manifold of
macro-variables, @xmath corresponding to @xmath @xmath be a
quasiequilibrium manifold in @xmath corresponding to @xmath . Then

  -- -- -- ------
           (84)
  -- -- -- ------

For the transition to the quasiequilibrium approximation this property
reads simpler:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath the corresponding to @xmath procedure of the taking of the
quasiequilibrium approximation.

For each @xmath both the point of the quasiequilibrium, @xmath , and the
linear manifold, @xmath , containing this point are defined. For each
@xmath the quasiequilibrium, @xmath , and the linear manifold, @xmath
containing this point are defined. As well @xmath and containing them
@xmath are defined.

Relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

are fulfilled.

The quasiequilibrium manifold, @xmath parameterized by @xmath lies on
the quasiequilibrium manifold, @xmath parameterized by @xmath For each
@xmath the set

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

forms the quasiequilibrium manifold in @xmath with the set of
macroscopic variables, @xmath and the same entropy. For the projector,
@xmath it means that for each @xmath in the linear manifold, on that
@xmath the quasiequilibrium manifold corresponding to the macroscopic
variables @xmath (if @xmath is a linear mapping on this manifold) is
defined.

The last remark leads us to an important construction named by us
“layer-by-layer linearization” . The filed @xmath could be presented in
the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

The “layer-by-layer quadratic entropy” has special importance for the
theory of non-linear equations ( 88 ) :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

Let us remind that the bilinear form, @xmath is generated by the
negative second differential of the entropy at the point @xmath

The layer-by-layer linearized equations allowed us to add more moment
equations and construct the quasiequilibrium approximations using the
entropy ( 89 ). This is especially important for the moments which are
time derivatives @xmath and so on.

Application of the layer-by-layer linearized equations ( 85 ) together
with the layer-by-layer quadratic entropy ( 89 ) allowed us to construct
a thermodynamically consistent theory of the moment equations for the
Boltzmann equation [ 32 , 33 ] .

It is convenient to supplement the quasiequilibrium, @xmath with the
quasiequilibrium for additional macro-variables @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

in two stages: i) supplementing by the entropy production, ii) and later
by the conserving part of the entropy.

i) We supplement @xmath by the entropy production. In the layer-by-layer
linear approximation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

(as was already determined, see ( 45 )). The quasiequilibrium manifold
corresponding to @xmath in the layer over @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

Quasiequilibrium projector in the layer is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

ii) We distinguish in @xmath the conservative (conserving the entropy)
part over @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This corresponds to the situation when we have fixed @xmath and we
consider the motion in the layer for fixed @xmath For this:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

The quasiequilibrium manifold corresponding to @xmath in the layer over
@xmath could be constructed in the following way: we search for the
kernel of @xmath in @xmath (the set of all solutions to equations @xmath
@xmath ). We define it as @xmath The orthogonal complement, @xmath to
@xmath in the scalar product, @xmath is the corresponding manifold. For
each point from the image, @xmath on @xmath , @xmath there exists unique
@xmath such that @xmath We define it as @xmath As a result, for every
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

The second and third terms in ( 94 ) are reciprocally orthogonal in the
scalar product @xmath .

### 4.6 The failure of the simplest Galerkin approximations for
conservative systems

The simplest approach to the problem is connected to the Galerkin
approaches: one considers a projection of the vector field, @xmath onto
the manifold in question and investigates the obtained motion equations.
It is not difficult to make sure that for conservative systems such an
approach is unfruitful. If the orthogonal projection, @xmath is taken,
then in the linear within the layer approximation only quasiequilibrium
approximations with increased number of moments could be obtained. For
the dissipative systems, in contrast, such a way leads to quite
satisfactory results. Thus, if for the Boltzmann equation and the
hydrodynamic moments the invariant manifold is to be searched in the
form @xmath , then we obtain the Navier-Stokes equations with the
viscosity calculated within the first Sonine polynomials approximation.
Using another scalar product simply leads to unphysical results.

In order to specify appearing problems, let us give an example with a
linear field, @xmath and quadratic entropy, @xmath The conservativity of
@xmath means that for each @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

is fulfilled.

The quasiequilibrium subspace corresponding to the moments @xmath is the
orthogonal complement, @xmath The quasiequilibrium projector, @xmath is
an orthogonal projector on this subspace, and does not depend on the
point. For the defect of invariance @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

Under Galerkin approximation we write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

Projector of the vector field on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, we pass from the equation of motion of the film ( 58 ) to the
Galerkin approximation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ------

One can try to find the fixed points (solving @xmath ). This is the
projected invariance equation. Due to the properties of the operator
@xmath and the self-adjoint projector, @xmath , we obtain for
conservative systems

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (100)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, for the dissipative systems the form ( 100 ) is
negatively definite, and it is this form that determines the
Navier-Stokes equations (in the first Sonine’s polynomials
approximation) for derivation of these equations from the Boltzmann
equation. For the conservative equations this main part vanishes, and
the second term in equation ( 4.6 ), generally speaking, is
sign-indefinite.

The failure of the Galerkin approximations is even more obvious in the
equations of motions on the film. Here everything is very simple:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the dissipative systems under frozen @xmath @xmath relaxes to the
stable point

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

This fixed point is “the leading order term” in the solution of the
invariance equation, @xmath ( 4.6 ).

For the conservative systems @xmath This result was evident beforehand
from the entropy production formula ( 35 ), and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 4.7 Possible ways beyond the simplest Galerkin approximations

The first way is an application of the projection operators methods [ 4
] . The film equation ( 56 ) is considered for two sets of “variables”:
slow “macro-variables”, @xmath and rapid “micro-variables”, @xmath
(where @xmath is a coarse-graining projector, see subsection 4.4 ).

Next the rapid variables are eliminated, and the equation with
retardation for the slow variables is written. This formally exact
equation becomes tractable only after a sequence of additional
approximations (“short memory”, “Markovian models” etc.). The method is
applicable to linear (linear within the layer) vector fields, @xmath .
The main problem is the computation of the coefficients including
averaging along the trajectories of the rapid motion.

The second way is an introduction of the dissipative part (using the
thermodynamic limit) into the vector field, @xmath One adds into ( 58 )
either a “relaxation” operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

or operator @xmath simulating a random process. For example, if @xmath
is a function on a space @xmath then the typical form of @xmath with the
“detailed equilibrium” is @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

with non-negative kernel @xmath @xmath

As a result, the system becomes dissipative, and one can construct for
it invariant manifolds that are stationary solutions for the film
equation. They could be found either as a sequence [ 34 , 35 ] or, more
effectively, based on the Newton method with the incomplete
linearization [ 21 , 28 ] . It becomes possible to use the Galerkin
approximations, and so on.

After this one makes the transition to the thermodynamic limit. It is
suggested that the thermodynamic limit exists for the found invariant
manifold, @xmath , and, if later @xmath tends to zero, that a finite
limit, @xmath exists. This limit is suggested for the definition of the
macroscopic variables @xmath

In some problems of dissipative kinetics (namely, in the problem of
initial layer for the Boltzmann equation) it was found to be effective
to approximate the trajectories by segments (with further smoothing and
corrections, or without them). These segments were constructed in the
following way: the initial direction of motion was taken, and @xmath
evolved along this direction for as long as it was possible to conserve
the smooth evolution of the entropy. Further, the procedure was repeated
from the obtained point (for details see [ 15 , 16 ] ).

Unfortunately, in the problem of the initial layer for the conservative
systems there are no stop points during the motion along the straight
line (more precisely, the start of the motion itself can be considered
as a stop point because under the linear approximation the relation (
100 ) is valid). In the initial layer for the dissipative systems the
motion of the system along the straight line @xmath in any case
increases the entropy. For the conservative systems one needs to “rotate
the phase”, and the models of motion are to be arcs of ellipses (in
linear space), or the constant entropy lines, instead of the straight
lines. In the film problem, as even the simplest examples show, the
simplest good model is a general conic section. A simple example: @xmath
@xmath is generator of rotation around the axis with direction @xmath
@xmath the film is the lateral surface of the cone, obtained by rotation
of the quasiequilibrium manifold, the axis @xmath around the axis @xmath
For @xmath the curve @xmath is an ellipse, for @xmath it is a hyperbole,
for @xmath it is a parable.

### 4.8 The film: Second order Kepler models

The curve @xmath is a section of two manifolds: one of them is the
result of motion of the quasiequilibrium manifold along the vector field
@xmath , and another one is the linear manifold @xmath

Already in the finite-dimensional space, and under linear approximation
( @xmath is linear, @xmath is quadratic) we have an interesting
geometrical picture: quasiequilibrium manifold is an orthogonal
complement to @xmath @xmath is the rotation generator. @xmath is rotated
under action of @xmath unknown curve is the section:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath @xmath

The simplest model motion is a second order curve. However, it is not
sufficient to know the first and the second derivatives. We need
information about the third derivative. If we consider the curve @xmath
as a trajectory in the Kepler problem, then the location, @xmath of the
center of attraction (repulsion) is (Fig. 8 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the initial point where all the derivatives are taken.
The force is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is necessary to specifically note that the Kepler problem defines an
approximation of the trajectory @xmath , but not the dependence on
@xmath

An important question is the finiteness of the film. Is the modeling
motion finite?

The answer is simple in terms of the Kepler problem [ 36 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the norm in the entropic scalar product, as it is usual.

### 4.9 Minimal second order models: entropic parable, and entropic
circle

In accordance with the film equation ( 58 ), the following derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

contribute to the construction of the second order Kepler models.

There is a rougher construction leading to the two distinguished
simplest second order models that uses only two derivatives. One of them
is finite (the entropic circle), another one is infinite (the entropic
parable). Both could be constructed for every point of the film (if
@xmath otherwise, all second order models turn into straight lines). The
circle was already used by us in subsection 3.3 in order to estimate
stabilizating value of @xmath Let us remind that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the entropic scalar product corresponding to the extension of
the entropy at the point @xmath or, for the linear (as well as linear
within the layer) systems, at the point @xmath

The concentric motion could be presented as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (112)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The parable could be constructed simpler:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

or even as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

The difference between ( 113 ) and ( 114 ) is this: in the formula ( 113
) the angle between @xmath and @xmath tends to @xmath for @xmath in the
model ( 114 ) this occurs too if @xmath

Note. In expressions ( 112 - 114 ) @xmath coincides with the true @xmath
of the motion on the film only in the zeroth and the first orders. For
the further calculations it could be necessary to recalculate @xmath
using true values of @xmath in the projection on the trajectory. This is
discussed below.

### 4.10 The finite models: termination at the horizon points

In order to construct a step-by-step approximation it is necessary to be
able to solve two problems: the choice of the direction of the next
step, and the choice of the value of this step.

If the motion @xmath is along the straight line (dissipative systems),
the direction of the next step is @xmath (let us remind that @xmath is
the defect of the invariance of the manifold @xmath under fixed @xmath
), and the value of the step should be taken in the direction to the
stable point: to the point where direction of @xmath becomes orthogonal
to initial one, @xmath (Fig. 9 ). Naturally, the current direction of
@xmath is calculated with ( 58 ), but approximately, with the frozen
projector ( @xmath instead of @xmath ).

For the conservative systems we have chosen the second order models
instead of the linear ones. For finiteness of the models we need to
define the moments of stop. It is suggested to operate in a manner
similar to the case of the dissipative systems: to stop at the moment
when the direction of motion is orthogonal to the initial one. In this
case we will take the direction of motion along the model.

Thus, if @xmath is a starting point of motion, and @xmath is a motion on
the finite second order model, then condition for the transition to the
next model is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

(in the entropic scalar product).

Let us call the horizon points such points, @xmath where the scalar
product ( 115 ) for the first time becomes zero (for @xmath this scalar
product is positive). This notion is motivated by the fact that for
@xmath the motion on the second order model “disappears behind the
horizon”, and its orthogonal projection on the line parallel to @xmath
starts to move back passing the same points for the second time.

The convention about the change of the model in the horizon points
seemed quite natural. The following sequence of calculations suggests
itself (Fig. 10 ):

1) we pose that @xmath

2) we calculate @xmath @xmath @xmath in accordance with equation (50);

3) we construct the (finite) second order models, @xmath

4) we find the horizon points, @xmath

5) then we take the manifold of the horizon points as a new initial
manifold, and so on.

At the first glance, this sequence contradicts the original statement of
the film problem. The manifold @xmath does not have the form of @xmath
for a fixed @xmath and is not a shift of the quasiequilibrium manifold
by the given time along the true microscopic equations of motion.

The second difficulty was already mentioned: the time of motion along
the modeling curve does not coincide with the true time, @xmath More
precisely, it coincides only within the second order. However, global,
not local approximation are consructed. Therefore, global corrections to
the time, or ways to circumvent these corrections, are required.

The following two sections are devoted to the elimination of these
difficulties.

### 4.11 The transversal restart lemma

Let @xmath @xmath be the solution to ( 58 ) under initial condition ( 59
) (the film). We call the transverse section of the film, @xmath the
manifold, @xmath where @xmath is a smooth function @xmath

Let the transverse condition be fulfilled. Namely, for every finite
patch, @xmath , that does not exclude equilibrium exists, @xmath such
that in this patch

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

in an appropriate (for example, entropic) norm. Let @xmath be the
solution to ( 58 ) under the initial condition @xmath Then the following
transverse restart lemma is valid:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

here @xmath .

In order to prove ⁶ ⁶ 6 Let us remind that in the degree of generality
being used there are no proofs to the theorems of existence and
uniqueness this lemma, we notice that it is equivalent to the following
statement. For every @xmath the segment of the trajectory, @xmath @xmath
crosses the manifold @xmath and only once.

In order to demonstrate the unicity of the section, we consider the film
in another coordinates, for each point @xmath we set @xmath and @xmath :
@xmath

In these coordinates the transverse condition excludes pleats on @xmath

In order to demonstrate the existence of the segment @xmath @xmath for
the cross point, @xmath with @xmath , we define in the neighborhood of
the point @xmath on the quasiequilibrium manifold the mapping into the
neighborhood of this section point. Image of the point @xmath is section
of the trajectory @xmath @xmath with the manifold @xmath in the
neighborhood of @xmath Due to the transverse condition, it performs an
isomorphism of the neighborhoods. Therefore, the set of @xmath for which
the section of the trajectory with @xmath exists is open. Furthermore,
it is closed, because the limit of section points is a section point
(and segment @xmath is compact). Obviously, it is not empty.
Consequently, it is the set of all possible @xmath

### 4.12 The time replacement, and the invariance of the thermodynamic
projector

Let the film be constructed as @xmath where relation between @xmath and
@xmath is unknown; @xmath @xmath in order to determine this functions
one needs to solve the equation obtaining from ( 58 ) with substitution
@xmath (and projection, therefore, @xmath is only an approximation). The
calculation itself does not contain principal difficulties. However, a
question arises: is it possible to escape the reverse replacing of time
for the derivation of the kinetic equations? Another words, could we use
the constructed geometrical object, the film, without an exact
reconstruction of the time, @xmath on it?

For positive answer to this question it is sufficient to demonstrate
that the equations of motion, constructed with the thermodynamic
projector ( 65 - 67 ), describes the same motion on the film after the
time replacement.

This property of the thermodynamic projector is evident: deriving
equations ( 65 - 67 ), we did not use that @xmath is the “true time”
from the equation ( 58 ), and made the local replacement of variables,
passing from @xmath @xmath to @xmath @xmath

In such a way, the thermodynamic projector is invariant with respect to
the time replacement, and, constructing equations of motion, it is not
necessary to restore the “true time”.

Results of this, and previous sections allow to apply the sequence of
operations suggested in subsection 4.10 .

### 4.13 Correction to the infinite models

Let an infinite model @xmath @xmath @xmath be constructed for the film.
Actually, it means that an approximation is constructed for the whole
film @xmath (but not for its initial fragment, as it was for the finite
models). Naturally, there arises a problem of correction to this initial
approximation, and, in general, construction of a step-by-step
computational procedure.

The thermodynamic projector on the film is defined ( 64 ).
Correspondingly, the invariance defect of the film is determined too

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is easy to verify, that if @xmath is a solution to ( 58 ), then
@xmath

Subsequently we calculate the corrections to @xmath using an iterative
method for the manifold with edge (see Appendix).

Generally speaking, one could (and should) calculate these corrections
for the finite models. However, the infinite models are distinguished,
because they require such corrections.

### 4.14 The film, and the macroscopic equations

Let a film be constructed. What next? There are two routes.

i) Investigation of the conservative dynamics of @xmath variables, where
@xmath is moments, @xmath and @xmath is @xmath on the film;

ii) Derivation of the macroscopic equations for @xmath

Actually, the second route is more desirable, it leads to the usual
classes of equations. The first one, however, is always available,
because the film exists always (at least formally) but the existence of
equations for @xmath is not guaranteed.

The route of obtaining equations for @xmath is is the same one,
suggested by us [ 28 ] , [ 29 ] - [ 12 ] following Ehrenfest [ 25 ] ,
and Zubarev [ 3 ] .

i) One chooses a time @xmath .

ii) For arbitrary @xmath one solves the problem of the motion on the
film ( 65 ), ( 67 ) under initial conditions @xmath , @xmath on the
segment @xmath The solution is @xmath

iii) For the mapping @xmath the system @xmath is constructed. It has the
property that for its phase flow, @xmath the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

is satisfied, for defined @xmath and all @xmath This is a natural
projector again (see ( 32 ), and whole section ).

In this sequence of actions there are two nontrivial problems: solution
to the equations on the film, and reconstruction of the vector field by
transformation of the phase flow, @xmath under fixed @xmath

The natural method for solving the first problem is the averaging
method. The equations of motion on the film read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is (formally) small parameter.

Assuming that the motion of @xmath is slow, one can write down the
series of the Bogoliubov-Krylov averaging method [ 37 ] . The first term
of this series is a simple averaging over the period @xmath @xmath is
solution to the equation @xmath under fixed @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

correspondingly.

The first correction to reconstruction of the vector field, @xmath by
the transformation of the phase flow, @xmath is very simple too:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, we obtain the first correction to the macroscopic equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a solution to the equation ( 67 ) under fixed @xmath
(actually, @xmath should be substituted into ( 67 ) instead of @xmath ).

The second and higher approximations are much more cumbersome, but their
construction is not a significant problem.

Let us demonstrate an explicit expression for @xmath ( 124 ) for the
modeling motion on the entropic circle ( 51 ), ( 112 ) for the linear in
layer system ( 88 ).

The original system is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

The macroscopic equations are (see also equations ( 53 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the quasiequilibrium projector ( 16 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath is the entropic scalar product related with quadratic
approximation to the entropy @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note. In ( 125 ), in accordance with ( 67 ), the model of motion on the
circle ( 112 ) is taken without recalculating the time. Such a
recalculation changes the values of the coefficients without a change in
the structure of the equation: instead of @xmath and @xmath , other
numbers appear.

The entropy production for equations ( 125 ) has the form @xmath ( 54 ).

In general, equations such as ( 125 ) are determined accurately to the
values of the coefficients simply by the sequence of the horizon points
of the second order finite Kepler models, and corresponding @xmath
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath

The last comment on the positivity of the “kinetic constants” @xmath and
@xmath is important, and cannot be easily verified every time. However,
in the case under consideration it follows from the next theorem.

The theorem about the positivity of kinetic constants. The motion on the
Kepler ellipse from start to the horizon point always satisfies the
property

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a starting point, @xmath and @xmath are velocity, and
acceleration correspondingly.

This theorem follows from elementary theorems about analytical geometry
of second-order curves.

For the modeling motion on the circle, strictly speaking, this is not so
every time. Positivity of the coefficients is guaranteed only for @xmath
and @xmath

Two phenomena can be related to the increase of the number of terms in (
126 ): i) alteration of the kinetic constants (terms are not orthogonal
to each other, therefore, new terms contribute to the previous
processes), ii) appearance of new processes.

Motion on an infinite film can lead to the stabilization of kinetic
constants as functions of @xmath , but it can also lead to their
permanent transformation. In the second case one has to introduce into
macroscopic equations an additional variable, the coordinate, @xmath on
the film.

From the applications point of view, another form of equations of motion
on the film could be more natural. In these equations kinetic
coefficients are used as dynamic variables. Essentially, this is just
another representation of equations ( 65 ), ( 67 ). For every kinetic
coefficient, @xmath expression @xmath is calculated in accordance with (
65 ), ( 67 ). Substitution of variables @xmath in this equation is
possible (at least locally) if value @xmath does not stabilize during
the motion on the film. Finally, we have the system in the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the motion starting from the quasiequilibrium state the initial
conditions are @xmath

### 4.15 New in the separation of the relaxation times

The classical Bogoliubov’s concept about separation of the relaxation
times does not agree well with the thesis of the quasiequilibrium
initial conditions.

Originally, there are no dissipative possesses in the quasiequilibrium
state (the theorem of preservation of the type of dynamics for the
quasiequilibrium approximation).

The first thing that occurs during the motion out of the
quasiequilibrium initial conditions is appearance of the dissipation. It
can be described (in the first non-vanishing approximation) by equation
( 33 ). It is of special importance here that there is still no
separation into processes with various kinetic coefficients. This occurs
at further relaxation stages: Various processes appear, their kinetic
coefficients are determined (see, for example, ( 126 )) (or, in some
cases, the dynamics of the kinetic coefficients is determined). And just
after this the “hydrodynamic” relaxation occurs, which is the motion of
the macroscopic variables to their equilibrium values.

Generalizing, we can distinguish three stages:

i) appearance of dissipation;

ii) branching of dissipation: appearance of various processes;

iii) macroscopic relaxation.

It is important to notice in this schema that the determination of the
kinetic coefficients can occur at both stages: at the second stage when
macroscopic (hydrodynamic) relaxation can be described in the usual form
with kinetic coefficient as functions of the macroscopic parameters, as
well as in the third phase (motion on the film), when the hydrodynamic
description includes dynamics of the kinetic coefficients also.

## 5 Conclusion

To solve the problem of irreversibility we have introduced the notion of
the macroscopically definable ensembles. They are result of evolution of
ensembles from the quasiequilibrium initial conditions under macroscopic
control. The quasiequilibria (ensembles of conditional maximum of the
entropy under fixed macro-variables) are intensively used in statistical
mechanics after Jaynes [ 44 ] . Papers of Rosonoer and Kogan [ 45 ] - [
47 ] significantly affected our initial investigation. The primitive
macroscopically definable ensembles appear as results (for @xmath ) of
motions which start from the quasiequilibrium state (at @xmath ). The
hypothesis of the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles is very
important from constructive point of view: Any macroscopically definable
ensemble can be approximated by primitive macroscopically definable
ensembles with appropriate accuracy. In accordance to this hypothesis it
is possible to study the one curve for every value of macroscopic
variables. These curves form the film of nonequilibrium states.

The hypothesis about the primitive macroscopically definable ensembles
is real hypothesis, it can be true or false. There is the significant
difference between this hypothesis and the thesis about macroscopically
definable ensembles. The thesis can be accepted, or not, but nobody can
prove the definition, even the definition of the macroscopically
definable ensembles.

Technically, the solution to the problem of irreversibility looks as
follows: we can operate only with the macroscopically definable
ensembles; the class of these ensembles is not invariant with respect to
the time inversion. The notion of the macroscopically definable
ensembles moves the problem of irreversibility into a new setting. It
could be called a control theory point of view. The key question is:
Which parameters can we control? It is those parameters that are fixed
until “all the rest” come to an equilibrium. The quasiequilibrium states
are obtained in such a way.

The further development of this direction must lead to an investigation
of the macro-dynamics under controlled macro-parameters. This will be a
supplement of the postulated quasiequilibrium initial conditions with an
investigation of a general case of an evolution of the controlled
ensembles: The initial condition is quasiequilibrium, after which one
carries out on the system by available control influences.

The method of the natural projector allows us to construct an
approximate dynamics of macro-variables. Under tendency of the time of
projection, @xmath to infinity, these equations should tend to the
actual equations of macro-dynamics, if the latter exist. This a
hypothesis about their existence for the thermodynamic limit (first, the
number of particles @xmath and then, the time of projection @xmath ) is
the basis of the Zubarev statistical operator [ 3 ] . Here, however, we
need to make a note. Frequently, physicists use objects whose existence
and unicity are not proven: solution to the hydro- gaso-dynamics,
kinetic equations etc. Often, the failure to prove the theorems of
existence and unicity is treated as an absence of an adequate
mathematical statement of the problem (definition of spaces etc.). For
all this, it is assumed, that substantial obstacles either are absent,
or can be distinguished separately, independently on the theorem proof
in physically trivial situations. Existence (or non-existence) of the
macroscopic dynamics is a problem of an absolutely different kind. This
question is substantial: the cases of non-existence can be found as
frequently as the usual existence.

The notion of the invariant film of non-equilibrium states, and the
method of its approximate construction allow us to solve the problem of
macro-kinetic even in cases when there are no autonomous equations of
macro-kinetic. The existence of the film appears to be one of the
physically trivial problems of existence and uniqueness of solutions.

Using the Taylor’s expansions of the natural projector, the first
applications already have been constructed [ 29 , 42 , 43 ] .
Particularly, the post-Navier-Stokes hydrodynamic, replacing the Burnett
equations, have been found. It is free from unphysical singularities [
29 , 41 ] .

The formula for entropy production

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

makes the geometrical sense of dissipation clear.

Nevertheless, at least one important problem remains unsolved. This is a
problem of undivisible events : For macroscopically small time small
microscopic subsystems can go through “the whole life”, from the
beginning to the limit state (or, more accurate, to the limit behaviour
which may be not only a state, but a type of motion, etc.). The
microscopic evolution of the system in a small interval of macroscopic
time can not be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if it is really the system with microscopic structure, and consists of a
large number of microscopic subsystems. The evolution of microscopic
subsystems in a macroscopically small time @xmath should be described as
a “ensemble of undivisible events”. An excellent hint gives us the
Boltzmann equation with undivisible collisions, another good hint gives
the chemical kinetics with undivisible events of elementary reactions.
The useful formalism for description such ensembles of undivisible
events is developed. It is the “quasi-chemical” representation (see
elsewhere, for example, the review [ 22 ] ). But the way from a general
systems to such ensembles remains unclear. It is a challenge to the
following works.

## 6 Appendix

### 6.1 The method of invariant manifolds

The aim of this appendix is to give a short presentation of the method
of invariant manifold, including positive-invariant manifolds with the
fixed edge.

### 6.2 Construction of the invariant sections

Let @xmath be a vector space, in the patch @xmath the vector field
(microscopic system)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

is defined.

@xmath is assumed to be smoothly continued to the closure of @xmath
positively invariantly with respect to ( 129 ). It means that every
solution to ( 129 ), @xmath , starting under @xmath in @xmath , is to be
found within @xmath for every @xmath

Let @xmath be a vector field (of macroscopic variables), and a
surjective mapping @xmath is defined.

It is required to construct such a mapping

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

that @xmath and @xmath is a positive invariant manifold of the system (
129 ) (since @xmath is positive-invariant, it is sufficient to verify a
local condition: the field @xmath is tangent to the manifold @xmath for
each @xmath ).

Actually, we continue to keep such a level of strictness (unstrictness)
of reasoning when such details as topology in @xmath and @xmath etc. are
not discussed. If necessary, it could be made for particular
realizations.

We call the mapping ( 130 ) a section, and the problem of construction
of positive invariant manifold, @xmath an invariant section problem.

It could be solved with many methods. Here are some of them:

i) the Taylor expansion over the degrees of an appropriate parameter in
a neighborhood of the initial approximation (for example the
Chapman-Enskog method [ 38 ] );

ii) the Newton method (as in the KAM-theory [ 39 ] , [ 40 ] but with a
incomplete linearization, as in the original formulation of the method
of invariant manifolds for dissipative systems [ 21 ] ).

iii) the implementation of Galerkin approximations for each iteration.

Omitting the well known expansions of the perturbation theory, we
consider the direct methods.

In order to make one step of the Newton method with incomplete
linearization, we need:

i) an approximate manifold, @xmath which we call @xmath

ii) projector @xmath mapping a neighborhood of @xmath on @xmath

For each @xmath the projector, @xmath mapping @xmath on the tangent
space, @xmath is @xmath ( @xmath is differential of @xmath ).

Usually, the projector @xmath is defined in such a way that the layers
(prototypes of points @xmath under projection) could be patches on
affine subspaces of @xmath

For each @xmath we define the invariance defect

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

The invariance equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

is solved with the Newton method with incomplete linearization: for
every @xmath we search for @xmath such as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the layers of @xmath are patches on the affine manifolds, then ( 133
) is a system of linear equations. Another form of this system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

It should be stressed that in equation ( 133 ) incomplete (in contrast
to the Newton method) linearization has been used. We did not
differentiate @xmath in @xmath in ( 131 ).

The discussion is given in ( 8 ). We note only that for the simplest
stable self-adjoin linear systems with incomplete linearization
equations ( 133 ) lead generically to an invariant subspace with the
largest (i.e. closest to zero) eigenvalues. In contrast, procedures with
whole lonearization lead in this case to the subspace closest to the
initial approximation.

As soon as @xmath is found from equations ( 133 ), we substitute @xmath
for @xmath construct new projectors and repeat the procedure.

Solution to the invariance equation ( 132 ) by the Newton method with
incomplete linearisation can turn into a difficult problem. In spite of
their linearity, equations ( 133 ) cannot be solved easily every time.
One can try to simplify the problem passing from the invariance
equations to the Galerkin approximations. The simplest example is
one-dimensional approximations when @xmath and equation is solved in the
projection on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

The entropic scalar product @xmath is used.

Solving ( 135 ) with the Newton method, we obtain at the first
iteration:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

More often for the dissipative systems the denominator is negative, and
this allows us to move on. For the conservative systems the
one-dimensional Galerkin approximations lead to an unsatisfactory
result, at least, in the combination with the Newton method (with the
incomplete linearization).

### 6.3 The entropic thermodynamic projectors

The simplest choice of @xmath is obvious:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each value of @xmath the values of macroscopic variables, @xmath can
be calculated. Based on these values, the corresponding point with the
same value of @xmath on the manifold can be obtained.

However, projector ( 137 ) does not satisfy the physical constrains
every time.

On the set @xmath a concave function, the entropy, @xmath , is defined.
Two kinds of systems are under consideration: i)( 129 ) dissipative, for
which @xmath , in accordance with the system, ii) conservative, for
which @xmath The quasiequilibrium manifolds, @xmath are physically
distinguished. They are the solution to the variational problem

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

Application of the simplest projector ( 137 ) leads to the fact that the
vector field, @xmath preserves the type of dynamics of the system on the
quasiequilibrium manifold. For the conservative @xmath it is
conservative, and for the dissipative systems it is dissipative too
(with the same entropy). Such a preservation of the type of dynamics by
the projector is guaranteed only for the quasiequilibrium manifolds.

However, practically for every manifold @xmath it is possible to
construct such a projector, @xmath that every @xmath is a solution to
the problem

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

in a neighborhood of @xmath For this it would be sufficient that for
every @xmath the functional @xmath eliminate @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, in order to control the physical sense of obtained approximations,
one needs to consider the projector depending on the manifold [ 21 ] .

### 6.4 Method of invariant manifold for the positively invariant
manifolds with fixed edge

In the problem of construction of invariant sections the position of
points @xmath was not fixed. Only fulfillment of condition @xmath was
important. There is another kind of problems where one needs to find a
positive invariant manifold with a fixed edge. Practically, this is a
problem of construction of a trajectory of the edge in accordance with (
129 ) for @xmath

These problems include the problem of initial layer [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] , as
well as the problem of construction of the film of non-equilibrium
states discussed in this paper.

The iterative methods described above cannot be implemented here,
because they destroy the boundary conditions on the edge of the
manifold. If the invariance conditions are fulfilled on the edge of the
initial approximation, @xmath , accurate to the @xmath th derivative in
time, then the Newton method leads to the fact that after the @xmath th
iteration the edges of the manifold will be changed (the film tears off
the edge).

In the previous paper devoted to the problem of initial layer [ 15 ] we
have technically overcame this difficulty. To do this, we simulated the
trajectory as an elastic beam with a rigidly fixed end. In the
mechanical equilibrium this beam had the form of an approximate
trajectory. Later, it was elastically attracted to the result of the
Newton iterations. Even though that this technique allows to avoid the
separation of contact between the edge and the film, its technical
artificiality forces us to continue to search for new methods.

The application of the Picard iterative procedure allows to conserve
initial conditions. For the film equation we write: let @xmath be an
approximation for the film, then the Picard iteration gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the right hand side of ( 58 ) taken at the point @xmath

Let us define, as usual, @xmath as the difference of the vector field
and its projection on the approximate manifold, then the Picard
iteration obtains the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Picard iteration gives a good result for small @xmath but can be too
radical for large one. It is possible to use the Picard iterations
together with the weight which ensures essential dependence of the
correction, @xmath not from all @xmath , @xmath but from those within a
segment @xmath For example,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

Another choice of the weight function is possible. For large @xmath and
sufficiently small @xmath and @xmath , the formula ( 143 ) gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

For small @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is order of zero of @xmath at the point @xmath

Joining ( 144 ) and ( 145 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

In all cases the question of how to choose the step arises. The simplest
solution exists for ( 146 ): it is possible to take the step, @xmath ,
depending on the point:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath is to be found from the condition of stopping
in the direction of @xmath ( 135 ).

Various combinations of the Picard and Newton iterations can generate a
separate subject for investigation. Their simplest hybridisation
consists of the following. Let for each @xmath the step, @xmath is found
according to the Newton method ( 133 ).

Define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to have the step value on the direction @xmath close to @xmath
for large @xmath the multiplier @xmath has been used. An analog to ( 146
) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

The typical time scale, which separates in ( 137 ) and ( 138 ) the
Picard (small times, @xmath ), and Newton (large time, @xmath )
iterations, can be estimated by the curvature radius ( 52 ) (in general,
from the relations @xmath or @xmath ).

Further development of the methods will be determined by particular
applications.

Acknowledgments. A.N.G. is thankful to G. Sh. Fridman for stimulating
discussions and encouragement. A.N.G. thanks Institut des Hautes Études
Scientifiques, where parts of this work have been developed, for
hospitality. I.V.K. is thankful to the organizers of the First Mexican
Meeting on Mathematical and Experimental Physics, where parts of this
work have been presented, and especially to Leo García-Colín and
Francisco Uribe for discussions. I.V.K. acknowledges stimulating
discussions with Miroslav Grmela. Finally, it is our pleasure to thank
Misha Gromov and Hans Christian Öttinger for stimulating discussions.

S. Ansumali, P. Gorban, V. Ilyuschenko, and L. Tatarinova help us to
prepare the manuscript.