In this Thesis we develop a novel direction in the theory of
nano-objects, i.e., structures of nanometer size in a tunnel contact
with macroscopic electron reservoirs (metallic leads). This theory arose
and was developed rapidly during the two recent decades as a response to
challenging achievements of modern nanotechnology and experimental
techniques. Evolution of this technology enabled the fabrication of
various low-dimensional systems from semiconductor heterostructures to
quantum wires and constrictions, quantum dots, molecular bridges and
artificial structures constructed from large molecules. This impressive
experimental progress initiated the development of a new direction in
quantum physics, namely, the physics of artificial nano-objects.

We focus in this work on a theoretical investigation of the Kondo
physics in quantum dots and molecules with strong correlations. An
exciting series of recent experiments on mesoscopic and nanoscale
systems has enabled a thorough and controlled study of basic physical
problems dealing with a local moment interacting with a Fermi sea of
conduction electrons. Scanning tunnel microscopy and quantumâ€“dot devices
have provided new tools for studying the Kondo effect in many new
perspectives and with unprecedented control. As experimental and
theoretical investigations of tunneling phenomena continue, it turns out
that the physics of tunneling spectroscopy of large molecules and
complex quantum dots have much in common.

In particular we elucidate the Kondo effect predicted in tunneling
through triple quantum dots and sandwich-type molecules adsorbed on
metallic substrate, which are referred to as trimers . The unusual
dynamical symmetry of nano-objects is one of the most intriguing
problems, which arise in the theory of these systems. We demonstrate
that trimers possess dynamical symmetries whose realization in Kondo
tunneling is experimentally tangible. Such experimental tuning of
dynamical symmetries is not possible in conventional Kondo scattering.
We develop the general approach to the problem of dynamical symmetries
in Kondo tunneling through nano-objects and illustrate it by numerous
examples of trimers in various configurations, in parallel, in series
and in ring geometries.

In the first part of this Thesis, the evenly occupied trimer in a
parallel geometry is studied. We show that Kondo tunneling through the
trimer is controlled by a family of @xmath dynamical symmetries. The
most striking feature of this result is that the value of the group
index @xmath can be changed experimentally by tuning the gate voltage
applied to the trimer. Following the construction of the corresponding
@xmath algebras, the scaling equations are derived and the Kondo
temperatures are calculated.

In the second part, the Kondo physics of trimer with both even and odd
electron occupation in a series geometry is discussed. We derive and
solve the scaling equations for the evenly occupied trimer in the cases
of the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath dynamical symmetries. The
dynamical-symmetry phase diagram is displayed and the experimental
consequences are drawn. The map of Kondo temperature as a function of
gate voltages is constructed. In addition, the influence of magnetic
field on the dynamical symmetry and its role in the Kondo tunneling
through the trimer are studied. It is shown that the anisotropic Kondo
effect can be induced in the trimer by an external magnetic field. The
corresponding symmetry group is @xmath . In the case of odd electron
occupation, the effective spin Hamiltonian of the trimer manifests a
two-channel Kondo problem albeit only in the weak coupling regime (due
to unavoidable anisotropy).

In the third part, the point symmetry @xmath of an artificial trimer in
a ring geometry and its interplay with the spin rotation symmetry @xmath
are studied. This nano-object is a quantum dot analog of the
Coqblin-Schrieffer model in which the Kondo physics is governed by a
subtle interplay between spin and orbital degrees of freedom. The
orbital degeneracy is tuned by a magnetic field, which affects the
electron phases thereby leading to a peculiar Aharonov-Bohm effect.

The following novel results were obtained in the course of this
research:

-   It is found that evenly occupied trimer manifests a new type of
    Kondo effect that was not observed in conventional spin @xmath
    quantum dots. The dynamical @xmath symmetries of Kondo tunneling
    through evenly occupied trimer both in parallel and series geometry
    are unravelled. These symmetries can be experimentally realized and
    the specific value of @xmath can be controlled by gate voltage
    and/or tunneling strength. The Kondo temperature explicitly depends
    on the index @xmath and this dependence may be traced experimentally
    by means of measuring the variation of tunnel conductance as a
    function of gate voltages. The hidden dynamical symmetry manifests
    itself, firstly in the very existence of the Kondo effect in trimer
    with even occupation, secondly in non-universal behavior of the
    Kondo temperature @xmath . In a singlet spin state the anisotropic
    Kondo effect can be induced in the trimer by an external magnetic
    field.

-   It is shown that the effective spin Hamiltonian of a trimer with odd
    electron occupation weakly connected in series with left ( @xmath )
    and right ( @xmath ) metal leads is composed of two-channel exchange
    and co-tunneling terms. Renormalization group equations for the
    corresponding three exchange constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
    are solved in a weak coupling limit (single loop approximation).
    Since @xmath is relevant, the system is mapped on an anisotropic
    two-channel Kondo problem. The structure of the conductance as
    function of temperature and gate voltage implies that in the weak
    and intermediate coupling regimes, two-channel Kondo physics
    persists at temperatures as low as several @xmath . Analysis of the
    Kondo effect in cases of higher spin degeneracy of the trimer ground
    state is carried out in relation with dynamical symmetries. The
    Kondo physics remains that of a fully screened impurity, and the
    corresponding Kondo temperature is calculated.

-   It is demonstrated that spin and orbital degrees of freedom
    interlace in ring shaped artificial trimer thereby establishing the
    analogy with the Coqblin-Schrieffer model in magnetically doped
    metals. The orbital degrees of freedom are tunable by an external
    magnetic field, and this implies a peculiar Aharonov-Bohm effect,
    since the electron phase is also affected. The conductance is
    calculated both in three- and two-terminal geometries. It is shown
    that it can be sharply enhanced or completely blocked at definite
    values of magnetic flux through the triangular loop.
