##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 The field equations from a numerical point of view
    -    2.1 The “3+1” decomposition of spacetime
        -    2.1.1 The foliation
        -    2.1.2 Gauge freedom
        -    2.1.3 Extrinsic curvature and the 3-metric
        -    2.1.4 The projections of the Riemann tensor
        -    2.1.5 The role of the field equations
        -    2.1.6 The kinematic degrees of freedom: lapse and shift
        -    2.1.7 The current state of “3+1” formulations: recent
            progress and limitations
    -    2.2 The characteristic initial value problem
        -    2.2.1 Characteristic coordinates
        -    2.2.2 The Bondi-Sachs line element
        -    2.2.3 Introduction of a tetrad
        -    2.2.4 The field equations
        -    2.2.5 Boundary conditions
        -    2.2.6 Initial data and the integration of the field
            equations
    -    2.3 Numerical methods
        -    2.3.1 The numerical grid
        -    2.3.2 Derivatives and finite differences
        -    2.3.3 The leapfrog scheme
        -    2.3.4 The McCormack scheme
        -    2.3.5 Relaxation
        -    2.3.6 The Crank-Nicholson scheme
        -    2.3.7 Consistency
        -    2.3.8 Stability
        -    2.3.9 Convergence
-    3 Cauchy characteristic matching in cylindrical symmetry
    -    3.1 The idea of Cauchy characteristic matching
    -    3.2 The Southampton CCM-project
    -    3.3 The original code
        -    3.3.1 The Geroch decomposition
        -    3.3.2 The equations of the original code
        -    3.3.3 The numerical implementation
        -    3.3.4 Including the rotational degree of freedom @xmath
    -    3.4 A reformulation of the problem
    -    3.5 Testing the code
        -    3.5.1 The Weber-Wheeler wave
        -    3.5.2 Xanthopoulos’ rotating solution
        -    3.5.3 Time dependent convergence analysis
-    4 Numerical evolution of excited cosmic strings
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Mathematical description of a cosmic string
    -    4.3 The field equations
    -    4.4 Numerical methods
        -    4.4.1 The static cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime
        -    4.4.2 The static cosmic string coupled to gravity
        -    4.4.3 The dynamic cosmic string
    -    4.5 Testing the dynamic code
        -    4.5.1 The Weber-Wheeler wave
        -    4.5.2 The rotating solution of Xanthopoulos
        -    4.5.3 Evolution of the static cosmic string
        -    4.5.4 Convergence analysis
    -    4.6 Time dependence of the string variables
        -    4.6.1 Static cosmic strings excited by gravitational waves
        -    4.6.2 Frequency analysis
        -    4.6.3 The long term behaviour of the dynamic string
    -    4.7 Discussion
-    5 Non-linear oscillations of spherically symmetric stars
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Spherically symmetric static stars
        -    5.2.1 The Tolman Oppenheimer Volkoff equations
        -    5.2.2 The numerical treatment of the TOV-equations
        -    5.2.3 Physical units
        -    5.2.4 Transformation to a new radial coordinate
        -    5.2.5 Asymptotic properties of the TOV equations
        -    5.2.6 Solutions of the TOV equations
    -    5.3 Spherically symmetric dynamic stars in Eulerian coordinates
        -    5.3.1 The equations in the dynamic case
        -    5.3.2 A fully non-linear perturbative formulation
        -    5.3.3 The linearized equations and the eigenmode spectrum
        -    5.3.4 The surface problem
        -    5.3.5 The numerical implementation in Eulerian coordinates
        -    5.3.6 The performance of the code in the linear regime
        -    5.3.7 A simplified neutron star model
        -    5.3.8 Testing the code with the new model
        -    5.3.9 Non-linear mode coupling
        -    5.3.10 Discussion of the non-linear mode-coupling
    -    5.4 Radial oscillations in a Lagrangian formulation
        -    5.4.1 The equations in the Lagrangian formulation
        -    5.4.2 The linearized evolution equations
        -    5.4.3 The equations for the numerical implementation
        -    5.4.4 Initial data and boundary conditions
        -    5.4.5 The finite differencing of the equations
        -    5.4.6 Testing the code
    -    5.5 Do shocks form at the surface for low amplitude
        oscillations?
-    6 Conclusions
-    A The finite differencing of the Lagrangian equations

Acknowledgements

[10pt]

In the vain hope of achieving completeness I would like to express my
gratitude to the following people.
My supervisor Ray d’Inverno for making this whole project possible and
for all support and suggestions I have received in the course of the
last three years.
Nils Andersson, Carsten Gundlach and James Vickers for many suggestions,
discussions, encouragement and constructive criticism of my work.
All other members of the Southampton relativity group who provided a
phantastic working environment and were barely ever short of encouraging
comments, support and ideas.
My colleague Robert Sjödin with whom I worked jointly on the cosmic
string project. The derivation of the equations for a cosmic string in
section 4 has been done in collaboration with him and he reformulated
the analytic vacuum solutions used in section 3 and 4 in the way they
are implemented in the codes.
Last but not least Philippos Papadopoulos of the University of
Portsmouth for his many suggestions, ideas and support concerning the
work in section 5.

Notation

[10pt]

Unless stated otherwise, the following conventions apply. Greek indices
run from 0 to 3, whereas Latin indices are used for 3-dimensional
quantities. We will generally represent vectors and tensors of higher
rank with boldfaced letters (e.g. ). Sometimes we will denote vectors,
i.e. tensors of rank (1,0), by partial differential operators (e.g.
@xmath ). If we need to distinguish between a one-form and a vector, the
one-form will be marked with a tilde (e.g. @xmath ). If a one-form is
the exterior derivative of a scalar function @xmath , it will be denoted
by @xmath and the tilde will be omitted. If is a vector, then @xmath is
the associated one-form, i.e. @xmath . In coordinate free language the
contraction of a one-form @xmath with a vector will be written as @xmath
. The 4-dimensional Riemann tensor and its contractions will be denoted
by the standard . For the 3-dimensional Riemann tensor we always use
@xmath . We will use square brackets to denote the commutator as is done
in quantum mechanics, so for example @xmath . Throughout this work we
will use natural units with @xmath and the sign convention “ @xmath ”
for the metric.

## 1 Introduction

In 1915 Albert Einstein published a geometrical theory of gravitation:
The General Theory of Relativity . He presented a fundamentally new
description of gravity in the sense that the relative acceleration of
particles is not viewed as a consequence of gravitational forces but
results from the curvature of the spacetime in which the particles are
moving. As long as no non-gravitational forces act on a particle, it is
always moving on a “straight line”. If we consider curved manifolds
there is still a concept of straight lines which are called geodesics ,
but these will not necessarily have the properties we intuitively
associate with straight lines from our experience in flat Euclidean
geometry. It is, for example, a well known fact that two distinct
straight lines in 2-dimensional flat geometry will intersect each other
exactly once unless they are parallel in which case they do not
intersect each other at all. These ideas result from the fifth Euclidean
postulate of geometry which plays a special role in the formulation of
geometry. It is a well known fact that one needs to impose it separately
from the first four Euclidean postulates in order to obtain flat
Euclidean geometry. It was not realised until the work of Gauss,
Lobachevsky, Bolyai and Riemann in the 19th century that the omission of
the fifth postulate leads to an entirely new class of non-Euclidean
geometries in curved manifolds. A fundamental feature of non-Euclidean
geometry is that straight lines in curved manifolds can intersect each
other more than once and correspondingly diverge from and converge
towards each other several times. In order to illustrate how these
properties give rise to effects we commonly associate with forces such
as gravitation, we consider two observers on the earth’s surface, say
one in Southampton and one in Hamburg. We assume that these two
observers start moving due south in “straight lines” as for example
guided by an idealised compass exactly pointing towards the south pole.
If we follow their separate paths we will discover exactly the ideas
outlined above. As long as both observers are in the northern hemisphere
the proper distance between them will increase and reach a maximum when
they reach the equator. From then on they will gradually approach each
other and their paths will inevitably cross at the south pole. In the
framework of Newtonian physics the observers will attribute the relative
acceleration of their positions to the action of a force. It is clear,
however, that no force is acting in the east-west direction on either
observer at any stage of their journey. In a geometric description the
relative movement of the observers finds a qualitatively new
interpretation in terms of the curvature of the manifold they are moving
in, the curvature of the earth’s surface. With the development of
general relativity Einstein provided the exact mathematical foundation
for applying these ideas to the forces of gravitation in 4-dimensional
spacetime. One may ask why such a geometrical interpretation has only
been developed for gravitation. Or in other words which feature
distinguishes gravitation from the other three fundamental interactions?
The answer lies in the “gravitational charge”, the mass. It is a common
observation that the gravitational mass @xmath which determines the
coupling of a particle to the gravitational field is virtually identical
to the inertial mass @xmath which describes the particle’s kinematic
reaction to an external force. High precision experiments have been
undertaken to measure the difference between these two types of masses.
All these results are compatible with the assumption that the masses are
indeed equal. The mass will therefore drop out of the Newtonian
equations governing the dynamics of a particle subject exclusively to
gravitational forces @xmath , where @xmath is the acceleration of the
particle, @xmath the gravitational constant, @xmath the mass of an
external source and @xmath the distance from this source. The particle
mass @xmath can be factored out so that the movement of the particle is
described in purely kinematic terms. The redundancy of the concept of a
gravitational force is naturally incorporated into a geometric theory of
gravity such as general relativity. It is important to note that this
behaviour distinguishes gravity from the other fundamental interactions
which are associated with different types of charges, such as electric
charge in the case of electromagnetic interaction. It is not obvious how
and whether it is possible to obtain similar geometric formulations for
the electromagnetic, weak and strong interaction. The unification of
these three fundamental forces with gravity in the framework of quantum
theory is one of the important areas of ongoing research.
In order to formalize the ideas mentioned above, general relativity
views spacetime as a 4-dimensional manifold equipped with a metric
@xmath of Lorentzian signature where the Greek indices range from 0 to
3. At any given point in the manifold the signature enables one to
distinguish between time-like, space-like and null directions. The
metric further induces a whole range of higher level geometric concepts
on the manifold. It defines a scalar product between vectors which leads
to the measurement of length and the idea of orthogonality. From the
metric and its derivatives one can derive a connection on the manifold
which facilitates the definition of a covariant derivative . The notion
of a derivative is more complicated in a curved manifold than in the
common case of flat geometry and Cartesian coordinates because the basis
vectors will in general vary from point to point in the manifold. It is
therefore no longer possible to identify the derivative of a tensor with
the derivative of its components. Instead one obtains extra terms
involving the derivatives of the basis vectors. In terms of a covariant
derivative these terms are represented by the connection. In general
relativity one uses a metric-compatible connection defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the Einstein summation convention , according to which one sums
over repeated upper and lower indices, has been used. These connection
coefficients are also known as the Christoffel symbols and define a
covariant derivative of tensors of arbitrary rank by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath represents the standard partial derivative with respect to
the coordinate @xmath . So for each upper index one adds a term
containing the connection coefficients and for each lower index a
corresponding term is subtracted. With the definition of a covariant
derivative we can finally write down the exact definition of a “straight
line” in a curved manifold. A geodesic is defined as the integral curve
of a vector field which is parallel transported along itself

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Based on the covariant derivative we can also give a precise definition
of curvature. For this purpose the Riemann tensor is defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If we use a coordinate basis, i.e. @xmath , this definition can be shown
to imply that for any vector field @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which is commonly interpreted by saying that a vector is changed by
being parallel transported around a closed loop unless the curvature
vanishes (see for example \citeNP Misner1973). In order to describe the
effect of the matter distribution on the geometry of spacetime one
defines the Ricci tensor as the contraction of the Riemann tensor @xmath
, where again the Einstein summation convention for repeated indices has
been used. The geometry and the matter are then related by the Einstein
field equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar and @xmath the energy momentum tensor .
The interaction between the matter distribution and the geometry of
spacetime can be summed up in the words of \citeANP Misner1973: “Space
acts on matter, telling it how to move. In turn, matter reacts back on
space, telling it how to curve” .
Although the field equations look rather neat in the compact notation we
have given above, this should not hide the fact that the Einstein tensor
@xmath is in fact a complicated function of the metric @xmath and its
first and second derivatives. Due to the symmetry of the Einstein tensor
and the energy momentum tensor the field equations represent 10 coupled,
non-linear partial differential equations, which written explicitly may
contain of the order of 100,000 terms in the general case. It therefore
came as quite a surprise when Karl Schwarzschild found a non-trivial,
analytic solution to these equations just some months after their
publication. Since then many analytic solutions have been found and a
whole branch of the studies of general relativity is concerned with
their classification. Enormous insight into the structure of general
relativity has been gained from these analytic solutions, but due to the
complexity of the field equations these solutions are normally idealized
and restricted by symmetry assumptions. In order to obtain accurate
descriptions of astrophysically relevant scenarios one may therefore
have to go beyond purely analytic studies. A particularly important area
of research connected with general relativity that has emerged in recent
years concerns the detection of gravitational waves . In analogy to the
prediction of electromagnetic waves by the Maxwell equations of
electrodynamics, the Einstein field equations admit radiative solutions
with a characteristic propagation speed given by the speed of light. Due
to the weak coupling constant of the gravitational interaction, which is
a factor of @xmath smaller than the electromagnetic coupling constant,
gravitational waves will have an extremely small effect on the movement
of matter and are correspondingly difficult to detect. If one considers
for example a metal bar of a length of several kilometres, estimates
have shown that the detection of gravitational waves requires one to
measure changes in length orders of magnitude smaller than the diameter
of an atomic nucleus. Even though attempts to detect gravitational
radiation go back to the work of Joe Weber in the early sixties, it is
only the recent advance of computer and laser technology that provides
scientists with a realistic chance of success. The current generation of
gravitational wave detectors GEO-600, LIGO, TAMA and VIRGO that have
been constructed for this purpose are complex multi-national
collaborations and have recently gone online or are expected to go
online in the near future. Due to the extreme smallness of the signals,
the accumulation of data over several years is expected to improve the
chances of a positive identification of signals from extra-galactic
sources.
Confidence in the existence of gravitational waves has been
significantly boosted by the Nobel prize winning discovery of the binary
neutron star system PSR1913 @xmath 16 ( \citeNP Hulse1975, \citeNP
Taylor1989). The spin-down of this system has been found to agree
remarkably well with the energy-loss predicted by general relativity due
to the emission of gravitational waves and is generally accepted as
indirect proof of the existence of gravitational radiation.
In order to simplify the enormous task of detecting gravitational waves,
it is vital to obtain information about the structure of the signals one
is looking for. It is necessary for this purpose to accurately model the
astrophysical scenarios that are considered likely sources of
gravitational waves and extract the corresponding signals from these
models. According to Birkhoff’s \citeyear Birkhoff1923 theorem the
Schwarzschild solution, which describes a static, spherically symmetric
vacuum spacetime, is the only spherically symmetric, asymptotically flat
solution to the Einstein vacuum field equations. As a consequence a
spherically symmetric spacetime, even if it contains a radially
pulsating object, will necessarily have an exterior static region and be
non-radiating. It is necessary, therefore, to use less restrictive
symmetry assumptions in the modelling of astrophysical sources of
gravitational waves. In fact the most promising sources of gravitational
waves currently under consideration are the in-spiralling and merger of
two compact bodies (neutron stars or black holes) and complicated
oscillation modes of neutron stars that increase in amplitude due to the
emission of gravitational waves by extracting energy from the rotation
of the star. Even though a great deal of information about these
scenarios has been gained from approximative studies, such as the
post-Newtonian formalism or the use of perturbative techniques , a
detailed simulation will require the solution of the Einstein equations
in three dimensions. The complicated structure of the corresponding
models in combination with the enormous advance in computer technology
has given rise to numerical relativity , the computer based generation
of solutions to Einstein’s field equations.
In order to numerically solve Einstein’s field equations it is necessary
to cast the equations in a form suitable for a computer based treatment.
Among the formulations proposed for this purpose by far the most
frequently applied is the canonical “3+1” decomposition of \citeN
Arnowitt1962, commonly referred to as the ADM formalism. In this
approach spacetime is decomposed into a 1-parameter family of
3-dimensional space-like hypersurfaces and the Einstein equations are
put into the form of an initial value problem. Initial data is provided
on one hypersurface in the form of the spatial 3-metric and its time
derivative and this data is evolved subject to certain constraints and
the specification of gauge choices. It is a known problem, however, that
the ADM formalism does not result in a strictly hyperbolic formulation
of the Einstein equations and in combination with its complicated
structure the stability properties of the ensuing finite differencing
schemes remain unclear. These difficulties have given rise to the
development of modified versions of the ADM formulation in which the
Einstein equations are written as a hyperbolic system. These and similar
modifications of the canonical ADM scheme have been successfully tested,
but an optimal “3+1” formulation has yet to be found and it may well be
possible that an optimal “3+1”-strategy depends sensitively on the
problem that needs to be solved.
An entirely different approach to the field equations is based on the
decomposition of spacetime into families of null-surfaces, the
characteristic surfaces of the propagation of gravitational radiation.
The Einstein field equations are again formulated as an initial value
problem and by virtue of a suitable choice of characteristic coordinates
one obtains a natural classification of the equations into evolution and
hypersurface equations. The characteristic initial value problem was
first formulated by \shortciteN Bondi1962 and \citeN Sachs1962 in order
to facilitate a rigorous analysis of gravitational radiation which is
properly described at null infinity only. It is a generic drawback of
“3+1” formulations that null infinity cannot be included in the
numerical grid by means of compactifying spacetime and instead outgoing
radiation boundary conditions need to be used at finite radius. Aside
from the non-rigorous analysis of gravitational radiation at finite
distances these artificial boundary conditions give rise to spurious
numerical reflections. A characteristic formulation resolves these
problems in a natural way but is itself vulnerable to the formation of
caustics in regions of strong curvature. It is these properties of “3+1”
formulations and the characteristic method that resulted in the idea of
Cauchy characteristic matching (CCM), i.e. the combination of a “3+1”
scheme applied in the interior and a characteristic formalism in the
outer vacuum region. This allows one to make use of the advantages of
both methods as we will illustrate in more detail below.
This thesis consists of four parts. First we will investigate the
Einstein field equations from the numerical point of view. This includes
a detailed description of the ADM and the characteristic Bondi-Sachs
formalism as well as a general discussion of finite difference methods
and numerical concepts such as stability and convergence. Section 3 is
concerned with Cauchy characteristic matching as a numerical tool to
solve the field equations. In particular we present a long term stable
CCM code for cylindrically symmetric vacuum spacetimes containing both
gravitational degrees of freedom. In section 4 we investigate the
behaviour of static and dynamic cosmic strings in cylindrical symmetry.
The numerical codes developed for the analysis are described together
with a detailed study of the oscillations of a cosmic string excited by
gravitational radiation. Finally in section 5 we present a fully
non-linear perturbative approach to study non-linear radial oscillations
of neutron stars. The perturbative formulation enables us to study
non-linear oscillations over a large amplitude range with high
precision. In an Eulerian formulation, however, the surface of the star
gives rise to numerical difficulties which leads us to investigate a
simplified neutron star model instead. The section is concluded with the
development of a Lagrangian formulation of dynamic spherically symmetric
stars in which the surface problems are resolved in a natural way. We
use the exact treatment of the surface for the analysis of shock
formation near the surface for initial data of low amplitude.

## 2 The field equations from a numerical point of view

We have already mentioned that the Einstein field equations have to be
put into an appropriate initial value form before they can be integrated
numerically. In this section we will describe in detail the “3+1”
decomposition of \citeN Arnowitt1962 and the characteristic formalism
introduced by \shortciteN Bondi1962 and \citeN Sachs1962. The section is
completed by a discussion of general numerical aspects and the
description of some finite differencing schemes used later in this work.

### 2.1 The “3+1” decomposition of spacetime

#### 2.1.1 The foliation

Following \citeN York1979 we start the discussion of the “3+1” formalism
with a 4-dimensional manifold @xmath with coordinates @xmath . Then a
suitable function @xmath defines a 1-parameter family of 3-dimensional
hypersurfaces by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We will refer to these hypersurfaces as @xmath . Geometrically they are
represented by the one-form @xmath . Next we consider a 3-parameter
family of curves threading the family of hypersurfaces. By threading we
mean

-   the curves do not intersect each other,

-   the tangent vectors of the curves are nowhere tangent to @xmath ,
    i.e. @xmath everywhere.

In this case the curves are parameterized by @xmath and the tangent
vector with respect to this parameterization is @xmath which satisfies
@xmath . This foliation is illustrated graphically in Fig. 1 . We are
now in the position to construct basis vector fields in the manifold
@xmath . For each slice @xmath we choose three vector fields @xmath , so
that they are linearly independent at each point of @xmath and satisfy
the condition @xmath . Then at each point @xmath of @xmath , the set of
vectors @xmath is a basis of the tangent space @xmath at this particular
point. We note that no use of a “metric” has been made so far. All we
have done is to foliate @xmath into a 1-parameter family of
3-dimensional slices and to choose suitable basis vectors at each point.

#### 2.1.2 Gauge freedom

Without a metric, the concepts of length and orthogonality are not
defined. It will, therefore, be an essential step in the construction of
a metric to give meaning to these notions. We let be a symmetric rank
two tensor field, choose a vector field with @xmath and demand

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive definite metric inside the hypersurfaces
@xmath . At this stage the 3-metric is unknown and below we shall see
that its components are the dynamic variables of the ADM “3+1” scheme
and thus need to be specified on the initial slice (subject to certain
constraints). It is important to note the minus sign in Eq. ( 2.2 ). It
is this choice in combination with the positive definiteness of the
3-metric which determines the spatial nature of the 3-dimensional
hypersurfaces and the time-like character of the normal vector . To what
extent we have now specified the metric will become clearer if we use
the basis @xmath . Furthermore we will introduce the lapse function
@xmath and the shift vector @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
              @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Then the components of the metric become

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               (2.7)
     @xmath               (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which corresponds to the canonical “3+1” line element

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From this equation we can see that the metric component @xmath will be
negative unless a large shift vector is chosen. In the remainder of this
discussion we will assume a sufficiently small shift vector and
therefore consider @xmath the time-like coordinate. In contrast the
positive definite nature of the 3-metric implies that the @xmath are
space-like coordinates.
In order to investigate the remaining gauge freedom we will now consider
the implications of a different choice of lapse @xmath and shift .
According to Eq. ( 2.5 ) such a different choice would result in a
modified relation between and @xmath , i.e. a different family of curves
threading the foliation. This, however, merely corresponds to a
coordinate transformation (relabelling of the points in the manifold)
and we see that lapse and shift represent the coordinate or gauge
freedom of general relativity. They can in principle be chosen
arbitrarily without affecting the resulting spacetime.
The lapse can be interpreted as the proper time measured by an Eulerian
observer, that is an observer moving with 4-velocity n . If we consider
two hypersurfaces @xmath , @xmath , the difference in coordinate time is
by definition @xmath . An illustrative way of describing this result is
to say that @xmath points from @xmath to @xmath . On the other hand we
know from Eq. ( 2.6 ) that @xmath . So the vector connecting the two
hypersurfaces in the normal direction is @xmath . The proper length of
this vector is given by @xmath and the proper time experienced by
travelling along the integral curve of from @xmath to @xmath is @xmath .
In this sense, the lapse allows us to measure the length of vectors
pointing outside the hypersurfaces. In numerical relativity the lapse
can be used to control the advance of proper time in different regions
of spacetime as the numerical code is evolved into the future. Suitable
choices for @xmath and will be discussed in section 2.1.6 .
The shift vector on the other hand introduces the concept of
orthogonality relative to the spatial hypersurfaces @xmath . For this
purpose it is necessary to define the scalar product between the spatial
basis vectors @xmath and vectors pointing out of the hypersurface. The
shift vector which is given by @xmath introduces this scalar product. As
a result @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath in the sense that its scalar
product with any vector tangent to @xmath vanishes. We can then use the
lapse function to rescale this vector to unit length and thus recover
Eq. ( 2.3 ).

#### 2.1.3 Extrinsic curvature and the 3-metric

Even though we have determined a basis adapted to our foliation of
spacetime, it is convenient to describe the Cauchy initial value problem
in a general basis. Following \citeN York1979, we introduce the
projection operator @xmath and a shorthand notation for the projection
of a tensor of arbitrary rank @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We can use this definition to write the 3-metric as the projection of
the 4-metric onto @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which in the “3+1” basis reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The 3-metric completely describes the intrinsic properties of the
3-dimensional manifold @xmath . In particular, the connection on @xmath
which for a vector tangent to the slice is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with obvious extension to general tensors, turns out to be the
Christoffel connection of @xmath if we restrict ourselves to spatial
quantities and use the “3+1” basis @xmath . Furthermore we define the
3-dimensional Riemann tensor @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, this amounts to the usual definition in terms of @xmath if the
“3+1” basis is used.
In order to describe the embedding of @xmath into @xmath , we define the
extrinsic curvature

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This can be shown to be equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lie-derivative along the unit normal vector field .
In particular this equation implies that is a symmetric tensor. The
effect of a non-vanishing extrinsic curvature is schematically
illustrated in Fig. 2 by the following two examples.

-   At different points of @xmath , the unit normal vector n points in
    different directions because of the embedding: @xmath .

-   Due to the extrinsic curvature an observer moving along from one
    hypersurface to another observes an increase or decrease in distance
    between points with fixed spatial coordinates. This corresponds to a
    change of the 3-metric : @xmath .

In section 2.1.5 we will see that the extrinsic curvature and the
3-metric are the dynamic variables of the ADM scheme and need to be
specified on an initial hypersurface @xmath . With an appropriate choice
of lapse function and shift vector we will then be able to evolve the
4-metric over some region of the manifold.

#### 2.1.4 The projections of the Riemann tensor

In order to derive the equations that will finally determine the
evolution of the metric, we follow \citeN Stachel1962 and look at the
projections of the Riemann tensor. Given the 3-dimensional hypersurfaces
and the unit normal vector field there are three non-trivial projections
of @xmath :

-   all four components are projected onto @xmath : @xmath ,

-   three times onto @xmath , once onto n : @xmath ,

-   twice onto @xmath , twice onto n : @xmath .

These are all non-trivial projections we can construct since projecting
three or more components onto n yields zero because of the symmetry
properties of . It is a remarkable fact that the first two projections
are entirely determined by the initial data according to the
Gauss-Codacci equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations determine 14 of the 20 independent components of the
4-dimensional Riemann tensor. The remaining 6 components are contained
in the third projection of according to the Mainardi equation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If we assume that the 3-metric and the extrinsic curvature are given on
some initial slice we are able to derive 14 of the 20 components of the
4-dimensional Riemann tensor from these initial data. The Lie derivative
of the extrinsic curvature @xmath , however, is not known at this stage
and as a consequence we cannot determine the remaining 6 components of
@xmath nor can we evolve the extrinsic curvature and the 3-metric
forward in time. We therefore need an additional source of information
that relates the Lie-derivative @xmath , i.e. the time derivative of the
extrinsic curvature, to the initial data. In general relativity this
extra information is given in the form of the field equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the Ricci tensor @xmath and the Ricci scalar @xmath describe the
geometry and the energy-momentum tensor @xmath is determined by the
distribution of matter in spacetime. The terms on the left hand side of
this equation are often combined into the Einstein tensor @xmath .

#### 2.1.5 The role of the field equations

It is important to note that the field equations have not been used so
far. We have seen that the initial data and determine a substantial part
of the 4-dimensional Riemann tensor, but 6 components, or put another
way, the second time derivatives of the 3-metric remain unknown. It is
Einstein’s field equations that allow us to express the undetermined
projections of the Riemann tensor @xmath in terms of the other
projections @xmath and @xmath and the matter distribution on @xmath .
That allows us to calculate the 4-dimensional Riemann tensor @xmath on
the initial slice @xmath . Furthermore we can calculate the time
derivatives of and and evolve the variables onto the next slice @xmath .
Then the process is repeated on each new slice and eventually we have
(in principle) determined the geometry of the whole spacetime. Lapse and
shift provide the remaining information for the components of the
4-metric . Before we look at the field equations in more detail,
however, we have to turn our attention to the matter distribution.

a) The energy-momentum tensor
We have already mentioned that the energy-momentum tensor represents the
matter distribution in spacetime. We illustrate this by considering the
components of in a coordinate system @xmath . One can then interprete
the component @xmath as the @xmath -component of flux of @xmath
-momentum as measured by an observer at rest in the coordinate system.
In the case of spatial components this is commonly referred to as the
@xmath -component of the “stress”. The concept extends to the time
component, so that @xmath describes the flux of @xmath -momentum across
surfaces @xmath which is just the density of @xmath -momentum. As a
special case @xmath represents the energy density. Similarly @xmath is
the energy flux across surfaces @xmath . It can be shown that the energy
flux @xmath is equal to the momentum density @xmath and that the stress
components @xmath are symmetric (see for example \shortciteNP
Misner1973). As a consequence the energy momentum tensor is symmetric:
@xmath .
Below we will see that projecting the Einstein equations in the same way
as the Riemann tensor will naturally divide the equations into two
different groups, the constraints and the evolution equations. In the
previous section we have studied the projections of the Riemann tensor,
which determines the left hand side of the field equations ( 2.24 ),
onto and the hypersurfaces @xmath . It remains therefore to calculate
the corresponding projections of the right hand side of the equations
given by the energy-momentum tensor. For this purpose we define the
energy and momentum density and the stress tensor by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The evolution of the matter variables follows from the conservation of
energy and momentum @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to determine the time derivatives of S extra information is
required which usually comes in the form of an equation of state.

b) The evolution equations
With the projections of the Riemann tensor given by Eqs. ( 2.21 )-( 2.23
) and those of the energy-momentum tensor given by Eqs. ( 2.25 )-( 2.27
) we are now in a position to project the field equations onto @xmath
and . First we consider the projection of both components onto @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting the projections of and and solving for the time derivative of
, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the evolution equations for the 3-metric are simply the definition
of the extrinsic curvature. It is this set of equations which forms the
core of the ADM-evolution of the metric. Given appropriate initial data
on some initial slice @xmath for the extrinsic curvature @xmath and the
3-metric @xmath we can evolve these functions into the future. The
4-dimensional Riemann tensor and thus the geometry of the spacetime is
determined at any time according to Eqs. ( 2.21 )-( 2.23 ). The
appearance of Greek indices in the evolution equations should not hide
the fact that there are only six components each for the extrinsic
curvature and the 3-metric . This becomes clear when we use the adapted
basis @xmath in which case all Greek indices can be replaced by Latin
indices in Eqs. ( 2.31 ), ( 2.32 ). We can also see then that there are
no evolution equations for @xmath or, put another way, in this basis the
field equations do not contain second time derivatives of the @xmath .
In this sense the problem is under-determined.

c) The constraint equations
If we consider the remaining projections of the field equations, we find
that they can be expressed in terms of the initial data only

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations impose conditions that need to be satisfied by the
hypersurface data for all values of @xmath . They are called the energy
or Hamiltonian constraint ( 2.33 ) and the momentum constraints ( 2.34
). In this sense, the problem is over-determined. However, it can be
shown that by virtue of the contracted Bianchi identities @xmath the
constraints are satisfied for all values of @xmath if they are satisfied
by the initial data.

d) The initial data problem
The problem we are facing now is to find initial data for and that
satisfy the constraint equations. A systematic approach to solving this
problem is given in \citeN OMurchadha1974. We will illustrate their
method in the vacuum case with “maximal slicing” (cf. section 2.1.6 ),
where the vanishing of @xmath leads to a decoupling of the constraint
equations. \citeANP OMurchadha1974 start by introducing a conformal
3-metric and extrinsic curvature according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the case of maximal slicing the constraint equations can then be
written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative with respect to @xmath and
@xmath is the conformal Laplace operator. The conformal transformation
of the 3-dimensional curvature scalar is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can further split the traceless @xmath according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the transverse traceless part of the conformal extrinsic
curvature @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the vector @xmath is to be determined by Eq. ( 2.38 ) which in the
case of maximal slicing can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In this formulation of the initial data problem the conformal 3-metric
@xmath and the transverse traceless part @xmath are regarded as given.
Then the momentum constraint ( 2.40 ) has to be solved to obtain @xmath
and the conformal factor @xmath results from the energy constraint (
2.37 ). By means of the conformal decomposition we have thus isolated
@xmath and @xmath as the four variables determined by the constraint
equations on the initial hypersurface.
Much of the work that has gone into the calculation of initial data has
been based on the conformally flat approach of \citeN Bowen1980. In this
approach one assumes the spatial 3-metric to be conformally flat, so
that @xmath . However, recent work has cast doubt on the suitability of
this approach in the case of black hole initial data. The difficulties
arise from the fact that there exist no conformally flat space-like
slices of the Kerr spacetime ( \citeNP Garat2000). The initial data
resulting from the conformally flat approach will therefore represent
distorted Kerr black holes which generally radiate off a burst of
gravitational waves which contaminates the evolution of binary black
holes or perturbed Kerr spacetimes (“close limit” calculations). Recent
efforts have therefore gone into the calculation of more realistic
initial data which is not based on the conformally flat approach (see
for example \citeNP Marronetti2000).
A comprehensive description of the general initial value problem and
more details on solving the constraint equations can be found in \citeN
York1983.

#### 2.1.6 The kinematic degrees of freedom: lapse and shift

In the previous section we have seen that there are no evolution
equations for the components @xmath of the metric if we use the adapted
basis @xmath . The line element ( 2.10 ), however, shows that the @xmath
are completely determined by the lapse @xmath and the shift vector and
these can be chosen arbitrarily without affecting the metric.
Nevertheless the choice has a substantial impact on the performance of a
numerical scheme. For example a poor choice of coordinates can result in
a code which runs into a singularity before interesting results are
computed. A large number of gauge choices have been suggested in the
past, some of which we will describe below. A more comprehensive
discussion can be found in \citeN Piran1983.

The lapse function

(a) Geodesic slicing
In geodesic slicing @xmath is set to 1 everywhere. This means that the
coordinate time is identical to the proper time of Eulerian observers.
Although this slicing condition appears to be quite natural it does not
lead to any significant simplifications of the equations and, worse, it
is singularity seeking. We illustrate this behaviour in the case of the
Schwarzschild spacetime in Kruskal coordinates ( \citeNP Smarr1978), by
considering an Eulerian observer close to the black hole. An Eulerian
observer does not initially move in the spatial hypersurface and will
fall into the singularity on a time scale @xmath , where @xmath is the
mass of the black hole. Choosing the orthogonal time of an Eulerian
observer as coordinate time will therefore cause the code to crash on a
coordinate time scale of @xmath . Far away from the black hole, however,
where Eulerian proper time is close to the proper time of an
astronomical observer we would basically like the code to advance up to
@xmath . One way to accomplish this is to slow down the advance of
proper time near the formation of a singularity as illustrated in Fig. 3
. This, however, implies a different choice for the lapse function
@xmath .
An alternative way of avoiding the code to encounter singularities
consists in cutting off the singularity from the calculation assuming
that it is hidden inside an apparent horizon and thus no information is
lost in the excision ( \citeNP Thornburg1987, \citeNP Seidel1992). This
approach has attracted a lot of attention in recent years and has been
successfully implemented in the evolution of black holes (see
\shortciteNP Alcubierre2001 for example). In this work, however,

we will not make use of these methods and therefore restrict this
discussion to conventional techniques for avoiding singularities.

(b) Maximal slicing
The restrictions arising from geodesic slicing were recognised long ago
by \citeN Lichnerowicz1944 who showed that a much more suitable choice
for @xmath is obtained if one requires that the trace of the extrinsic
curvature vanishes: @xmath . This choice has been termed maximal slicing
since the volume of an arbitrary region @xmath of a hypersurface @xmath
will be maximal with respect to all other hypersurfaces that are
identical with @xmath outside @xmath if @xmath (see for example \citeNP
York1979). If we insert the energy constraint ( 2.33 ) into the
evolution equation for @xmath [obtained from Eq. ( 2.31 )] we obtain the
following condition for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

A number of useful properties have made maximal slicing one of the most
popular choices in numerical relativity.

-   It avoids singularities.

-   The constraint equations in the initial data problem are decoupled
    (cf. section 2.1.5 ).

-   It leads to some simplification of the evolution equations.

The major drawback is that we have to solve the elliptic partial
differential equation (PDE) ( 2.43 ) on each time slice.

(c) Hyperbolic slicing
Hyperbolic slicing is a generalised version of maximal slicing. The
trace of the extrinsic curvature is required to be constant but not
necessarily to vanish: @xmath . The major difference is that the
hypersurfaces asymptotically extend to future or past null infinity,
depending on the sign of @xmath , instead of spatial infinity as in the
case of maximal slicing. This property makes it an interesting choice
for the analysis of gravitational radiation.

(d) Polar slicing
Another slicing condition where the lapse function is determined by
enforcing a condition on the extrinsic curvature is polar slicing (see
\citeNP Bardeen1983 for a detailed discussion). Using polar coordinates
@xmath , one demands that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This condition leads to a parabolic PDE for the lapse function @xmath
which, in general, is easier to solve than the elliptic PDE that appears
for example in maximal slicing. Furthermore polar slicing is strongly
singularity avoiding as we will illustrate in the evolution of a
spherically symmetric dust sphere in Lagrangian gauge and polar slicing
in section 5.4 . The main drawback of polar slicing is the irregular
behaviour of the lapse function in the non-spherically symmetric case (
\citeNP Bardeen1983). This problem can be overcome by using an
alternative condition, for example maximal slicing, near the origin and
implementing a gradual transition to polar slicing outside a finite
radius @xmath .

(e) Harmonic slicing
In harmonic slicing one requires that @xmath is a harmonic time
coordinate

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the lapse function @xmath this condition results in
equations similar to those of maximal slicing

  harmonic sl.   maximal sl.
  -------------- -------------
  @xmath ,       @xmath ,
  @xmath ,       @xmath .

Harmonic slicing is another singularity avoiding condition and was used
by \citeN Bona1992 to write the Einstein equations as a hyperbolic
system of balance laws. The same authors and coworkers have shown that
many other slicing conditions suit this purpose as well ( \shortciteNP
Bona1997).

(f) approximate coordinate conditions, driver conditions
The suggestion of so-called driver conditions by \shortciteN
Balakrishna1996 arises from the fact that one is normally interested in
the ensuing properties of the numerical evolution rather than the exact
shape of the lapse (or shift) function. In this respect one has to note
that the field equations are intrinsically coordinate independent and
thus there is no need to implement a specific coordinate condition
exactly if an approximate implementation leads to a stable evolution.
\shortciteANP Balakrishna1996 illustrate this effect in the case of
maximal slicing @xmath , where the important property is the vanishing
of the trace of the extrinsic curvature. They demonstrate how this
condition is actually satisfied with higher numerical accuracy if one
imposes the “ -driver” slicing condition @xmath where @xmath is a
positive constant. This condition will result in an exponential decay in
any deviation from @xmath , whereas the original implementation of
maximal slicing has no such built-in correction mechanism. The lapse
function @xmath is determined in this case by an elliptic equation
similar to Eq. ( 2.43 ) in maximal slicing. The only difference is the
appearance of the term @xmath on the right hand side of the equation.
\shortciteANP Balakrishna1996 demonstrate the superior performance of
the “ @xmath -driver” condition in the cases of flat space and a
self-gravitating scalar field.
A related proposal by \shortciteANP Balakrishna1996 concerning elliptic
coordinate conditions in general is also based on the suitability of
approximate implementations of coordinate conditions. Instead of solving
the elliptic equation directly, which in general is computationally
expensive, they suggest “evolving the elliptic equations” by rewriting
them in parabolic form which is similar to the relaxation method of
solving elliptic PDEs (see for example \shortciteNP Press1989).
We have listed these methods under the heading of slicing conditions,
but the same principles apply to the shift vector.

(g) New slicing conditions used in black hole evolutions
In recent work on 3-dimensional black hole excision \shortciteN
Alcubierre2001 have achieved substantial progress in terms of stability
and accuracy by using a new type of evolution equation for the lapse
function in combination with “Gamma freezing” conditions for the shift
vector (see below). \shortciteANP Alcubierre2001 propose to evolve the
lapse @xmath according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive function of @xmath which they normally set to
@xmath . The key feature of this choice is that the trace of the
extrinsic curvature becomes time independent for the final state of a
stationary black hole (see their paper for details).

The shift vector

(a) Normal coordinates
In normal coordinates the shift vector is set to zero

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which implies that the coordinate vector @xmath is normal to the
hypersurfaces @xmath . Normal coordinates have the advantage that they
do not become singular as long as the hypersurfaces have a regular
intrinsic and extrinsic geometry ( \citeNP Bardeen1983b). They do not,
however, facilitate a substantial simplification of the field equations.

(b) Minimal shear gauge
The minimal shear condition suggested by \citeN Smarr1978 leads to
elliptic equations for the components of @xmath . \citeANP Smarr1978
find this gauge choice particularly useful for the description of
gravity in the wave zone. The major drawbacks are the complexity of the
elliptic equations for @xmath and the fact that it barely simplifies the
field equations.

(c) Simplifying gauge choices
This is actually a whole class of gauge choices. The idea is to impose
algebraic relations on the metric components on the initial slice

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and to choose the shift vector so that these algebraic relations hold on
all future hypersurfaces. The three components of the shift vector allow
us to impose three relations of this kind. In particular, we can choose
up to three metric components to vanish identically. Solving the
resulting equations for @xmath , however, is non-trivial and it cannot
even be guaranteed that such a solution does exist. Popular examples of
this gauge choice are

-    Diagonal gauge , where the 3-metric is diagonalized.

-    Radial gauge , which employs polar coordinates @xmath and imposes
    the conditions @xmath and @xmath . Radial gauge simplifies the field
    equations significantly and results in parabolic equations for the
    @xmath .

-    Isothermal gauge is similar to radial gauge, except that the third
    condition on the metric components is now @xmath . The
    simplifications are not as substantial as in radial gauge, but
    isothermal gauge can be used for a more general class of physical
    scenarios.

(d) “Gamma freezing conditions”
We have already mentioned the substantial improvements that \shortciteN
Alcubierre2001 have achieved in their 3-dimensional black hole
evolutions using new gauge conditions. In combination with the slicing
condition mentioned above under (g) they relate the shift vector to the
evolution of the conformal connection functions @xmath introduced by
\citeN Baumgarte1999 and \citeN Shibata1995. In their simulations they
use a condition of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the initial ADM mass of the system and
@xmath is the conformal factor introduced in the discussion of the
initial value problem in section 2.1.5 . \shortciteANP Alcubierre2001
call these conditions “Gamma freezing” because they are related to the
elliptic operator for @xmath in the “Gamma freezing condition” @xmath .

A more detailed description of different gauge choices can be found in
\citeN Piran1983.

#### 2.1.7 The current state of “3+1” formulations: recent progress and
limitations

The standard “3+1” decomposition we have described above was first
formulated by \citeN Arnowitt1962. In the course of time numerous codes
have been developed on the basis of this formulation. The structure of
the ADM evolution equations ( 2.31 ), ( 2.32 ), however, has been a
constant cause of concern. It is well known that these equations do not
satisfy any known hyperbolicity condition and the stability properties
of the corresponding numerical implementations remain obscure. In the
course of the 1990s attention shifted towards modifying the canonical
ADM-formalism in order to obtain strictly hyperbolic formulations of the
Einstein equations (see for example \shortciteNP Bona1995, \citeNP
Friedrich1996, \shortciteNP Anderson1997). The question to what extent
these formulations result in a superior numerical performance and thus
whether the difficulties encountered in the ADM formalism are entirely
due to a possible non-hyperbolicity has not yet been answered.
An alternative modification of the ADM-formulation which has attracted a
great deal of attention recently is based on a conformal decomposition
of the original ADM-equations ( \citeNP Shibata1995, \citeNP
Baumgarte1999). In this “BSSN”-formulation one starts with a conformal
transformation analogous to that used in the initial-value problem in
section 2.1.5 (d) . The 3-metric @xmath is decomposed into the conformal
metric @xmath and the conformal factor @xmath according to Eq. ( 2.35 ).
Similarly the extrinsic curvature is split up into the trace @xmath and
the conformal traceless extrinsic curvature @xmath . The set of
fundamental variables is completed by the conformal connection
coefficients @xmath . In terms of these variables \citeANP Baumgarte1999
have obtained significantly improved stability properties as compared
with the standard ADM-equations. The “BSSN”-formalism has also been
successfully implemented by \shortciteNP Alcubierre2001.
Significant progress in “3+1” numerical relativity has been achieved by
the implementation of new slicing conditions and shift vectors in
3-dimensional evolutions of black holes ( \shortciteNP Alcubierre2001).
We have included these new gauge conditions in the list in the previous
section.
In spite of the progress achieved in recent years, there remain some
difficulties intrinsic to any “3+1” formulation. These are generally
concerned with the restriction to a finite grid in numerical
computations. A lot of interest in the modelling of complicated
astrophysical scenarios in the framework of general relativity is
motivated by the advent of highly sensitive gravitational wave
detectors. One of the fundamental requirements of a numerical simulation
is therefore the extraction of gravitational waves and the generation of
predicted gravitational wave templates. It is a well known fact,
however, that gravitational waves are unambiguously defined at null
infinity only. \citeN Penrose1963 has shown how it is possible to
describe infinity in terms of finite coordinate values which enables one
to incorporate null infinity in a finite coordinate grid. In numerical
relativity, however, this “compactification” is only practical if the
coordinates are adapted to the characteristics of the underlying
equations and it is not entirely clear how to implement this technique
in “3+1” formulations. Consequently approximating techniques are used to
interprete gravitational waves at finite radii. Furthermore outgoing
radiation boundary conditions need to be specified at the outer grid
boundaries. These will normally give rise to spurious reflections which
contaminate the numerical evolution.
The difficulties concerning the interpretation of gravitational waves in
“3+1” formulations have been known for a long time and motivated the
development of alternative decompositions of spacetime as early as the
early sixties ( \shortciteNP Bondi1962, \shortciteNP Sachs1962). In the
next section we will discuss this characteristic formulation in more
detail. A generic problem of this approach, however, arises from the
fact that light rays are deflected by matter. In regions of strong
curvature the focusing of light rays may give rise to so-called
caustics. If that is the case the characteristic foliation of spacetime
which is based on the null-geodesics will break down. Regions of strong
curvature are generally restricted to small regions around the
astrophysical sources. In this sense the “3+1” and the characteristic
formalisms complement each other which has given rise to the idea of
Cauchy-characteristic matching , i.e. the use of a “3+1” scheme for an
interior region containing the astrophysical source and a characteristic
method in the outer vacuum region including null infinity. In section 3
we will discuss these ideas in more detail and develop a
Cauchy-characteristic matching code in cylindrical symmetry.

### 2.2 The characteristic initial value problem

In section 2.1 we have seen how one can decompose spacetime into a
1-parameter family of 3-dimensional space-like hypersurfaces. An
alternative way to foliate spacetime is based on the characteristic
surfaces of the vacuum field equations which can be shown to be the null
surfaces of the underlying spacetime ( \citeNP Pirani1965).
Gravitational waves will as a matter of course travel along null
geodesics and the characteristic approach is thus particularly suitable
for the analysis of gravitational waves. It is this property which
provided the main motivation for the ground breaking work by \shortciteN
Bondi1962 and \citeN Sachs1962 which we will follow in our description
of the characteristic formalism. In this discussion we will consider the
vacuum case of the field equations @xmath . In the case of
Cauchy-characteristic matching this is normally no restriction since
matter is assumed to be present in the inner Cauchy region only.

#### 2.2.1 Characteristic coordinates

We start our discussion with a 4-dimensional manifold @xmath and assume
that @xmath is equipped with a metric of signature +2. In the
Bondi-Sachs formalism the gauge freedom of general relativity is used to
impose the following conditions on the coordinates.

-   It is assumed that there exists a scalar function @xmath with the
    property @xmath , which means that the surfaces @xmath are null
    surfaces. Such null surfaces will always exist if the field
    equations admit wave-like solutions since the corresponding
    characteristic surfaces can be shown to be null ( \citeNP
    Pirani1965).

-   A normal direction to these surfaces is defined by @xmath . It
    follows that @xmath and @xmath , i.e. the tangent curves of are
    null-geodesics. They are normal to the surfaces @xmath [any vector
    in that surface satisfies @xmath ] and lie in these surfaces (
    @xmath ).

-   In order to eliminate coordinate irregularities, the normal vector
    @xmath is assumed to satisfy the conditions

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath can be interpreted as the expansion and @xmath as the
    shear of the congruences of null geodesics.

-   The next step consists of labelling the geodesics. For this purpose
    we will use standard angular coordinates @xmath and @xmath . These
    can always be chosen so that

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    The first condition implies that the coordinates @xmath and @xmath
    are constant along a geodesic and the second condition ensures a
    non-degenerate 2-dimensional volume element @xmath , where upper
    case Latin indices run from 2 to 3 corresponding to the coordinates
    @xmath and @xmath .

-   Finally the null geodesics labelled by @xmath are parametrized by a
    function @xmath . In order to obtain a regular parametrization it is
    necessary that the Jacobian matrix of @xmath vanish nowhere. The
    conditions imposed in (3) on the expansion and shear ensure that
    this will be the case. Bondi and Sachs further require the
    coordinate @xmath to satisfy the relation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

    As a consequence the area of the 2-spheres defined by @xmath is
    given by @xmath and @xmath is the so-called areal radius. This
    condition corresponds to the radial gauge condition discussed in
    section 2.1.6 .

The coordinate lines @xmath and @xmath are schematically illustrated in
Fig. 4 in the case of a time-like @xmath and a null vector @xmath .

#### 2.2.2 The Bondi-Sachs line element

With the coordinate conditions of the previous paragraph the gauge
freedom of general relativity has been used to constrain the form of the
metric. This process is analogous to specifying lapse and shift in the
“3+1” formalism. The result can be shown to be the Bondi-Sachs line
element

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where upper case Latin indices again run from 2 to 3 and @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that the metric as a geometric object is still completely
undetermined. This is represented by the six unknowns @xmath which
correspond to the six unknown functions @xmath in the “3+1”
decomposition. We shall see below that the characteristic formulation
leads to a natural classification of the field equations and the two
gravitational degrees of freedom are contained in the functions @xmath
and @xmath . The remaining quantities are determined on each
hypersurface irrespective of their history.

#### 2.2.3 Introduction of a tetrad

In order to classify the field equations, it is convenient to introduce
basis vectors @xmath , where is a real and @xmath are complex
null-vectors and is the null-vector field introduced above. These
vectors are required to satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If we use the complex conjugate of the last equation we further obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the corresponding one forms the metric can now be written as

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

We note that in spite of the use of complex vectors eventually all
results will be real. In fact if we write the complex vector as @xmath ,
it follows directly from the conditions imposed on , that and are
space-like vectors orthogonal to the null-vectors and . We conclude that
represents the null-surfaces @xmath , determines a unique null-direction
out of these hypersurfaces and the complex vector defines two spatial
directions orthogonal to both and . The only remaining freedom is the
phase of which is normally fixed by relating @xmath to the shear @xmath
(see \shortciteANP Sachs1962 for details). The benefit of this
particular basis is that it provides a convenient way to create linear
combinations of the vacuum field equations that can be classified in a
natural way.

#### 2.2.4 The field equations

We have already mentioned that the two gravitational degrees of freedom
are contained in the metric functions @xmath and @xmath . It is a
remarkable property of the characteristic formalism that it naturally
leads to a classification of the field equations which reflects the
isolation of the gravitational degrees of freedom. As originally shown
by Bondi the field equations can be grouped into

-   6 main equations:
    (a) 4 hypersurface equations: @xmath ,
    (b) 2 evolution equations: @xmath ,

-   1 trivial equation: @xmath ,

-   3 supplementary equations: @xmath .

The reasoning for this classification is as follows. If we suppose that
the main equations are satisfied, it can be shown that

-   The trivial equation is satisfied: @xmath .

-   @xmath vanishes along a null-geodesic (integral curve of ) either
    everywhere or nowhere.

-   If all equations except @xmath are satisfied, it follows from the
    Bianchi identities that @xmath .

We conclude that the trivial equation is an algebraic consequence of the
main equations. The supplementary equations are satisfied everywhere if
they are satisfied at some value @xmath and the main equations are
satisfied. As far as the main equations are concerned, we note that

-   the hypersurface equations do not contain any derivatives of the
    metric functions with respect to @xmath ,

-   the evolution equations contain the derivatives @xmath and @xmath
    (although in several forms, e.g. @xmath ).

#### 2.2.5 Boundary conditions

The boundary conditions are determined by the requirements that

-   the spacetime has Euclidean topology at large distance from the
    source,

-   the spacetime is asymptotically flat,

-   gravitational radiation obeys an outgoing radiation boundary
    condition.

As shown by \citeN Sachs1962 these requirements are necessarily
satisfied if the following boundary conditions are imposed.

-   For any choice of @xmath one can go to the limit @xmath along each
    ray.

-   For this @xmath and any choice of @xmath we have
    @xmath
    @xmath .

-   For @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath all metric components and
    quantities of interest can be expressed as a series in @xmath with
    at most a finite pole at @xmath .

#### 2.2.6 Initial data and the integration of the field equations

The evolution of the metric variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath can be split up into four steps. In the discussion of these
steps it will become obvious what type of initial data we need to
specify in order to start the evolution of the metric. We have
graphically illustrated the integration of the field equations from time
slice @xmath to @xmath in Fig. 5 .

1.) We start by providing initial data for @xmath and @xmath on a
hypersurface @xmath . This means that we need to specify two functions
of @xmath .

2.) Next the hypersurface equations are integrated along @xmath to
obtain @xmath , @xmath , @xmath on the initial hypersurface. For this
purpose we need to specify three functions of integration @xmath . A
potential fourth function of integration for @xmath is fixed by the
boundary condition @xmath .

3.) We use the evolution equations in order to calculate @xmath and
@xmath on the future hypersurface @xmath . The evolution equations
contain the @xmath -derivatives of @xmath and @xmath in the form @xmath
, @xmath . Consequently the solution requires in principle the
integration over @xmath to obtain the corresponding @xmath -derivatives.
For this purpose we need to specify two functions of @xmath as functions
of integration. These functions are commonly introduced as the complex
news function @xmath . Below we will illustrate the meaning of news
function in more detail.

4.) Finally, the supplementary equations are used to evolve the @xmath
onto the hypersurface @xmath .

We complete the description of the characteristic formalism with an
explanation why the news function needs to be specified for all values
of @xmath . For this purpose we consider the path of an object, e.g. the
earth, in spacetime as illustrated in Fig. 6 . Even if we have complete
data on the past light cone @xmath , we can still not determine the
future of the earth. There may be waves outside @xmath , that have not
yet reached the planet. @xmath provides this extra information and is,
therefore, called the news function. This is to be contrasted with the
“3+1” decomposition discussed above, where the initial data on a slice
@xmath

completely determines the evolution up to the specification of boundary
conditions.
In sections 3 and 4 we will use a similar characteristic formulation
with a different gauge choice to evolve cylindrically symmetric vacuum
spacetimes and dynamic cosmic strings. The presence of matter in the
latter case does not result in any significant complications compared
with the vacuum case described in this section.

### 2.3 Numerical methods

In order to numerically solve a set of differential equations, the
equations have to be cast into a form suitable for a computer based
treatment. The most common method used for this purpose is finite
differencing which replaces derivatives with finite difference
expressions and thus converts differential equations into large sets of
algebraic equations. Alternative methods, as for example spectral or
finite element methods have been used successfully in various cases. In
this thesis, however, we will use finite difference methods throughout
and therefore restrict our description to this approach. In particular,
we will concentrate on finite differencing in the case of two
dimensions, time and one spatial dimension, which we will label by the
coordinates @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 The numerical grid

Given a system of differential equations, our aim is to determine the
solution @xmath in a subset @xmath . In finite differencing the domain
of @xmath is replaced by a set of discrete grid points as illustrated in
Fig. 7 and the numerical scheme will provide values for @xmath at these
grid points only. If information of the function @xmath is required
between the grid points we will derive the corresponding values from
interpolation.
Throughout this work, we will only use uniform grids which means that
the distance @xmath between neighbouring grid points is independent of
position @xmath and time @xmath . At any given value of @xmath the
interval @xmath will therefore be replaced by the set of points @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In section 5 we will demonstrate how a coordinate transformation to a
new spatial coordinate @xmath can be used to simulate an inhomogeneous
grid in terms of the original coordinate @xmath

without abandoning the concept of a uniform grid.
For the presentation of finite difference expressions it is convenient
to introduce a short hand notation for the function values at the grid
points. For this purpose we define @xmath . If the meaning is obvious we
may omit either index.

#### 2.3.2 Derivatives and finite differences

We describe the approximation of derivatives with finite differences in
the case of spatial derivatives. The same ideas apply to time
derivatives. Suppose a function @xmath is given at positions @xmath for
fixed time and we want to calculate @xmath at @xmath . For this purpose
we expand @xmath in a Taylor series about @xmath which allows us to
express @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in terms of @xmath and its
derivatives at @xmath . Next the derivative that needs to be calculated
is expressed as a linear combination of the function values at
neighbouring grid points. The required finite difference expression is
then obtained from inserting the Taylor expansions for the @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and comparing the coefficients on both sides of the
equations. The number of grid points that needs to be included in this
calculation depends on the degree of the derivative and the order of
accuracy to be achieved.
We illustrate these ideas by calculating the second derivative @xmath
with second order accuracy. We assume that the function @xmath is known
at the grid points @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . By Taylor
expanding @xmath around @xmath we can relate the function values to
@xmath and its derivatives at @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Next we write @xmath as a linear combination of the function values

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If we insert Eqs. ( 2.63 )-( 2.66 ) for the function values @xmath and
compare the coefficients of both sides of the equation, we obtain the
system of linear equations

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.68)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The solution is @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and we can approximate
the derivative @xmath with second order accuracy by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In general, a one sided calculation as used in this example yields less
accurate estimates of the derivative and two sided approximations are to
be preferred. In our case the centred finite difference expression is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If we substitute expressions corresponding to ( 2.69 ) or ( 2.70 ) for
all derivatives, the differential equation is replaced by a large set of
algebraic equations.

#### 2.3.3 The leapfrog scheme

The leapfrog scheme is a second order in space and time finite
differencing scheme in which three successive time-levels are used at
each integration step. If we assume that the differential equation can
be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

the right hand side can be evaluated on the @xmath time slice. The time
derivative, on the other hand, is approximated by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the difference equation can be explicitly solved for @xmath .
Because of the centred finite difference approximation for @xmath ,
three time slices are involved in the calculation. As an example

we consider the special case where @xmath . At the spatial position
@xmath the finite difference equation is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath is taken on slice @xmath and we “leap” across slice
@xmath to calculate @xmath . This property is schematically illustrated
in Fig. 8 and has given the scheme its characteristic name. The need to
store the function values of two time slices makes this scheme more
memory intensive than 2-level schemes such as the McCormack scheme
discussed in the next section. Second order accurate two-level schemes,
on the other hand, involve more complicated finite difference
expressions and are therefore more CPU-intensive.
A potential problem of the leap-frog scheme is its vulnerability to the
so-called mesh-drifting effect, an instability that results from the
decoupling of odd and even mesh points. This instability can often be
cured by evolving some of the variables on a separate grid translated
with respect to the original one by half a grid step ( staggered
leap-frog) or introducing artificial dissipation which couples odd and
even grid points. In our application of this scheme in section 3 ,
however, we do not encounter this problem and have no need to use either
of the remedies.
We finally note that in Eq. ( 2.73 ) the function value on the new slice
@xmath is expressed explicitly in terms of known function values on
previous slices. Finite differencing schemes with this property are
called explicit schemes. In section 2.3.6 we will, by contrast,
introduce an implicit scheme where this is in general not possible for
non-linear partial differential equations and iterative methods or
linear solvers are used to determine the @xmath .

#### 2.3.4 The McCormack scheme

The McCormack scheme is another second order accurate explicit finite
differencing method. In contrast to the leapfrog scheme it is a
two-level method, i.e. requires storage of one previous slice only.
However, this comes at the expense of two computation steps in the
calculation of the new values, a predictor and a corrector step. We
illustrate this method by considering the partial differential equation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the first step preliminary values on the new time slice are
calculated according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the source term evaluated to second order accuracy at
@xmath by using @xmath and @xmath . This predictor step itself is a
first order accurate scheme, but the terms of first order truncation
error are eliminated in the corrector step

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the source term evaluated from the preliminary values
@xmath and @xmath . The extension to systems with more functions is
obvious.

#### 2.3.5 Relaxation

Relaxation is a method for solving so-called two point boundary value
problems , that is ordinary differential equations (ODEs) where boundary
conditions are given at different locations on the grid. A
straightforward integration to obtain the solution is not possible in
these cases and one needs to resort to more sophisticated techniques.
One such technique, of which we will make extensive use in this work is
numerical relaxation. In the case of ordinary differential equations
only one independent coordinate is present which can be visualised in
Fig. 7 by suppressing the time dimension so that we have only one row of
grid points. It is straightforward to see that any ordinary differential
equation can be written as a first order system. Without loss of
generality we will therefore restrict our discussion to this case.
Suppose for example that we have a system of 4 ODEs for 4 functions
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

A numerical solution consists of @xmath function values @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and so on. It is convenient to
introduce a vector @xmath to label these values, i.e. @xmath , @xmath
and so on. For each pair of grid points @xmath , @xmath we apply centred
finite differencing according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and likewise for the other functions. In combination with Eq. ( 2.77 )
this amounts up to @xmath algebraic equations for the 4K variables
@xmath . This set is completed by 4 boundary conditions for @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we arrive at 4K algebraic equations which
we write in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In general these equations are non-linear and we have to resort to
iterative techniques to obtain a solution @xmath . For this purpose we
assume that @xmath is a solution of ( 2.80 ) and @xmath is a
sufficiently close guess. Then @xmath -dimensional Taylor expansion
yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This is simply a system of linear equations which we can
write as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Even though the Jacobi matrix A is a @xmath by @xmath matrix, it is a
sparse matrix which greatly simplifies its inversion. If the equations
@xmath are ordered appropriately, A has block diagonal structure and can
be inverted by standard methods (see for example \shortciteNP
Press1989). Starting with an initial guess @xmath , we can calculate the
correction @xmath which leads to an improved approximation @xmath and
the process is repeated until the norm @xmath satisfies some convergence
criterion. This iteration scheme is the Newton-Raphson method
generalized to @xmath dimensions and usually converges fast.

#### 2.3.6 The Crank-Nicholson scheme

The Crank-Nicholson scheme is a two-level evolution scheme for partial
differential equations and can be considered a generalization of the
relaxation scheme. Again the system of equations is rewritten as a first
order system by introducing auxiliary variables. For convenience we will
illustrate the scheme for one equation and one function @xmath only. The
extension to more functions is obvious. Consider the PDE

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

on a grid of the type shown in Fig. 7 with @xmath points on each slice
@xmath . We can use a stencil of the type shown in Fig. 9 to obtain
second order centred finite

difference expressions for the functions and their derivatives according
to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.86)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting these relations into Eq. ( 2.85 ) we obtain @xmath algebraic
equations for the @xmath unknown values @xmath in terms of the known
@xmath . The set is completed by the boundary condition for @xmath and
we are in exactly the same situation as in Eq. ( 2.80 ) in the
relaxation scheme. Note that each algebraic equation involves two
unknown values @xmath , @xmath , so it is in general not possible to
obtain explicit expressions similar to Eq. ( 2.73 ) in the
leapfrog-scheme. Therefore methods like the Crank-Nicholson scheme are
called implicit and a solution is obtained by using iterative methods.
The initial guess for the values on the new slice is usually taken from
the previous slice.
An explicit variation of the Crank-Nicholson scheme which has attracted
a good deal of attention recently is the so-called iterative
Crank-Nicholson method. There one calculates intermediate values @xmath
on the new time slice according to the unconditionally unstable forward
time centred space method and averages these values with the data on the
old slice @xmath to obtain @xmath . These averaged values are then used
to calculate the source terms in the partial differential equation at
time @xmath and can be used to evolve the data with centred finite
differencing of the time derivatives in a second order scheme. In fact
this iteration process can be repeated arbitrarily often and the number
of iterations significantly affects the stability properties of the
scheme. In particular \citeN Teukolsky2000 has shown that the smallest
number of iterations required for a stable method is two and that any
further iterations do not lead to any superior performance in terms of
stability and accuracy.
Before we apply these numerical schemes to general relativistic
scenarios, we discuss some general properties of numerical evolution
schemes.

#### 2.3.7 Consistency

If we take the difference equations and calculate the @xmath as a Taylor
series about some fixed grid-point, we will again arrive at a
differential equation for @xmath . The difference between this
differential equation and the original one is the truncation error . The
numerical scheme is said to be consistent if the truncation error
vanishes in the limit @xmath (see for example \citeNP LeVeque1992).
Assuming that @xmath and @xmath differ by a constant factor in the limit
@xmath , the scheme is of @xmath order accuracy if the leading term of
the truncation error vanishes as @xmath .

#### 2.3.8 Stability

The concept of stability is concerned with an exponentially increasing
deviation of the numerical solution from the solution of the underlying
differential equation. If such a deviation is present either due to the
initial data or round off errors, it will quickly swamp the entire
numerical solution and make the code practically useless. The stability
of a code can depend on many properties. Often changing the grid
parameters @xmath , @xmath has a substantial effect on the stability.
In the case of linear partial differential equations one can use the von
Neumann stability analysis in order to test finite differencing schemes
for stability. For this purpose we assume that the numerical grid is
uniform, i.e. @xmath and @xmath are constant. The solution of the
difference equation can then be expanded as a Fourier series

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a spatial wave vector (1-dimensional in our case). It is
sufficient to consider one mode @xmath which can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

if the coefficients of the difference equations show sufficiently weak
variation in space and time and can be considered nearly constant. The
important aspect is that the amplitude at some time is obtained from
that of the preceding time step by multiplication with a time
independent factor @xmath . If @xmath the scheme is unstable. In
practice, Eq. ( 2.90 ) is inserted into the difference equations which
then is solved for @xmath . For many applications, the result is the
well known Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition (CFL-condition)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are the slopes of the characteristics of the underlying
system of PDEs. An intuitive interpretation of this result is that the
numerical domain of dependency of the point where @xmath is to be
calculated must contain the physical one. Indeed this condition was
recognised as a necessary stability condition for any numerical scheme
by \citeN Courant1928 (See \shortciteNP Courant1967 for an English
translation). The CFL condition is therefore commonly used in non-linear
codes to determine the permissible Courant factor @xmath . We will
illustrate the use of this criterion in the evolution of non-linear
radial oscillations of neutron stars in section 5.3.5 .

#### 2.3.9 Convergence

It is necessary to carefully distinguish between consistency , stability
and convergence of a code. The convergence of a numerical method is a
stronger requirement than consistency or stability. It is quite obvious,
for example that a consistent method will not be convergent if it is
unstable. In order to define convergence, we consider a solution @xmath
of the system of differential equations and a solution @xmath of the
corresponding difference equations. We note that @xmath is never
obtained in practice due to round off errors. A scheme is said to
converge if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of linear equations convergence can be ensured by the Lax
Equivalence Theorem which states: Given a properly posed linear initial
value problem and a finite difference approximation to it that satisfies
the consistency condition, the stability is a necessary and sufficient
condition for convergence (see for example \citeNP Richtmyer1967).
In the case of non-linear equations there is no corresponding theorem
but in some cases we will be able to check our codes for convergence by
comparing the results with known analytic solutions. If such analytic
solutions are not available, we need to use reference solutions obtained
for high resolutions instead. We will thus be able to ensure the Cauchy
convergence of the numerical scheme. This is, however, a weaker
statement than Eq. ( 2.92 ) and does not strictly guarantee convergence
to the solution of the differential equations.

## 3 Cauchy characteristic matching in cylindrical symmetry

### 3.1 The idea of Cauchy characteristic matching

Cauchy characteristic matching (CCM) is a method that simultaneously
makes use of the beneficial properties of the “3+1” and the
characteristic formalism. In section 2.1 we have seen that in the “3+1”
case spacetime is decomposed into 3-dimensional space-like hypersurfaces
threaded by a one parameter family of curves. The dynamic variables are
the components @xmath of the 3-metric of the hypersurfaces. A complete
set of initial data consists of values for @xmath and their time
derivatives on some initial hypersurface. The second order evolution
equations then determine the 4-metric of the spacetime up to gauge
transformations. This type of initial value problem is known as a Cauchy
problem and has been extensively used for the numerical solution of
Einstein’s field equations. It is however not suitable for the analysis
of gravitational radiation since it is not clear how to incorporate null
infinity into a finite numerical grid via conformal compactification.
Instead one uses approximating techniques to extract information about
the gravitational radiation at finite radii and imposes outgoing
radiation boundary conditions in order to prevent incoming gravitational
waves. Unfortunately attempts to implement these boundary conditions
give rise to spurious reflected numerical waves. Characteristic
formalisms solve this problem in an elegant way. Spacetime is decomposed
into a 2-parameter family of 2-dimensional space-like surfaces threaded
by two 1-parameter families of curves. At least one of these families
consists of null geodesics, the characteristics of the propagation of
radiation. The spacetime can be compactified by standard methods, exact
boundary conditions can be applied at future or past null infinity and
gravitational radiation can be properly analysed. In regions of strong
curvature, however, caustics can form and the foliation along null
geodesics breaks down.
A possible remedy for this problem consists in using both a “3+1” and a
characteristic formulation, each in its preferred region. Normally an
astrophysical scenario is approximated as a finite inner region
containing all the matter (a neutron star, for example) and the outer
vacuum region with an observer located at future null infinity. In CCM a
“3+1” scheme is used for the evolution of the interior and a
characteristic formulation for the evolution of the exterior region. At
a finite radius an interface facilitates the transfer of information
between these two regions. The method is illustrated in Fig. 10 where
the dark shaded area represents the astrophysical source. Gravitational
waves emitted from this source travel along null geodesics which are
given by straight lines at an angle of 45 degrees in this figure. In the
outer region the null geodesics are used to define the characteristic
coordinate axis.
The feasibility of combining Cauchy algorithms with characteristic
methods in order to evolve the gravitational field was first studied by
\citeN Bishop1992. The first attempts at obtaining numerical evolutions
have been carried out in one spatial dimension. The work of the
Southampton CCM-group in cylindrical symmetry will be discussed in
detail in the next section. The Pittsburgh relativity group studied CCM
in spherical symmetry by evolving the Einstein-Klein-Gordon system (
\shortciteNP Gomez1996). They have demonstrated second order convergence
and found no indications of back reflection or instabilities at the
interface. After the demonstration of the viability of CCM in one
dimension attention shifted towards higher-dimensional problems. The
Southampton relativity group focused their studies on the axisymmetric
case. After laying the theoretical foundations ( \citeNP dInverno1996,
\citeNP dInverno1997) a great deal of work has gone into the development
of an axisymmetric CCM code (see \citeNP Pollney2000 for details). This
code has now been completed and is currently being evaluated and tested.
In contrast the Pittsburgh group has immediately turned their attention
towards the general 3-dimensional case. \shortciteN Bishop1996 and
\shortciteN Bishop1997 have probed the use of Cauchy-characteristic
matching in three dimensions by evolving non-linear scalar waves in a
flat space-time. The application of these ideas to 3-dimensional
problems in general relativity has resulted in a module for the
combination of Cauchy and characteristic codes for the evolution of a
binary black hole ( \shortciteNP Bishop1998). A more comprehensive
overview of the ongoing research using Cauchy-characteristic matching
can be found in \citeN Winicour2001.

### 3.2 The Southampton CCM-project

The Southampton CCM-project is a long term project devoted to the study
of Cauchy-charac-teristic matching in scenarios of decreasing symmetry
assumptions ( \citeNP dInverno2000). The first step was to demonstrate
the viability of the approach. That was done by \citeN Clarke1994 by
evolving the wave equation in flat spacetime. Attention then turned
towards gravitational waves in cylindrical symmetry. The theoretical
foundations were laid by \shortciteN Clarke1995 and the resulting code
of \shortciteN Dubal1995 showed good agreement with analytic solutions
containing one gravitational degree of freedom. Furthermore
\shortciteANP Dubal1995 demonstrated the superior performance of the
CCM-method as compared with the use of artificial outer boundary
conditions in “3+1” schemes. \shortciteN dInverno2000b presented a
generalisation of this code to also include the rotational degree of
freedom. They find, however, that the convergence of the code drops to
first order level in later stages of the evolutions. In this work we
will present a new code that allows us to include the rotational degree
of freedom in terms of natural geometrical variables with regular
behaviour at null infinity. This reformulation resulted in improved
accuracy, long term stability and ensures second order convergence over
long evolution times. We will demonstrate the improved quality by
comparing the numerical results with analytic solutions possessing both
gravitational degrees of freedom.
The Southampton CCM-project has continued meanwhile with the development
of the axisymmetric code mentioned in the previous section.

### 3.3 The original code

In this section we will describe the cylindrically symmetric Cauchy
characteristic matching code developed by the Southampton Relativity
Group ( \shortciteNP Clarke1995, \shortciteNP Dubal1995). This code was
used to reproduce the analytic solution by \citeN Weber1957, which
possesses one gravitational degree of freedom, with high accuracy and
second order convergence. \shortciteN dInverno2000b presented an
extension of this code based on the formulation of \shortciteANP
Clarke1995 to also include the rotational degree of freedom. Their
difficulties in obtaining a long term stable second order convergent
code motivated the reinvestigation of the problem described in this
thesis.
In their derivation of the equations \shortciteANP Clarke1995 find it
necessary to decompose spacetime according to the methods of \citeN
Geroch1970 in order to eliminate irregularities of the equations in the
characteristic region. The Geroch decomposition plays a crucial role in
our reformulation and will also be used in section 4 when we numerically
simulate cosmic strings. Before we turn our attention to the
cylindrically symmetric CCM code, we will therefore describe the Geroch
decomposition in more detail.

#### 3.3.1 The Geroch decomposition

A problem generally faced in cylindrical symmetry is that the spacetime
is not asymptotically flat due to the infinite extension in the @xmath
-direction. The decomposition of \citeN Geroch1970 solves this problem
by factoring out the Killing direction and reformulating the
4-dimensional problem in terms of two scalar fields on an asymptotically
flat 3-dimensional spacetime. Suppose, the spacetime admits a Killing
field @xmath which in the case of cylindrical symmetry simply is @xmath
. Then we define the norm of the Killing vector

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and the Geroch twist

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the completely antisymmetric Levi-Cevita tensor. These
fields are well defined on the 3-dimensional space @xmath given by
@xmath with the resulting metric

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

If @xmath denotes the covariant derivative associated with the 3-metric
, one can show that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In vacuum the right hand side vanishes so that @xmath is curl free and
can be expressed in terms of a potential

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is a remarkable fact that the right hand side of Eq. ( 3.4 ) will
also vanish in some non-vacuum cases. In the discussion of cosmic
strings in section 4 we will encounter such an example.
Geroch has then shown that the Einstein equations for the metric of the
4-dimensional spacetime can be written in terms of the two scalar fields
@xmath and @xmath and the 3-metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.6)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where Latin indices run from 0 to 2 and @xmath is the Ricci tensor
associated with the 3-metric . Note that even in the case of a vanishing
energy-momentum tensor , the scalar fields @xmath and @xmath present
source terms in the field equations ( 3.6 ) for the 3-metric .
In the vacuum case @xmath , \shortciteN Sjodin2000 have shown how it is
possible to reformulate the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian in terms of
@xmath , @xmath and the conformal 3-metric @xmath . This leads directly
to the 3-dimensional energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative associated with the conformal
3-metric @xmath . Since the Weyl-curvature vanishes identically in three
dimensions, the curvature is completely determined by the Ricci tensor
@xmath , i.e. the energy-momentum tensor @xmath which in turn is
determined by @xmath and @xmath . Thus the gravitational degrees of
freedom of the original 4-dimensional spacetime are represented by the
scalar fields @xmath and @xmath . If matter is present in the
4-dimensional spacetime, there are extra terms on the right hand side of
( 3.9 ).

#### 3.3.2 The equations of the original code

We will now turn our attention to the original cylindrically symmetric
CCM code of the Southampton relativity group. An extensive description
of this code and the derivation of the equations can be found in
\shortciteN Clarke1995 and \shortciteN Dubal1995. In order to illustrate
the effects of our reformulation, we will include here a rather detailed
description of their equations and choice of variables. They start with
the metric in Jordan, Ehlers, Kundt and Kompaneets (JEKK) form (
\shortciteNP Jordan1960, \citeNP Kompaneets1958)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which describes a general cylindrically symmetric vacuum spacetime. The
metric functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath
only. In terms of the gauge freedom discussed in section 2.1.2 this
choice implies a vanishing shift vector and the lapse is determined by
the requirement that @xmath . As a consequence the null geodesics are
given by the simple relations @xmath . In the outer characteristic
region, the line element is rewritten by transforming to the coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the regions are matched at @xmath . \shortciteANP Clarke1995 find,
however, that the compactified field equations cannot be made regular in
this way. Therefore they factor out the @xmath -direction in the outer
region according to the Geroch decomposition described above. This leads
to a reformulation of the problem in terms of the variables

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Geroch potential and @xmath the norm of the @xmath
-Killing vector. These are related to the metric functions @xmath and
@xmath by Eqs. ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.2 ) which in this particular case become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With this choice of variables one obtains two evolution equations for
@xmath and @xmath in the interior Cauchy region and a constraint
equation for @xmath . \shortciteANP Dubal1995 write this set of
equations as a first order system

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The corresponding set of equations in the characteristic
region is given by two evolution equations for @xmath and @xmath and a
hypersurface equation for @xmath which is again written as a first order
system

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath               (3.24)
     @xmath               (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The transformation between the two pairs of variables @xmath and @xmath
and their derivatives is implemented at the interface at @xmath
according to the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The problematic relations are ( 3.28 ) and ( 3.30 ) which involve the
spatial derivative of @xmath and @xmath . The presence of spatial
derivatives in combination with the interpolation techniques applied at
the interface make the implementation of these relations a rather subtle
issue.
The code of \shortciteANP Dubal1995 formed the starting point for our
investigation of the problem. This code has been well checked in the
non-rotating case but did not include the implementation of Eqs. ( 3.28
) and ( 3.30 ) for the rotational variables @xmath and @xmath at the
interface. In this work we therefore started with the addition of these
missing modules to the original code. In order to describe our
implementation it is necessary to first discuss the numerical
techniques, in particular those underlying the transmission of
information from the Cauchy to the characteristic region and vice versa.

#### 3.3.3 The numerical implementation

We will now discuss the numerical implementation of Eqs. ( 3.17 )-( 3.30
). The numerical grid used for the evolution consists of an inner Cauchy
region which covers the range @xmath and the outer characteristic region
extending from @xmath to infinity which corresponds to the range @xmath
. The evolution equations in these regions are discretized in a
straightforward way using the leapfrog scheme described in section 2.3.3
while second order centered finite differencing is used for the
constraints. If we assume that all functions are known on the time
slices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , a full evolution cycle consists of
the following steps.

-   Evolution of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath at the interior
    grid points of the Cauchy region according to Eqs. ( 3.17 )-( 3.20
    ).

-   Update of these variables at the origin according to the inner
    boundary conditions @xmath .

-   Evolution of @xmath and @xmath at the outer boundary of the Cauchy
    grid ( @xmath ) according to Eqs. ( 3.17 ), ( 3.18 ).

-   Extraction of @xmath and @xmath from the interface at @xmath on the
    Cauchy grid on time slice @xmath .

-   Evolution of @xmath , @xmath at the outer boundary of the Cauchy
    grid ( @xmath ) according to Eqs. ( 3.19 ), ( 3.20 ).

-   Calculation of @xmath on the Cauchy grid via quadrature according to
    Eq. ( 3.21 ).

-   Evolution of @xmath and @xmath in the characteristic region
    according to Eqs. ( 3.22 ), ( 3.23 ).

-   Extraction of @xmath and @xmath from the interface at @xmath on the
    characteristic grid on time slice @xmath .

-   Calculation of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on the characteristic grid
    via quadrature according to Eqs. ( 3.24 )-( 3.26 ).

The crucial steps which provide the flow of information through the
interface are (4) and (8). These steps together with the start up
procedure required to get the leap-frog scheme running will now be
discussed in more detail. We start with the interface.
We first note that the interface is fixed at the radial position @xmath
. Since we always have the freedom to rescale the radial coordinate
@xmath by a constant factor, this implies no loss of generality. From a
numerical point of view the need of an interface arises from the
calculation of spatial derivatives at @xmath on the Cauchy grid and
@xmath on the characteristic grid. The centred finite differencing used
for the leapfrog scheme as illustrated in Eq. ( 2.73 ) requires
knowledge of the Cauchy variables at @xmath and the characteristic
variables at @xmath for this purpose. In order to obtain these values,
they need to be calculated with interpolation techniques using Eqs. (
3.27 )-( 3.30 ). We will describe this process in the case of the
direction “char @xmath Cauchy” corresponding to step (4). The reverse
direction in step (8) works in complete analogy. The situation is
graphically illustrated in Fig. 11 .

The derivatives of a function @xmath at @xmath can be calculated to
second order accuracy by centred finite differencing

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

if @xmath is obtained from interpolation to fourth order accuracy in the
characteristic region. For this purpose @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are calculated in terms of the characteristic variables according
to Eqs. ( 3.27 )-( 3.30 ) at the 12 points of the characteristic region
(including 3 points at the interface) indicated by filled circles in
Fig. 11 . These values can then be used to obtain the function values
@xmath and @xmath at location @xmath with the required accuracy.
An alternative to this method consists in using the same interpolation
technique to calculate the @xmath -derivatives @xmath and @xmath at grid
point @xmath instead of the function values @xmath and @xmath . We can
then calculate the @xmath -derivatives at the interface from

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Even though this alternative looks natural for the transformation
between @xmath and @xmath because these variables are related via their
derivatives according to Eq. ( 3.28 ), it does not lead to any
improvement of the performance of the code.
The second point we need to discuss is the so-called start-up problem.
It is an intrinsic difficulty of 3-level schemes such as the leap-frog
algorithm that the specification of initial data on one time slice will
not be sufficient to start the numerical engine. Instead different
techniques need to be used to obtain data on auxiliary time slices. Due
to the requirements of the fourth-order interpolation at the interface
we need information on two additional slices. The data on these
auxiliary slices are calculated in three steps.

-   The first order Euler scheme (see for example \shortciteNP
    Press1989) is used to calculate data at @xmath .

-   This auxiliary time slice is then used to determine the variables at
    @xmath according to the leapfrog scheme.

-   In another leapfrog step, this time using the full time step @xmath
    , data is calculated at @xmath .

An alternative treatment at the interface is required for this start-up
procedure, because the necessary three time-slices are not available at
this stage. For this purpose the Cauchy grid is extended into the
characteristic region by 10 grid points. The derivatives of the Cauchy
variables can thus be calculated at @xmath using centred finite
differencing and the derivatives of the characteristic variables follow
from chain-rule. The treatment of the outer boundary of the Cauchy grid
is irrelevant for the numerical evolution, since the spurious signal
cannot travel across the additional 10 grid points during the three
evolution steps at the start-up procedure and these points are not used
in the remaining evolution.

#### 3.3.4 Including the rotational degree of freedom @xmath

In our first attempt to include the rotational degree of freedom we have
made use of the set of variables of section 3.3.2 , namely @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in the inner and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the
outer region. For this purpose we have extended the interface of the
original code to also include the transformations between @xmath and
@xmath as described in the previous section. In order to test the code
we use the analytic solution from \citeN Xanthopoulos1986 which we will
discuss in more detail in section 3.5.2 . In Eqs. ( 3.55 )-( 3.68 ) we
give analytic expressions for this solution in terms of the Killing
vector @xmath , the Geroch potential @xmath and the metric function
@xmath . The corresponding results for the variables @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are obtained straightforwardly from their definitions ( 3.13 )-(
3.15 ). The transformation into values for the function @xmath is more
complicated. The result is given by \shortciteN Sjodin2000

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the auxiliary functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
defined in Eqs. ( 3.55 )-( 3.58 ). We have not been able, however, to
obtain a long term stable evolution in this formulation of the problem.
For 300 grid points in each region instability set in after less than
1000 time steps and from the pattern of the noise it is clear that the
problems originate at the interface. In our attempts to overcome the
instability we have varied the obvious parameters such as the Courant
factor and the number of grid points over a large range, but no
improvement has been achieved. We have also used the alternative
implementation of the interface according to Eqs. ( 3.33 ), ( 3.34 ).
Even though this alternative looks quite natural at least for the
transformation between @xmath and @xmath which are related via their
derivatives according to ( 3.28 ), we did not achieve a significantly
better performance with this method. Finally we have changed the start
time of the numerical evolution and, thus, the initial data. The obvious
choice @xmath is not possible because some derivatives of Xanthopoulos’
solution are discontinuous at @xmath , but any positive value large
enough to ensure that the start-up procedure does not extend to negative
times can be chosen. Again the code became unstable after less than 1000
time steps. We have therefore decided to restart the investigation of
this problem by looking for alternative sets of variables.

### 3.4 A reformulation of the problem

A striking peculiarity of the formulation described above is the
drastically different treatment of the Cauchy and the characteristic
region. In view of the numerical subtleties associated with the
interface one may question the wisdom of factoring out the @xmath
-direction in one region and work in the framework of the 4-dimensional
spacetime in the other. It rather seems natural to look for as
homogeneous a description of the whole spacetime as possible. In this
context it is worth noting that the restriction of the Geroch
decomposition to the characteristic region was a voluntary choice and
not enforced at any stage of the derivation of the equations. We have
therefore decided to factor out the @xmath -direction in the Cauchy
region as well and thus Geroch decomposed the whole spacetime. This
enables us to use the same set of fundamental variables throughout
spacetime and thus obtain almost trivial interface relations. A closer
investigation of the equations suggests that aside from the metric
function @xmath the geometric variables @xmath and @xmath are the
natural variables to describe the cylindrically symmetric spacetime.
With this choice the equations in the Cauchy region can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In practice we use @xmath and @xmath as auxiliary variables in order to
write Eqs. ( 3.36 ), ( 3.37 ) as a first order system. If we transform
to the new set of variables the equations in the characteristic region
become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally the non-trivial relations at the interface are now given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have developed a code using the numerical techniques of section 3.3.3
based on these evolution equations and interface relations.

### 3.5 Testing the code

In order to test the performance of the new code, we will check it
against analytic solutions with one and two gravitational degrees of
freedom. Furthermore we will demonstrate its internal consistency with a
time dependent convergence analysis.
We have already mentioned the vacuum solution by \citeN Weber1957 that
was successfully used by \shortciteANP Dubal1995 to test their CCM code.
A solution with both gravitational degrees of freedom was derived by
\citeN Xanthopoulos1986. Both these solutions can be rewritten in terms
of our variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and thus compared with the
numerical results.

#### 3.5.1 The Weber-Wheeler wave

The analytic solution by \citeANP Weber1957 describes a gravitational
pulse of the “ @xmath ” polarization mode that moves in from past null
infinity, implodes on the axis and emanates away to future null
infinity. The analytic expressions in terms of @xmath and @xmath have
been derived in \shortciteN Sjodin2000. In the Cauchy region it is
convenient to introduce the auxiliary quantities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the Weber-Wheeler wave can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants representing the width and
amplitude of the pulse. The corresponding result in terms of the
characteristic coordinates @xmath , @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The initial values for @xmath and its time derivative are prescribed
according to these equations whereas @xmath on the initial slice is
calculated via quadrature from the constraint equations ( 3.38 ) and (
3.43 ). In order to plot the solution for @xmath we introduce the radial
variable

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 12 we show the numerical results for @xmath and @xmath and their
deviation from the analytic values obtained for @xmath and @xmath using
1200 grid points in each region and a Courant factor of 0.45. As in the
case of the original code from \shortciteANP Dubal1995 we find that a
Courant factor @xmath is required for a stable evolution. The plots show
the incoming pulse in @xmath which is reflected at the origin and then
moves outwards to null infinity. The relatively large number of grid
points is required to achieve a high accuracy at early times in
modelling the steep gradients of the incoming pulse. If the calculation
starts at a later time or a smaller parameter @xmath for the width of
the pulse is used, the same accuracy is obtained with significantly
fewer grid points.

We also see that longer runs do not reveal any new features as the
metric variables approach their Minkowskian values after @xmath . This
solution, however, does not provide a test for the rotational degree of
freedom. For that purpose we need an analytic solution with both
gravitational degrees of freedom.

#### 3.5.2 Xanthopoulos’ rotating solution

The next solution we consider is one due to \shortciteN Xanthopoulos1986
which has a conical singularity on the @xmath -axis and therefore
describes a rotating vacuum solution with a cosmic string type
singularity. The solution has been rewritten in terms of our variables
by \shortciteN Sjodin2000. Again it is convenient to introduce auxiliary
quantities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a free parameter which can take on any non-zero value.
The solution derived by Xanthopoulos then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the outer region where we use the coordinates @xmath the result is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 13 we show the numerical results and the deviation from the

analytic values obtained for @xmath and a Courant factor of 0.45. In
this solution no steep gradients are present and 300 grid points in each
region are sufficient to reproduce the analytic values to within a
relative error of about @xmath . Again longer runs do not reveal any
further features as the metric settles down into Minkowskian values. We
conclude that the code reproduces analytic solutions with one or two
gravitational degrees of freedom with high accuracy over the dynamically
relevant time intervals.

#### 3.5.3 Time dependent convergence analysis

Even though the accuracy and long term stability of the code has been
demonstrated in the previous sections, we still have to make sure that
it is also second order convergent. In particular the start-up procedure
described in section 3.3.3 and the use therein of the Euler scheme to
calculate the auxiliary time slice at @xmath might raise questions in
this respect.
For the convergence analysis we define the @xmath -norm of the deviation
of a numerical solution @xmath as a function of time

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the exact and @xmath the numerical value at

grid point @xmath obtained for a total of @xmath grid points. We have
calculated the @xmath norm for the Xanthopoulos solution of the previous
section using 300 and 600 grid points in each region. In Fig. 14 we plot
the quotient as a function of time. Corresponding to the increase of the
grid resolution by a factor of 2 we expect a convergence factor of 4 for
the second order scheme. In spite of the use of the first order Euler
method for the start-up, second order convergence is clearly maintained
throughout the dynamically relevant evolution.

## 4 Numerical evolution of excited cosmic strings

### 4.1 Introduction

According to the standard “big bang” model of cosmology, the universe is
continuously expanding and cooling and was extremely hot and dense in
its early stages. The grand unified theories (GUT) of elementary
particle physics predict phase transitions to occur as a result of this
cooling process in the early universe. These result in topological
defects, regions with the “old symmetry” surrounded by “new symmetry”.
The topology of the defects depends on the symmetry groups
characterising the involved fields before and after the symmetry
breaking. Cosmic strings are a 1-dimensional, “string-like” version of
these topological defects. The type of strings usually considered from
the astrophysical point of view has a mass per unit length @xmath in
natural units ( @xmath ). The corresponding phase transitions are
predicted to have occurred at the GUT energy scale @xmath GeV. Strings
with significantly higher mass created at higher energy scales cannot be
ruled out, however, and their treatment can no longer be achieved in the
weak-field limit.
Numerical simulations by \shortciteN Vachaspati1984 show that cosmic
strings are created in the form of a network of infinitely long or loop
like strings. In this work we will focus on infinitely long strings
which are modelled in the framework of cylindrical symmetry.
Cosmic strings have caught the interest of astrophysicists and
relativists for several reasons. Most importantly the suggestion that
cosmic strings be seeds for galaxy formation by \shortciteN
Zeldovich1980 has given rise to intense efforts to understand the
evolution of the resulting density perturbations (see e.g. \citeNP
Turok1986). Cosmic strings are also thought to be sources of
gravitational radiation ( \citeNP Vilenkin1994). Below we will study the
interaction of an infinitely long cosmic string with a wave pulse with
one gravitational degree of freedom. Cosmic strings have also been
considered of astrophysical relevance because of the bending of light
rays that arises from the conical structure of the resulting spacetime.
It has been shown by \shortciteN Vilenkin1981 that the geometry around
an isolated cosmic string is Minkowskian minus a wedge, the “deficit
angle”, and consequently cosmic strings may act as gravitational lenses.
Even though static cosmic strings in cylindrical symmetry have been
studied extensively in the past either in Minkowskian or curved
spacetime (see e.g. \shortciteNP Laguna1987, \citeNP Garfinkle1985), no
solution has been obtained, to our knowledge, for a dynamic cosmic
string coupled to gravity via the fully non-linear Einstein equations.
Below we will present a numerical solution of this scenario and
investigate the behaviour of a cosmic string excited by gravitational
radiation. After presenting the mathematical description of a cosmic
string in the next section we will derive the equations of a dynamic
cosmic string coupled to gravity. In section 4.4 we will describe the
numerical treatment of these equations. The simple scenario of a static
cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime presents already most of the
subtleties involved in solving the general problem and is therefore
suitable for illustrating our numerical methods. Subsequently we address
a static string in curved spacetime and finally present the dynamic
code. This code is extensively tested in section 4.5 before we
investigate the time evolution in section 4.6 .
The results and techniques presented in this section can also be found
in \shortciteN Sperhake2000.
We conclude this introduction with some comments on the numerical
formulations used in this section. We have seen above how the
combination of an interior Cauchy evolution with a characteristic
evolution in the exterior region leads to a stable accurate simulation
of cylindrically symmetry vacuum spacetimes. In a natural extension of
this project we studied the inclusion of matter in the form of a
cylindrically symmetric cosmic string. Such an extension of the CCM-code
of the previous section has been developed, but no long term stable
evolutions have been achieved with that code. Consequently we have
restarted the investigation. For convenience this has been done in a
purely characteristic framework and finally resulted in the long-term
stable, accurate code described below. In the course of this work we
have isolated the existence of exponentially diverging solutions and the
corresponding difficulties at the outer boundary as the source of the
problems. We will describe how these difficulties can be naturally
controlled with the use of implicit numerical techniques. The use of
such techniques, however, is by no means restricted to characteristic
methods and we have no reason to believe that an implicit
Cauchy-characteristic matching code would perform less satisfactorily.
Such an implicit CCM code has been tested in the simple case of a
cylindrically symmetric vacuum spacetime with vanishing rotation and has
lead to an accurate long-term stable evolution of the Weber-Wheeler
wave. From this point of view the choice of a characteristic formulation
for the work described in this section is merely a consequence of the
chronology in which progress has been achieved.

### 4.2 Mathematical description of a cosmic string

In the following work we will use cylindrical coordinates @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . Here @xmath is the Killing direction corresponding to
cylindrical symmetry and @xmath , @xmath are standard polar coordinates.
In 4-dimensional spacetime the time coordinate is @xmath , but we will
apply a characteristic formalism for the numerical solution and
therefore also use the retarded time @xmath . The simplest model of a
cosmic string consists of a scalar field @xmath coupled to a @xmath
-gauge field @xmath . The Lagrangian for these coupled fields is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a constant, which describes the coupling between the
scalar and the vector field. The self-coupling potential @xmath has the
“Mexican-hat” shape predicted by the standard model of elementary
particle physics and @xmath is the field tensor

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the self-coupling constant of the scalar field. It turns
out to be useful to introduce the Higgs vacuum expectation value of the
scalar field as a parameter @xmath . Generalizing the notation of
\shortciteN Garfinkle1985 we write the fields as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . From now on, however, we will make the simplifying assumption
of cylindrical symmetry. Then @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath
, @xmath only and @xmath , where @xmath is the winding number. In this
work we will only consider the case @xmath , so @xmath . We can
calculate the energy momentum tensor @xmath from the Lagrangian
according to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Lagrange density. Summarising the variables and
parameters, we have

-   the amplitude of the scalar field @xmath ,

-   the amplitude of the @xmath gauge field @xmath ,

-   the constant @xmath which describes the coupling between the scalar
    and vector field,

-   the self-coupling constant @xmath of the scalar field,

-   the vacuum expectation value of the scalar field @xmath .

If we substitute Eqs. ( 4.4 ), ( 4.5 ) in ( 4.1 ) we obtain the
Lagrangian and the energy momentum tensor in terms of these quantities

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### 4.3 The field equations

We start again with the line element in Jordan, Ehlers, Kundt and
Kompaneets (JEKK) form ( 3.10 ) for a cylindrically symmetric spacetime.
This form of the metric, however, is not compatible with the cosmic
string energy momentum tensor so we follow \shortciteN Marder1958 by
introducing an extra variable @xmath into the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the tilde is used to reserve the names @xmath and @xmath for
rescaled coordinates below. This choice enables us to compare our
numerical solutions with the results of the Cauchy-characteristic
matching code described in section 3 . We have already noted that this
metric has a zero shift vector and the lapse is determined by the
requirement @xmath . The function @xmath , however, introduces the extra
gauge freedom of relabelling the radial null surfaces: @xmath and @xmath
. We may fix this by specifying the initial values for @xmath and either
its time derivative in a “3+1” formalism or its boundary conditions in a
characteristic formalism. We will follow the second approach and below
we will see that the function @xmath is uniquely determined in the
static case and the boundary conditions follow from regularity
assumptions of the metric. The further requirement that the dynamic
results reduce to the static ones in the case of vanishing time
dependence therefore fixes the gauge.
It turns out that we can eliminate one of the free parameters and
simplify the equations if we introduce rescaled quantities according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath represents the relative strength of the coupling between
scalar and vector field compared to the self-coupling. Furthermore we
use the retarded time @xmath so that the line element becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In section 3.3.1 we have described the Geroch decomposition which can be
used to factor out the Killing direction @xmath even if the Killing
field is not hypersurface-orthogonal. It is a remarkable fact that the
right hand side of equation ( 3.4 ) still vanishes for spacetimes with a
cosmic string energy-momentum tensor ( 4.8 ) ( \shortciteNP Sjodin2000),
so that the Geroch twist can be described by a potential according to
Eq. ( 3.5 ). The other geometrical variable, the norm of the @xmath
-Killing vector ( 3.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the 3-dimensional line element ( 3.3 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the energy momentum tensor given by ( 4.8 ) and the 3-dimensional
line element ( 4.16 ) we are now in a position to calculate the field
equations according to equations ( 3.6 )-( 3.8 ). We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the flat-space d’Alembert operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This set of equations is supplemented by the matter evolution equations
obtained either from conservation of energy-momentum @xmath or variation
of the Lagrange density @xmath with respect to the matter fields @xmath
and @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that in equations ( 4.17 )-( 4.20 ) the matter terms exclusively
appear with a factor @xmath . Consequently @xmath describes the effect
of the string on the spacetime geometry and, thus, represents the
string’s mass. There are two further Einstein equations which can be
shown to be a direct consequence of ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) and their
derivatives. These equations have only been used to provide a check on
the accuracy of the code. Finally we have to supplement the equations by
boundary conditions on the axis. For the 4-dimensional metric variables
the simplest condition is to require the metric to be @xmath on the axis
so that we have a well defined curvature tensor. The resulting boundary
conditions are ( \citeNP Sjodin2001b)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary conditions for @xmath and @xmath are ( \citeNP
Garfinkle1985)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The numerical implementation of these boundary conditions as well as
regularity requirements at null infinity will be discussed in section
4.4.3 .

### 4.4 Numerical methods

In order to solve the above field equations we have developed two
independent codes. The first is based on the Cauchy characteristic
matching code described in section 3 . This code performs well in the
absence of matter and has been used to study several cylindrically
symmetric vacuum solutions (see also \shortciteNP Sjodin2000). However,
this CCM code performed less satisfactorily in the evolution of the
cosmic string. This is due to the existence of unphysical solutions to
the evolution equations ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) which diverge exponentially as
@xmath . Controlling the time evolution near null infinity by means of a
sponge function enabled us to select the physical solutions with regular
behaviour at @xmath , but the sponge function itself introduced noise
which eventually gave rise to instabilities. We therefore implemented a
second implicit, purely characteristic, code which allows us to directly
control the behaviour of the solutions at the boundaries and thus
suppress diverging solutions. The main problem with the system of
differential equations is the irregularity of the equations at both the
origin and null infinity. It is the implicit nature of the scheme that
provides a simple way of implementing the boundary conditions and thus
circumventing all problems with these irregularities. A purely
characteristic formulation has been used for the second code for
convenience rather than numerical necessity and we believe that an
implicit CCM scheme would produce similar accuracy, convergence and long
term stability. It is interesting that the irregularity problems are
already present in the calculation of the static cosmic string in
Minkowski spacetime. We will, therefore, first describe the numerical
scheme used in the static Minkowskian case where the equations are
fairly simple. We then present the modifications necessary for the
static and dynamic case coupled to the gravitational field.

#### 4.4.1 The static cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime

In Eqs. ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) we set the metric variables to their
Minkowskian values and all time derivatives to zero to obtain the
equations for the static cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime (cf.
\citeNP Garfinkle1985)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary conditions are (see \citeNP Garfinkle1985)

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to cover the whole spacetime with a finite coordinate range, we
divide the computational domain into two regions in the same way as in
section 3.3.3 . In the inner region ( @xmath ) we use the coordinate
@xmath , while in the outer region we introduce the compactified radius
@xmath defined by equation ( 3.12 ) which covers the range @xmath . This
corresponds to the region @xmath with infinity mapped to @xmath . Again
we combine @xmath and @xmath into the single radial variable @xmath
defined by ( 3.54 ). In terms of the coordinate @xmath Eqs. ( 4.30 ), (
4.31 ) take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number of grid points in each region may differ, but

each half-grid is uniform. Thus we use a total of @xmath grid points
where the points labelled @xmath and @xmath both correspond to the
position @xmath . The points @xmath , @xmath form the interface between
the two regions (see Fig. 15 ). One point will contain the variables in
terms of @xmath , the other in terms of @xmath . With the computational
grid covering the whole spacetime, we now face a two point boundary
value problem. Due to the existence of unphysical solutions diverging at
@xmath we have chosen to solve the equations with a numerical relaxation
scheme as described in section 2.3.5 which allows us to directly control
the behaviour of @xmath and @xmath at infinity. The form of Eqs. ( 4.30
), ( 4.31 ) suggests that in order to write them as a first order system
we should introduce the auxiliary variables @xmath and @xmath . The
equations may then be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding equations in the outer region are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Standard second order centred finite differencing according to Eqs. (
2.78 ), ( 2.79 ) results in @xmath non-linear algebraic equations which
are supplemented by the 4 boundary conditions ( 4.32 ) and 4 interface
relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We then start with piecewise linear initial guesses for @xmath and
@xmath (and the corresponding derivatives @xmath and @xmath ) and solve
the @xmath algebraic equations as described in section 2.3.5 .
In order to check the code for convergence, we vary the grid resolution
@xmath (using @xmath points in both regions) from @xmath to @xmath ,
halving the grid spacing each time. Since we do not have an analytic
solution, the results are compared against the high-resolution case (
@xmath ). For doing this we calculate the @xmath norm according to Eq. (
3.70 ). In this case the function @xmath in Eq. ( 3.70 ) stands for
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath and the norm does not depend on time
because of the static nature of the problem. For second order
convergence we expect the @xmath norm to decrease by a factor of 4 each
time we increase the grid resolution by a factor of 2. However, we do
not compare our results against the exact solution but against a high
resolution result which itself has a finite truncation error, so that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore we do not expect the factor to be exactly @xmath . Using a

grid resolution @xmath the truncation error is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the exact and @xmath the numerical solution. For
simplicity we will assume that the truncation error is either @xmath or
@xmath . If we use a reference solution obtained for @xmath grid points
and compare solutions @xmath and @xmath the ratio of the corresponding
@xmath -norms becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Considering the extreme cases, we expect a convergence factor between 3
and @xmath . The truncation error of the high resolution result will
have significantly less influence on the comparison of lower resolution
results and the factors should be closer to 4. Table 1 shows our results
for the cosmic string in Minkowski space-time and clearly indicates
second order convergence. In Fig. 16 we show the string variables @xmath
and @xmath for various values of @xmath as a function of @xmath .

Due to the rescaling ( 4.10 )-( 4.12 ) the equations for the cosmic
string in Minkowski spacetime ( 4.30 ) and ( 4.31 ) do not explicitly
contain the parameter @xmath , so the shape of the cosmic string fields
expressed in terms of the rescaled variables is independent of @xmath .
Below we will see that this is no longer true in curved spacetime where
@xmath , representing the mass of the string, determines the strength of
its coupling to gravity. Fig. 16 does, however, reveal a significant
variation of the profiles of the scalar and vector field with the
coupling ratio @xmath . As the scalar-vector coupling becomes more
dominant with respect to the self coupling of the scalar field (larger
@xmath ), both @xmath and @xmath become more concentrated towards the
origin.

#### 4.4.2 The static cosmic string coupled to gravity

The equations governing a static cosmic string in curved spacetime are
obtained from the general equations ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) by setting all
time derivatives to zero. If we combine first and second spatial
derivatives in a single operator as in equations ( 4.30 ), ( 4.31 ), we
can write these equations as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

After completing the code, we realised that in the case of vanishing
rotation @xmath the field equations ( 4.50 )-( 4.55 ) imply a simple
relation between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . An appropriate linear
combination of these equations and their spatial derivatives can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which after some manipulation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a constant that has to vanish in order to ensure finite
derivatives at the origin. In the static case we adjust the functions
@xmath and @xmath in the boundary conditions ( 4.24 ), ( 4.26 ) so that
@xmath and @xmath at the origin and consequently

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for all values of @xmath . Even though @xmath will be zero in the
analysis in this section, we will numerically solve the original system
of equations ( 4.50 )-( 4.55 ) and use ( 4.58 ) as a test for the code.
In order to numerically solve the equations of a cosmic string coupled
to gravity, we rewrite them again as a first order system. The
differential operators appearing on the right hand side suggest that we
introduce the auxiliary quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The system can then be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.61)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding equations in terms of the compactified radial
coordinate @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.71)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.72)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.73)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.74)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.75)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.76)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.77)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the numerical point of view, the problem of solving these equations
is virtually identical to that of a static string in Minkowski
spacetime. The only difference is the much higher degree of complexity
of the equations due to the appearance of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as extra variables. We will discuss the numerical implementation
of the boundary conditions at the origin and at infinity in the next
section when we consider the case of a dynamic cosmic string. The
boundary conditions are given by equations ( 4.104 ), ( 4.105 ). In the
static case we replace the conditions for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
( 4.104 ) by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (4.81)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

but otherwise use the same boundary conditions. The solution is then
obtained using the relaxation method described in the previous section.
As our initial guess for the metric variables we use Minkowskian values,
and for the string variables @xmath and @xmath we use the previously
calculated values for a Minkowskian string with the same string
parameters. Due to the appearance of @xmath or its derivatives in all
terms of ( 4.51 ) the Geroch potential will

stay zero in the relaxation process and our solution has no rotation.
We have checked the code for convergence in the way described in section
4.4.1 . We have chosen the unphysically large value @xmath here in order
to guarantee convergence even for strong coupling between matter and
geometry. @xmath is set to 1 as in the Minkowski case. The results are
given in Table 2 . For convenience we only display the results for the
fundamental variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Since we do not incorporate rotation, the result for @xmath is, as
expected, exactly 0 and we do not include it in Table 2 . Again the code
is shown to be second order convergent.

In Fig. 17 and 18 we plot the results obtained for @xmath grid points.
In all these plots the relative coupling strength is @xmath , but
qualitatively similar results are obtained for different values of
@xmath . We have already mentioned that the effect of the string on the
spacetime geometry is determined by @xmath . Therefore we have compared
the deviation of both the string variables and the metric from the
Minkowskian case for @xmath 0.001, 0.01, 0.1 and 0.2. In Fig. 17 we plot
the string variables @xmath and @xmath for the two extreme values and
the deviation from the Minkowskian string rescaled by @xmath for all
four values. For small @xmath we see that @xmath and @xmath is
essentially independent of @xmath . In this case the deviation from
Minkowskian values can be treated as a small perturbation and a linear
dependence of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath is to be expected. In the
range @xmath on the other hand, we clearly leave the linear regime and
the deviation depends on @xmath in a much more complicated way. These
values, however, are 2 orders of magnitude larger than the value @xmath
predicted in current GUT theories ( \citeNP Vilenkin1994). The deviation
of the metric variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is plotted in the
first three panels of Fig. 18 . Again we see the linear behaviour for
small @xmath and the transition to the non-linear regime at @xmath . In
the fourth panel of Fig. 18 we check Eq. ( 4.58 ) for @xmath . We
clearly see that @xmath is approximately zero. Indeed ( 4.58 ) is
satisfied to within @xmath as compared with the order of magnitude of
the individual terms @xmath .

#### 4.4.3 The dynamic cosmic string

In the dynamic case all variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath and we have to solve the
system ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) of partial differential equations. In order to
control the behaviour of the solution at infinity, we need a
generalisation for PDEs of the relaxation scheme applied to ordinary
differential equations. In view of the characteristic feature of the
relaxation scheme, namely the simultaneous calculation of new function
values at all grid points, this generalisation leads directly to
implicit evolution schemes as used for hyperbolic or parabolic PDEs.
Therefore, the dynamic code is based on the implicit, second order in
space and time Crank-Nicholson scheme described in section 2.3.6 . For
this purpose we rewrite the dynamic equations ( 4.17 )-( 4.23 ) as a
first order system. These equations involve radial derivatives which may
be written in terms of second order operators exactly as in the static
case ( 4.50 )-( 4.55 ). This naturally leads to the auxiliary quantities
introduced in Eqs. ( 4.59 )-( 4.63 ). In terms of these variables the
equations for the dynamic cosmic string become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.83)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.84)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.85)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.86)
     @xmath               (4.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.88)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.90)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding first order system in the outer region is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.94)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.95)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
     @xmath               (4.98)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.99)
     @xmath               (4.100)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.101)
     @xmath               (4.102)
     @xmath               (4.103)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The derivation of these equations and a number of other calculations in
this work have been carried out with the algebraic computing package
GRTensorII ( \citeNP Musgrave1996). In order to solve these equations we
must supplement them by appropriate initial and boundary conditions. We
have already mentioned the boundary conditions on the axis ( 4.24 )-(
4.29 ). In general we find that the dynamic code performs better if one
imposes boundary conditions on the radial derivatives rather than the
variables themselves. For the variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath we therefore impose the required boundary conditions
on the initial data according to ( 4.32 ) and ( 4.81 ). In the
subsequent evolution we impose the weaker condition that the radial
derivatives @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are finite on the axis. This
ensures that the evolution equations propagate the axial conditions
given on the initial data. For the variable @xmath we impose the
condition that @xmath is zero on the axis which is equivalent to the
rather weak condition that @xmath vanishes there. The inverse power of
@xmath in the definition of @xmath makes it unsuitable to specify the
value of this quantity at @xmath so in this case we work with the
variable directly and require that @xmath on the axis. Finally the
variable @xmath is given by a purely radial equation and in this case we
specify the value on the axis where @xmath vanishes by virtue of Eq. (
4.27 ). Therefore at @xmath we require

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.104)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

For the boundary conditions at null infinity we know that regular
solutions of the cylindrical wave equation have radial derivatives that
decay faster than @xmath so that we may take the variables @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , which satisfy a wave type equation, to vanish at
@xmath . The asymptotics of @xmath are slightly different due to the
additional power of @xmath in the radial derivative (similar to the
spherically symmetric wave equation) but for a regular solution @xmath
vanishes at null infinity. The equation for @xmath does not satisfy a
wave type equation due to the inverse power of @xmath but has asymptotic
behaviour given by a modified Bessel function. The physically relevant
finite solution has exponential decay so in this case one may impose the
condition that @xmath at @xmath . Hence we require the solution to
satisfy the following boundary conditions at @xmath

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.105)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

These boundary conditions are sufficient to determine the solution of
the first order system ( 4.82 )-( 4.103 ) while suppressing the
unphysical solutions which are singular on the axis or null infinity.
Note that @xmath is determined by the constraint equation ( 4.20 ),
which is a first order ODE, and thus only needs one boundary condition.
We finally note that all variables are related at the interface in the
form @xmath analogous to Eqs. ( 4.43 )-( 4.46 ) in the case of a static
string in Minkowski spacetime.

### 4.5 Testing the dynamic code

In this section we will describe four independent tests of the implicit
code for the dynamic cosmic string, namely

-   reproducing the non-rotating vacuum solution of \citeN Weber1957,

-   reproducing the rotating vacuum solution of \shortciteN
    Xanthopoulos1986,

-   using the results for the static cosmic string as initial data and
    verifying that the system stays in its static configuration,

-   convergence analysis for the string hit by a Weber-Wheeler wave.

Two additional tests arise in a natural way from the field equations and
the numerical scheme. As described above there are two additional field
equations which are consequences of the other equations. We have
verified that these equations are satisfied to second order accuracy (
@xmath ). Furthermore the numerical scheme calculates the residuals of
the algebraic equations to be solved, which have thus been monitored in
test runs. They are satisfied to a much higher accuracy (double
precision machine accuracy), so the total error is dominated by the
truncation error of the second order differencing scheme. Another
independent test is the comparison with the explicit CCM code which
yields good agreement as long as the latter remains stable. The four
main tests are now described in more detail.

#### 4.5.1 The Weber-Wheeler wave

In the first test we evolve the analytic solution given by \citeN
Weber1957, which describes a gravitational pulse of the “+” polarisation
mode. We have given the analytic expressions in section 3.5.1 in terms
of @xmath , @xmath [Eqs. ( 3.46 )-( 3.49 )] and in terms of @xmath ,
@xmath [Eqs. ( 3.50 )-( 3.53 )]. The corresponding equations in
characteristic coordinates @xmath , @xmath in the inner region are
easily obtained from the coordinate transformation @xmath . We prescribe
@xmath as initial data according to the analytic expressions obtained
for @xmath and @xmath and set the other free variables to zero, while
@xmath is calculated via quadrature from the constraint equation ( 4.20
). In Fig. 19 we show the deviation of the numerical results from the
analytic one for @xmath grid points (320 points in the inner, 1600
points in the outer region) and a Courant factor of 0.5 with respect to
the inner region. The convergence analysis (see below) shows that this
number of points provides sufficient resolution in the outer region
while still keeping computation times at a tolerable level. All
computations presented in the remainder of section 4 have been obtained
with these grid parameters, unless stated otherwise. The code stays
stable for much longer time intervals than shown in the figure, but does
not reveal any further interesting features as the analytic solution
approaches its Minkowskian values and the error goes to zero.

#### 4.5.2 The rotating solution of Xanthopoulos \shortciteN

Xanthopoulos1986 has derived an analytic vacuum solution for Einstein’s
field equations in cylindrical symmetry containing both the “+” and “
@xmath ” polarisation mode. Its analytic form in terms of our metric
variables is given by Eqs. ( 3.55 )-( 3.68 ) in section 3.5.2 . Again
the transformation to coordinates @xmath , @xmath in the inner region
results straightforwardly from @xmath . The solution has one free
parameter @xmath set to one in this calculation. The error of our
numerical results is displayed in Fig. 20 , where we have used the same
grid parameters as in the Weber-Wheeler case. Again we have run the code
for longer times and found that the error approaches zero. We conclude
that the code reproduces both analytic vacuum solutions with excellent
accuracy comparable to that of the CCM code and exhibits long term
stability.

#### 4.5.3 Evolution of the static cosmic string

The tests described above only involve vacuum solutions, so the matter
part of the code and the interaction between matter and geometry has not
been tested. An obvious test involving matter and geometry is to use the
result for the static cosmic string in curved spacetime as initial data
and evolve this scenario. All variables should, of course, remain at
their initial values. We have evolved the static string data for our
standard grid and the parameter set, @xmath and @xmath , which
corresponds to a strong back-reaction of the string on the metric. The
results are shown in Fig. 21 . The system stays in its static
configuration with high accuracy over a time interval which is
significantly longer than the dynamically relevant timescale of the
vacuum solutions discussed above.

#### 4.5.4 Convergence analysis

Our investigation of the interaction between the cosmic string and
gravitational waves will focus on the string being hit by a wave of the
Weber-Wheeler type. In order to check this scenario for convergence we
have run the code for the parameter set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath for different grid resolutions, where @xmath and @xmath are again
the width and amplitude of the Weber-Wheeler wave. In our case it is of
particular interest to investigate the time dependence of the
convergence to see what resolution we need in order to obtain reliable
results for long runs. We calculate the convergence rate again according
to equation ( 3.70 ). The high resolution reference solution has been
calculated for @xmath grid points. In Fig. 22 we show the convergence
factor @xmath as a function of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The initial data for @xmath is identically zero for
this scenario and stays zero during the evolution. The number of grid
points is increased by a factor of 1.5 here (instead of the more
commonly used 2) to reduce the computation time. Only points common to
all grids have been used in the sum in equation ( 3.70 ). For second
order convergence we would expect a convergence factor of @xmath .
Although the results in Fig. 22 show weak variations with @xmath ,
second order convergence is clearly maintained for long runs. In each
case the outer region contains 5 times as many grid points as the inner
region (e.g. @xmath , @xmath for the @xmath case). The reason for this
is that in the dynamic evolutions @xmath and especially @xmath exhibit
significant spatial variations out to large radii. Due to the
compactification, the spatial resolution of our grid decreases towards
null infinity and in order to resolve the spatial variations of the
string variables out to sufficiently large radii we therefore have to
introduce a large number of grid points in the outer region. No such
problems occur in the inner region. If significantly fewer grid points
are used in the outer region for this analysis, the convergence
properties of the string variables can deteriorate to roughly first
order level.

### 4.6 Time dependence of the string variables

#### 4.6.1 Static cosmic strings excited by gravitational waves

The scenario we are going to investigate in this section is an initially
static cosmic string hit by a gravitational wave of Weber-Wheeler type.
For this purpose we use the static results with two modifications as
initial data. Firstly the static metric function @xmath is multiplied by
the exact Weber-Wheeler solution to simulate the gravitational wave
pulse. Thus we guarantee that initially the cosmic string is indeed in
an equilibrium configuration provided the wave pulse is located
sufficiently far away from the origin and its interaction with the
string is negligible. Ideally the numerical calculation would start with
the incoming wave located at past null infinity. In order to approximate
this scenario, we found it was sufficient to use the large negative
initial time @xmath . The second modification is to calculate @xmath
from the constraint equation ( 4.20 ) to preserve consistency with the
Einstein field equations. In Fig. 23 the corresponding initial data for
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown for the parameter set @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . From now on we will refer to these values
as “standard parameters” and only specify parameters if they take on
non-standard values. The time evolution of the “standard configuration”
is shown in Fig. 24 where we plot @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath as functions of @xmath at times @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . While the wave pulse is still far away from the origin, its
interaction with the cosmic string is negligible (dotted lines). When it
reaches the core region it excites the cosmic string and the scalar and
vector field start oscillating (dashed curves). After being reflected at
the origin, the wave pulse travels along the outgoing characteristics
and the metric variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath quickly settle down
into their static configuration which is close to Minkowskian values for
@xmath . The vector and scalar field of the cosmic string, on the other
hand, continue ringing albeit with a different character. Whereas the
oscillations of the scalar field @xmath are dominant in the range @xmath
and have significantly decayed at @xmath as shown in the figure, the
vector field oscillations propagate to large radii and fall off very
slowly (solid curves). This behaviour is also illustrated in the right
panel of Fig. 25 which shows a contour plot of @xmath as a function of
@xmath out to @xmath . We shall see below, that the oscillations of
@xmath will also decay eventually and the cosmic string will
asymptotically settle back into its equilibrium configuration.

#### 4.6.2 Frequency analysis

We will now quantitatively analyse the oscillations of the scalar and
vector field of the cosmic string. Since we are working in rescaled
coordinates, physical time and distance are measured in units of @xmath
and frequency in its inverse. To avoid complicated notation, however, we
will omit the units from now on unless the meaning is unclear. In order
to measure frequencies, we Fourier analyse the time evolution of the
scalar and vector field for fixed radius @xmath . Fig. 26 shows @xmath
and @xmath for standard parameters as functions of time at @xmath
together with the corresponding power spectra. In each Fourier spectrum
we can see three peaks. Those very close to @xmath are merely due to the
offset of the data and the gradual change of the fields over long times.
We therefore do not attribute these peaks to the oscillations of the
fields and will not consider them in the ensuing discussion. We have
calculated similar power spectra for a large class of parameter sets and
in most cases found two peaks at non-zero frequencies. In order to
interprete the frequencies, it is convenient to plot them as functions
of the relative coupling strength @xmath . The result is shown in Fig.
27 . In this figure the solid lines show the frequency values calculated
for the scalar and vector field from the linearised equations (see
\citeNP Sjodin2001)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.106)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can thus associate the constant frequency @xmath with the scalar
field @xmath and the @xmath dependent frequency with the vector field
@xmath . We will refer to these frequencies as @xmath and @xmath from
now on. The @xmath -dependency of @xmath is also illustrated in Fig. 25
where we show contour plots of @xmath obtained for @xmath and @xmath .
The oscillation frequency is significantly larger for @xmath .
In Fig. 27 we can see that the frequencies associated with the scalar
and vector field become similar near @xmath . For this value it can be
shown that the masses associated with the scalar and vector field become
equal (see for example \citeNP Sjodin2001). The frequencies are
difficult to resolve in these cases and we have only found one peak in
the Fourier spectra. The resulting values are shown as filled lozenges
in the figure. In this context it is worth mentioning that the accuracy
of the measurements of the frequencies is limited by the resolution of
the Fourier spectra which again is limited by the time interval covered
in the evolution. In Fig. 26 we can see however, that the oscillations
of both @xmath and @xmath gradually die out in later stages of the
evolutions, so that it becomes increasingly difficult to extract more
information about the frequencies by using larger integration times. The
evolutions used for this analysis provide an accuracy @xmath which
corresponds approximately to one bin in the frequency spectra.
It is interesting to see that in the non-linear evolution the
distinction between the oscillations of the vector and the scalar field
is not as clear as in the linear case which is demonstrated by the
presence of two peaks in the Fourier spectra. We attribute this feature
to the interaction between the scalar and vector component of the cosmic
string. Concerning the radial dependence of the spectra we have in
general found that the characteristic mode of @xmath resulted in
stronger peaks at smaller radius, that of @xmath was stronger at larger
radii. This variation of the relative strength of the oscillations with
radius confirms the corresponding observation in Fig. 24 .

In order to investigate the dependency of the oscillations on

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the radial position @xmath , we have varied
each parameter over at least two orders of magnitude while keeping the
other parameters at standard values. We have found the following
dependencies:

-   The frequencies of both @xmath and @xmath do not show any variations
    with @xmath for @xmath . (Note that @xmath does, however, appear in
    the units). For larger values of @xmath , the non-linear interaction
    between string and geometry becomes dominant and we did not detect a
    simple relation between frequency maxima and parameters.

-   The variation of the parameters @xmath and @xmath , the width and
    amplitude of the Weber-Wheeler pulse, has no measurable effect on
    the frequencies of @xmath and @xmath , but only determined the
    amplitude of the oscillations. A narrow, strong pulse leads to
    larger amplitudes.

-   For small @xmath the oscillations in @xmath are stronger, whereas
    those for @xmath dominate at large @xmath . The frequency values,
    however, do not depend on the radius. For radii greater than 10 the
    oscillations in @xmath had decayed so strongly that we could no
    longer measure its frequency.

We have also checked the empirical relation between the coupling
constant @xmath and the frequencies @xmath and @xmath . For this purpose
we have performed a linear regression analysis of the double logarithmic
data of Fig. 27 excluding the cases where only one frequency is
observed. We obtain power law indices @xmath and @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.108)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which agrees with Eqs. ( 4.106 ), ( 4.107 ). If we transform this result
back into physical units using @xmath , we arrive at the following
relations for the physical variables

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.110)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As shown in \citeN Shellard1994 up to constant factors @xmath and @xmath
are the masses of the scalar and the vector field, @xmath and @xmath ,
so that @xmath and @xmath have characteristic frequencies

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.112)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since the frequencies for @xmath and @xmath seem only to depend upon the
respective masses we have attempted to confirm these results by
considering the oscillations of a cosmic string in two further
scenarios. Firstly since the frequencies do not depend upon the shape of
the Weber-Wheeler

pulse we take as initial data the static values for the metric variables
but excite the string by adding a Gaussian perturbation to either the
@xmath or @xmath static initial values. The evolution is then computed
using the fully coupled system. Secondly since the frequencies do not
seem to depend upon the strength of the coupling to the gravitational
field we have completely decoupled the gravitational field and
considered the evolution of a cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime. The
initial data is taken to be that for a static string in Minkowski
spacetime with a Gaussian perturbation to either the @xmath or @xmath
values. The evolution is then computed using the equations for a
dynamical string in a Minkowskian background [equations ( 4.22 ) and (
4.23 ) with the metric variables set to Minkowskian values]. In both
cases we obtain the same frequencies, to within an amount @xmath , that
we find in the original case of the fully coupled system excited by a
Weber-Wheeler pulse. Furthermore the frequencies did not depend on the
location or shape of the field perturbation nor upon the choice of
@xmath or @xmath as the perturbed field.

#### 4.6.3 The long term behaviour of the dynamic string

The time evolution shown in Figs. 24 and 25 indicates that the
oscillations of the cosmic string excited by gravitational waves
gradually decay and metric and string settle down into an equilibrium
state. In order to investigate the long term behaviour in detail we have
evolved the variables for a much longer time ( @xmath ) than in the
numerical evolutions discussed above. The unphysically large value of
@xmath is chosen for this calculation in order to guarantee a strong
interaction between spacetime geometry and the cosmic string. In Fig. 28
we show the difference @xmath between the time-dependent @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath and their corresponding static results obtained for
the same parameters. For the vector field @xmath a similar 3-dimensional
plot would require an extreme resolution to properly display the
oscillations of the vector field (cf. Fig. 24 ). For this reason we
proceed differently and calculate the @xmath -norm and the maximum of
@xmath for each slice @xmath . Both functions are plotted versus time in
Fig. 28 . The incoming wave pulse can clearly be seen as a strong
deviation of @xmath from the static function. The pulse excites the
cosmic string and is reflected at the origin at @xmath . The metric
variables and the scalar field @xmath then quickly reach their
equilibrium values. The oscillations in @xmath decay on a significantly
longer time scale which is also evident in Figs. 24 and 25 and the
@xmath -norm of @xmath slowly approaches 0. Significantly longer runs
than shown here are prohibited by the required computation time, but the
results indicate that @xmath will also eventually reach its equilibrium
configuration.

### 4.7 Discussion

In the previous two sections we have studied numerical problems in
cylindrical symmetry with particular emphasis on the use of
characteristic methods and the compactification of spacetime.
This work has completed the 1-dimensional stage of the Southampton
Cauchy-characteristic matching project by presenting for the first time
a long-term stable second order convergent code for general
cylindrically symmetric vacuum spacetimes with both the @xmath and
@xmath polarisation mode. In order to obtain long-term stability it was
crucial to formulate the problem in a way that simplifies the relations
at the interface where information is transferred between the interior
Cauchy and the exterior characteristic region. In this particular case
we achieved the simplification by applying the Geroch decomposition to
both regions which contrasts with the less successful previous attempts
where the Killing direction was factored out in the exterior region
only. In view of the numerical subtleties involved with the
interpolation techniques at the interface the importance of a suitable
choice of variables may not be too surprising. Nevertheless we stress
the significance of this result concerning Cauchy-characteristic
matching codes in higher dimensions. The structure of the null geodesics
will inevitably become much more complicated if the restriction of
cylindrical symmetry is dropped and the physical variables are allowed
to depend on the angular coordinates. Correspondingly the transformation
between variables at the interface will also be more complicated. In
view of our results it seems important to carefully choose the variables
describing the spacetime in both regions and aim for “simple”
transformation laws.
The inclusion of matter in the form of cosmic strings resulted in
qualitatively new numerical problems that finally were solved by the use
of specially adapted numerical methods. The incorporation of null
infinity proved to be important here for the specification of outer
boundary conditions on the matter variables. It was the existence of
unphysical exponentially diverging solutions of the equations for a
cosmic string that required a special numerical treatment. We were able
to suppress the unphysical diverging solutions by solving the equations
for a cosmic string with a relaxation scheme in the static case and an
implicit evolution scheme in the dynamic case. We have thus been able to
develop the first fully non-linear simulation of a static and a dynamic
cosmic string coupled to gravity which implements the exact boundary
conditions at both the origin and infinity. The resulting codes have
been used to study the interaction between a cosmic string and a
gravitational wave pulse. We have found that the gravitational wave
pulse excites the cosmic string which then starts oscillating with
frequencies proportional to the particle masses associated with the
scalar and vector field. The same frequencies have been observed if we
excite the cosmic string with a Gaussian perturbation to the scalar or
vector field.
From a numerical point of view an interesting result of the numerical
solution of the equations for a dynamic cosmic string concerns the
transfer of information at the interface. We have illustrated this in
Fig. 15 where two grid points @xmath , @xmath have been used for the
spatial position @xmath . The grid point @xmath contains the variables
of the interior region at @xmath , whereas the variables of the exterior
region are specified at the same position on grid point @xmath . The
corresponding implementation of the interface is remarkably simple as
illustrated by Eqs. ( 4.43 )-( 4.46 ) which represent the interface for
the static cosmic string in Minkowski spacetime. The corresponding
equations in the dynamic case coupled to gravity are equally trivial.
Even if different variables are used in the interior and exterior
region, one is still able to transform the variables locally at the grid
points @xmath and @xmath and there is no need to use interpolation
techniques as in the case of the explicit numerical methods used in
section 3 . We attribute the possibility of using this simple
implementation of the interface to the fact that all function values are
calculated simultaneously on the new time slice in an implicit scheme,
so that there is no hierarchical order according to which the function
values have to be calculated. We have probed such a “local interface” in
an implicit Cauchy-characteristic matching code for cylindrically
symmetric, non-rotating vacuum spacetimes and achieved a long term
stable evolution with an accuracy comparable to the explicit code
described in section 3 . Even though an interface based on interpolation
performs satisfactorily in cylindrical symmetry this may no longer be
the case in higher dimensional problems where the interpolation
techniques will be significantly more complicated. On the other hand we
can see no obvious reason why a “local interface” in combination with an
implicit numerical scheme should differ significantly from that used in
the 1-dimensional case.

## 5 Non-linear oscillations of spherically symmetric stars

### 5.1 Introduction

In this section we will turn our attention towards the study of compact
stars in the framework of general relativity. The discovery of stars
significantly more compact than the sun goes back to observations of the
binary star Sirius in the middle of the 19th century. Sirius is the
brightest star in the sky as viewed from the earth. From an
astrophysical point of view, however, the faint companion of the bright
main star, Sirius B has provoked much more interest. The astronomer
Bessel was the first to infer the existence of an unseen companion of
Sirius from a wobble in the motion of the main star. It took another
twenty years before Alvin Clark managed to optically resolve Sirius B.
By the early twentieth century it became clear from the analysis of its
electromagnetic spectrum that Sirius B has a rather high surface
temperature of about 25,000 @xmath . In view of this result the
extraordinarily low luminosity of Sirius B lead to the conclusion that
the star is very small, about the size of the earth. This type of high
density star was consequently named a white dwarf . It was understood at
the time that white dwarfs mark the final stage in the evolution of
stars, but it remained a puzzle how such compact objects were able to
support themselves against gravitational contraction. The answer was
first provided by Eddington and Fowler who suggested that the star is
supported by the degenerate electron pressure, a quantum effect arising
from the Pauli-exclusion principle. When Chandrasekhar worked out the
corresponding theory for a relativistic electron gas he made the
remarkable discovery that the degenerate electron pressure will never be
sufficient to support white dwarfs above a mass of about @xmath . In his
words: “For a star of small mass the natural white dwarf stage is an
initial step towards complete extinction. A star of large mass cannot
pass into the white dwarf stage and one is left speculating on other
possibilities.” It did not take long before such speculations were
directed towards the existence of neutron stars.
The first suggestion that stars made up of nucleons may exist came from
Landau in 1932 just two years after the discovery of the neutron. Two
years later Baade and Zwicky proposed the idea that neutron stars may be
the product of supernova explosions and thus mark the final stage in the
evolution of stars of large mass. The first theoretical models of
neutron stars were calculated in 1939 by Tolman, Oppenheimer and
Volkoff. It took another thirty years, however, before neutron stars
were actually discovered observationally. Furthermore this discovery
came in a completely unexpected way. In 1967 the then Cambridge graduate
student Jocelyne Bell and her supervisor Antony Hewish were looking for
scintillations of radio sources produced by the interstellar medium. On
the 28th of November 1967 they discovered a source with an exceptionally
regular pattern of radio pulses which at the time even gave rise to the
speculation of an extra-terrestrial, intelligent origin. These
speculations were quickly abandoned, however, when three more “pulsars”
were found within the next few weeks. The extremely short duration of
the pulses and the high pulse frequencies lead to the conclusion that
these sources must be significantly smaller than white dwarfs. An
explanation for this phenomenon was finally found when a pulsar was
detected at the centre of the crab nebula. From historical records it is
known that the crab nebula marks a supernova explosion that was observed
in the year 1054. Pulsars are therefore identified with neutron stars,
the remnants of supernova explosions. In the same way that the
degeneracy pressure of the electrons supports white dwarfs against
gravitational collapse, the internal pressure in neutron stars arises
from the degenerate nucleons. A great deal of work has gone into the
observational and theoretical study of these compact objects. From these
studies it is known that neutron stars have masses of about @xmath solar
masses and radii of about @xmath . Neutron stars are believed to have a
solid crust in which the density increases from about @xmath to a few
times @xmath . In this density range the matter is assumed to consist of
a degenerate electron gas and atomic nuclei that form a crystal-like
structure. At larger densities the atomic nuclei gradually dissolve and
at about @xmath the matter largely consists of a highly incompressible
neutron fluid with small amounts of protons and electrons. An
interesting property of this fluid arises from the thermal temperature
which is commonly believed to be smaller than @xmath . Compared with the
Fermi-temperature of the nucleons of about @xmath this implies that the
matter behaves like a fluid at zero temperature and becomes superfluid
and, in the case of the protons, super-conductive. The structure of
matter and the resulting equations of state at higher densities become
increasingly unclear and are subject to ongoing research. Near the
centre of a neutron star the density is assumed to be of the order of
@xmath and the matter may at least partly consist of hyperons, pions or
quarks, so-called strange matter .
The extreme compactness of neutron stars makes them particularly
interesting from a relativistic point of view. We have already mentioned
the significance of neutron stars in the context of the search for
gravitational waves. In this respect the importance of neutron star
oscillations arises from the discovery of secularly unstable oscillation
modes that increase in amplitude due to the spin down of the neutron
star while energy is radiated away in the form of gravitational waves.
If the attempts to measure gravitational waves are indeed successful, a
whole new window for astrophysical observations may be opened and
facilitate a unique opportunity to directly observe the interior of
astrophysical objects such as neutron stars. In this work, however, we
will not directly study neutron star oscillations in the context of
gravitational radiation. Instead we use the simpler case of spherically
symmetric dynamic neutron stars in order to probe a new numerical
approach which enables us to numerically evolve non-linear oscillations
of arbitrary amplitude with high accuracy. While these evolutions will
not lead to the generation of gravitational waves because of the
spherical symmetry, the numerical results, the new techniques and the
discussion of numerical difficulties encountered in the course of this
work may still be relevant for numerical simulations of more general
types of neutron star oscillations.
The use of oscillations as a diagnostic tool to obtain information about
the interior structure of an object is an old idea and by no means
restricted to the realm of distant stars. For example the same technique
has been applied to the earth where the study of artificially induced
oscillations and, in particular, earthquakes has lead to invaluable
insight into the internal structure of our planet. In the same way a
great deal of knowledge has been obtained about the sun and more distant
stars by investigating their oscillations which reveal themselves in the
electromagnetic spectra of these objects. Whereas Newtonian theory is
perfectly adequate for studying “normal” stars, i.e. stars that gain
their energy from continuous nuclear burning of hydrogen and other light
elements, accurate modelling of compact objects like neutron stars
requires a general relativistic description.
The first type of neutron star oscillations to be studied extensively
were linear radial oscillations (see for example \shortciteNP
Chandrasekhar1964a, \citeyearNP Chandrasekhar1964b) which today
represent a well understood problem that is described in the standard
literature. The same is not true, however, for nonlinear radial
oscillations which lead to qualitatively new problems. We have already
mentioned that spherically symmetric spacetimes do not admit radiative
solutions. Instead the generation of gravitational waves requires a time
varying quadrupole or higher multi-pole ( @xmath ) moment of the neutron
star inertia. From that point of view, the study of radial oscillations
is not immediately interesting. There are, however, several other
important aspects associated with radial oscillations. In the work
mentioned above, Chandrasekhar first revealed the existence of
relativistic instability. In the framework of radial oscillations this
instability manifests itself in the instability of the fundamental
radial oscillation mode. If the frequency of this mode becomes
imaginary, an exponential growth of physical quantities results and the
star collapses or evaporates. A fully non-linear evolution code based on
spectral methods has been developed by \citeN Gourgoulhon1991 and has
been used to study various aspects of the stability of neutron stars and
their collapse into black holes ( \citeNP Gourgoulhon1993, \shortciteNP
Gourgoulhon1994). Radial oscillations have also been considered from the
point of view of astrophysical observations. The discovery of
quasi-periodic radio sub-pulses in the spectra of pulsars and
periodicities in X-ray sources has lead to the suggestion that radial
oscillations of neutron stars may give rise to these features ( \citeNP
Boriakoff1976, \citeNP vanHorn1980), which in turn has stimulated
further research in this direction (see for example \shortciteNP
Marti1988, \citeNP Vaeth1992). Furthermore the influence of radial
oscillations on the electromagnetic spectrum of neutron stars and their
dependence on the structure of matter at super-nuclear densities may
provide valuable information about the equation of state in the high
density range ( \citeNP Glass1983). The study of radial oscillations is
frequently carried out in the linear regime, where all physical
quantities have a harmonic time dependence @xmath and the radial
profiles @xmath are determined by an eigenvalue problem. In this work we
will present explicit time evolutions of the physical variables in the
fully non-linear case. These evolutions will serve two purposes. First
we will be able to study deviations from the known linearized behaviour,
such as mode coupling and shock formation. Secondly the spherically
symmetric case can be used to investigate numerical difficulties that
are also expected in the more complicated time evolutions in two or
three spatial dimensions. A detailed analysis in the computationally
less expensive 1-dimensional case may lead to the development of new
advantageous numerical techniques or other types of solutions to these
problems. The work of \citeN Gourgoulhon1991 for example has shown among
other results that the use of momentum densities as fundamental
variables may lead to computation errors in passing from the momentum
densities to the velocity fields which can be avoided if velocity
variables are used in the first place.
In our discussion we will start with a static spherically symmetric star
which is governed by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations ( \citeNP
Tolman1939, \citeNP Oppenheimer1939). In section 5.2 we will investigate
these equations and describe the numerical methods we use to calculate
the resulting neutron star models. In section 5.3 we will use the static
results in order to obtain a fully non-linear perturbative formulation
of dynamic spherically symmetric stars. As a subclass we will discuss
the linearized limit of these equations in section 5.3.3 and numerically
calculate the corresponding eigenmode solutions. It is interesting to
see that the surface of the star turns out to be a problematic area even
in this comparatively simple case. After a more detailed discussion of
the general problems one faces at the surface in an Eulerian formulation
we describe the numerical implementation of the code. Even though the
code is shown to perform well in the linear regime for a large variety
of neutron star models in section 5.3.6 , the surface problem is shown
to give rise to spurious results in some special cases. In order to
circumvent these problems we use a simplified neutron star model in
section 5.3.9 to test the code in the non-linear regime and to
investigate the non-linear coupling of eigenmodes. We conclude this work
with the development of a fully non-linear perturbative Lagrangian code
in section 5.4 . We demonstrate how the difficulties at the surface are
resolved in such a formulation and extensively test this code in the
linear and non-linear regime. We use this code to address the question
whether non-linear effects are present near the surface of the neutron
star models in the case of low amplitude oscillations.

### 5.2 Spherically symmetric static stars

In the fully non-linear perturbative approach to the study of radial
oscillations we will decompose the time dependent physical quantities
into static background contributions and time dependent perturbations.
The background quantities will obey the corresponding static set of
equations which will then be used to remove terms of zero order from the
fully non-linear evolution equations in the time dependent case. In our
studies we have two principal choices for the static background: vacuum
flat space in which case we recover the standard non-perturbative
formulation of the problem and a static self-gravitating perfect fluid
in spherical symmetry which is described by the
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations. It is the second case which
enables us to obtain highly accurate numerical solutions for any given
amplitude of the oscillations. We will therefore first discuss in detail
the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff (TOV) equations as well as their
numerical solution.

#### 5.2.1 The Tolman Oppenheimer Volkoff equations

In the framework of the “3+1” formalism described in section 2.1 , we
start by choosing coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath on each spatial
hypersurface @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are standard angular coordinates
and the radius @xmath is defined by the radial gauge condition, so that
the area of a surface @xmath is @xmath . The 3-dimensional line element
is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in spherical symmetry @xmath is a function of @xmath only. If we
label the hypersurfaces @xmath by the coordinate @xmath we can apply the
polar slicing condition which combined with radial gauge can be shown to
imply a vanishing shift vector in spherical symmetry. The 4-dimensional
metric is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the lapse function @xmath is also a function of @xmath .
Alternatively this metric can be described by the variables @xmath and
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the Newtonian limit @xmath becomes the gravitational potential and
@xmath the gravitating mass.
Our description of the matter is based on three simplifying assumptions,
which we will discuss in order.

1) We will describe the matter as a single component perfect fluid. This
means that the fluid is seen as isotropic by a comoving observer. In
particular no heat conduction, no shear stresses, anisotropic pressures
or viscosity must be present. The deviation from the perfect fluid
equilibrium due to anisotropic stresses resulting from the solid crust
are found to be @xmath even for rotating stars ( \citeNP Friedman1992).
It is, however, not entirely clear to what extent the treatment of the
neutron star matter as a single perfect fluid is too restrictive. It was
suggested as early as 1959 by \citeANP Migdal1959 that nucleons might be
present in the form of superfluids in the interior of neutron stars. In
order to obtain more realistic descriptions of neutron stars it might
therefore be necessary to describe the matter as a multicomponent fluid.
These issues are subject to ongoing research (see for example \citeNP
Andersson2001) and their investigation would exceed the scope of this
work. We will therefore focus our discussion on single component perfect
fluids in which case we can write the energy-momentum tensor in the form

@xmath @xmath (5.5)

where @xmath is the energy density and @xmath the pressure measured by a
comoving observer. In the static spherically symmetric case @xmath and
@xmath are functions of the radius @xmath and the 4-velocity has a
non-vanishing time component only. The normalisation condition @xmath
then implies

@xmath @xmath (5.6)

2) The neutron star matter is assumed to be at zero temperature. This is
justified by comparing the thermal temperature of the stellar interior,
which is assumed to be smaller than @xmath in mature neutron stars, with
the relevant temperature scale given by the Fermi temperature of the
matter. Even though the thermal temperature is large compared with
terrestrial standards, it is orders of magnitude below the Fermi
temperature of matter at nuclear density ( @xmath K), so that the
thermal degrees of freedom are frozen out. As a consequence the single
component perfect fluid is described by a 1-parameter equation of state
which is commonly chosen to be of the form @xmath .

3) The equation of state (EOS) is assumed to be given by a polytropic
law

@xmath @xmath (5.7)

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. Instead of the polytropic
exponent @xmath sometimes the polytropic index @xmath is used which is
defined by

@xmath (5.8)

The suitability of such an EOS is certainly a debatable issue and the
determination of realistic equations of state of matter at super-nuclear
densities represents an entire branch of physical research. Conclusive
answers have yet to be obtained, however, and by using polytropes with
different indices @xmath one is able to study the qualitative
differences in the behaviour of neutron stars with equations of state of
varying stiffness. Furthermore polytropes are given in analytic form so
that no additional numerical error arises from their use.

We have got all ingredients now to derive the equations governing the
static spherically symmetric neutron star model. Starting with the
metric ( 5.2 ) and the energy-momentum tensor given by Eq. ( 5.5 ) with
the 4-velocity ( 5.6 ) the Einstein field equations @xmath result in two
independent equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

All other field equations are consequences of these two equations, their
derivatives and the matter equation ( 5.12 ). In terms of the
alternative variable @xmath defined by Eq. ( 5.3 ), the equation for
@xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From now on we will therefore refer to @xmath as the “mass” or “mass
function” of the neutron star. Conservation of energy and momentum
@xmath results in a single equation describing the hydrostatic
equilibrium

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The system of ODEs ( 5.9 ), ( 5.10 ), ( 5.12 ) was first derived by
\citeN Tolman1939 and \citeN Oppenheimer1939 and is thus known as the
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff or TOV equations. Together with an equation
of state which we choose to be the polytropic law ( 5.7 ) they describe
a self-gravitating perfect fluid in spherical symmetry.
We finally need to specify appropriate boundary conditions for these
equations. The condition for the radial component of the metric is
@xmath at the origin @xmath in order to avoid a conical singularity.
This is also illustrated by the requirement of a finite energy density
@xmath at the centre which according to Eq. ( 5.11 ) implies that @xmath
near the centre. Consequently @xmath and Eq. ( 5.3 ) leads to @xmath .
The lapse function @xmath on the other hand appears in the equations in
the form @xmath and is therefore only defined up to a constant factor.
Normally this factor is chosen so that @xmath takes on the value @xmath
at the stellar surface which matches the interior metric ( 5.2 ) to an
exterior Schwarzschild metric

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the radius of the star. Finally the surface
of the star is defined by the vanishing of the pressure @xmath which for
the polytropic equation of state is equivalent to @xmath . We note that
for some equations of state the fluid extends to infinity and the energy
density will vanish nowhere. In this work, however, we will restrict
ourselves to equations of state which lead to stars of finite size. We
therefore summarise the boundary conditions as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

at the origin @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

at the surface @xmath , i.e. three boundary conditions for the three
first order ODEs ( 5.9 ), ( 5.10 ), ( 5.12 ). At first glance this seems
to completely specify the physical scenario. We have to note one
subtlety however: the location of the stellar surface, i.e. the
extension of the numerical grid, is not determined at this stage. For
any given equation of state we therefore expect a 1-parameter family of
solutions parameterised by the radius @xmath . As we will see below we
can alternatively parameterise the family of solutions by the central
density @xmath of the star. Which of these parameters we choose and
therefore have to specify in addition to the boundary conditions ( 5.14
)-( 5.16 ) depends on the numerical approach we take towards solving the
TOV-equations. There are two main approaches to this problem.

#### 5.2.2 The numerical treatment of the TOV-equations

The problem we have to solve numerically is given by the TOV equations (
5.9 ), ( 5.10 ), ( 5.12 ), the boundary conditions ( 5.14 )-( 5.16 ) and
the prescription of the free parameter. From a numerical point of view
this is a two-point boundary value problem and should be solved
accordingly with shooting or relaxation methods. This is the first of
the two approaches we mentioned in the previous section. Here we will
discuss a relaxation algorithm. In this case we set up a numerical grid,
thus specifying the free parameter in the form of the stellar radius,
and finite difference the equations as described in section 2.3.5 . The
three boundary conditions then provide the remaining three algebraic
equations and having specified an initial guess the code relaxes to the
solution of the TOV-equations. The main advantages of this approach are:

-   all boundary conditions are exactly satisfied,

-   a neutron star model with a specified radius is obtained
    straightforwardly by appropriately setting up the numerical grid.

This code suffers from some drawbacks, however, which can be summarized
as follows:

-   the specification of initial data is non-trivial and the convergence
    of the code depends on a “good” initial guess,

-   obtaining high accuracy via a higher ( @xmath ) order finite
    differencing scheme results in more complicated coefficient matrices
    and inversion routines,

-   it is not clear how to obtain a neutron star model with a specified
    central density,

It is quite remarkable that the second numerical approach has exactly
the opposite properties in that the advantages and drawbacks are
reversed. In this approach the outer boundary conditions are ignored
initially and instead one starts with three boundary conditions at the
centre

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The TOV-equations can then be integrated outwards straightforwardly
until the energy density becomes negative and the out-most grid point
will define the surface of the star. Even though the energy density will
not vanish exactly at this point but take on a small positive value, the
accuracy thus obtained is good enough for most practical purposes. The
remaining freedom to multiply the lapse function @xmath with an
arbitrary constant is used to enforce the boundary condition ( 5.15 ).
Alternatively one can first integrate Eqs. ( 5.10 ), ( 5.12 ) for @xmath
and @xmath which decouple from @xmath and afterwards obtains @xmath from
inward integration of Eq. ( 5.9 ).
In a sense the two methods complement each other and for example we use
the quadrature approach to obtain an initial guess for the relaxation
scheme. Throughout this work we will use both numerical methods and
specify in each case how the TOV solutions were calculated.
Before we investigate the solutions thus obtained, however, we have to
discuss two technical issues, the choice of physical units and a
transformation to a new radial coordinate which will provide higher
resolution near the surface of the star. Below we will see that
sufficient resolution in this region can be crucial for an accurate
numerical evolution in the time dependent case.

#### 5.2.3 Physical units

Throughout this work we have worked with natural units, i.e. @xmath .
This choice can be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In astrophysics energy density is commonly measured in g/cm @xmath and
pressure in dyne/cm @xmath , where 1 dyne=1 erg/cm. However, we prefer
to measure all quantities in km or corresponding powers thereof. Using
Eqs. ( 5.20 ) and ( 5.21 ) we can calculate that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The metric variables @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless and it is
obvious then from Eqs. ( 5.3 ) and ( 5.10 ) that radius @xmath and mass
@xmath are measured in km. For example a typical central density for
neutron stars is @xmath g/cm @xmath which in our units becomes 0.000742
km @xmath . We can also compare our results for radius and mass with the
solar values

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In contrast to these values typical radii and masses of neutron stars
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is a well known result that relativistic correction terms to a
Newtonian description of stars generally appear in terms of the ratio
@xmath , so that this quotient describes the importance of relativistic
effects. In view of this result and the quotient @xmath it is
immediately obvious why a Newtonian description of the sun and other
“normal” stars is perfectly adequate. In contrast we find @xmath for
neutron stars, so that relativistic effects will play an important role
in their behaviour and accurate models need to be developed in the
framework of general relativity.

#### 5.2.4 Transformation to a new radial coordinate

We have already mentioned that the surface of the star is defined by the
vanishing of the pressure which in the case of a polytropic equation of
state is equivalent to a zero energy density. A dependent quantity
frequently introduced in the study of neutron stars is the speed of
sound defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which in the polytropic case ( 5.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Consequently the speed of sound will also vanish at the surface if
@xmath as will always be the case for a star of finite mass. In
particular we will show below that the asymptotic behaviour of the speed
of sound near the surface is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account the vanishing of the propagation speed of sound
waves at @xmath we now consider the qualitative behaviour of a localized
pulse travelling towards the surface. As a result of the decreasing
sound speed @xmath the front of the pulse will in general travel more
slowly than its tail and we would expect the pulse to narrow. In
particular the numerical resolution near the surface might be inadequate
to accurately evolve the pulse in this region and it might be beneficial
to work with a radial coordinate in terms of which the propagation speed
is by and large independent of the position within the star. In order to
study the implications of a locally vanishing propagation speed we
consider the simpler scenario of the 1-dimensional wave equation with
variable propagation speed

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

on a physical domain @xmath . Without loss of generality we will set
@xmath for the rest of this discussion. Eq. ( 5.30 ) then suggests to
choose a propagation speed of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For the numerical implementation we introduce the auxiliary variables
@xmath and @xmath and rewrite Eq. ( 5.31 ) as a system of two first
order PDEs

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and impose the boundary conditions @xmath , @xmath at both boundaries.
The system ( 5.33 ), ( 5.34 ) is linear and can be written in vectorial
form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
              @xmath      (5.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The characteristics of the PDE are then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are the eigenvalues of the matrix @xmath . At the
outer boundary the slopes of the characteristics collapse because of the
vanishing of the wave speed @xmath .
This system has been evolved with the second order in space and time
McCormack finite differencing scheme described in section 2.3.4 using a
grid of 500 points. In Fig. 29 we show the time evolution of @xmath
obtained for initial data in the form of a Gaussian pulse. Snapshots of
@xmath are plotted at @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

In order to shed light on the quality of the numerical evolution we
analyse the convergence properties of the code. For this purpose we have
performed the same runs using 1000 and 2000 grid points and calculated
the time dependent convergence factor according to the method described
in section 3.5.3 . Again we use a high resolution reference solution
obtained for 2000 grid points in place of the analytic solution. The
results shown in Fig. 30 demonstrate that the convergence of the code
drops to first order at about @xmath which coincides with the snapshot
at @xmath when the pulse is reflected at the outer boundary for the
first time. This result is confirmed by high resolution runs in which no
broadening of the pulse similar to that shown in Fig. 29 is observed
after reflections at either boundary. We conclude that a naive numerical
evolution can lead to spurious results in regions with a vanishing
propagation speed and that this problem is

due to an insufficient spatial resolution.
A solution to this problem is obtained by transforming to a new spatial
coordinate @xmath in terms of which the slopes of the characteristics do
not vary as drastically over the numerical domain and in particular do
not vanish at the boundary. A simple recipe is to define this new
coordinate by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the special case where the propagation speed is given by Eq. ( 5.32 )
the coordinates @xmath and @xmath are related by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so that the interval @xmath is mapped to @xmath . In terms of the new
coordinate @xmath the system ( 5.33 ), ( 5.34 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the characteristic curves are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to compare the new scheme with the original approach, we evolve
the

same initial data as above using the system ( 5.44 ), ( 5.45 ) on a
@xmath -grid again with 500 grid points and the same boundary
conditions.

The result is shown in Fig. 31 where we plot the same snapshots as in
Fig. 29 . For comparison purposes the plots show @xmath as a function of
the coordinate @xmath but as a result of the computation on the @xmath
-grid, the density of grid points is higher towards @xmath in Fig. 31
whereas the grid points are distributed homogeneously in Fig. 29 . In
contrast to the above evolution no broadening of the pulse after
reflection at the outer boundary is observed. The time dependent
convergence analysis shown in Fig. 32 demonstrates second order
convergence throughout the run even though small variations in the
convergence factor are visible when the pulse is reflected at either
boundary. We conclude that a transformation of the type ( 5.39 )
provides the necessary resolution in a region of vanishing propagation
speed and leads to satisfactory results at reasonable grid resolutions.
We now have to apply this idea to the case of a static, spherically
symmetric neutron star. The role of the wave speed @xmath is now assumed
by the speed of sound @xmath defined in Eq. ( 5.28 ) and we introduce
the new radial coordinate

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This transformation has also been successfully used by \citeN Ruoff2000
in the linearized time evolution of radial oscillations for more
realistic equations of state. The asymptotic behaviour of the sound
speed in the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff case given by Eq. ( 5.30 ) is
identical to that of the wave speed in the toy problem. Consequently the
radial interval @xmath of the star will be mapped to a finite interval
@xmath . In order to obtain a formulation which includes both possible
choices of the radial coordinate, we introduce the variable @xmath in
terms of which the TOV equations are written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the numerical code we are thus able to switch between the two
alternative modes of calculation by assigning the derivative @xmath
according to either possibility of Eq. ( 5.48 ). In either case the
boundary conditions are given by Eqs. ( 5.14 )-( 5.16 ) supplemented
with the requirement that @xmath and @xmath vanish simultaneously at the
origin

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One subtlety concerning the relaxation method of calculating TOV
solutions has to be mentioned. In this case we need to specify the
radius of the star. If we use the rescaled radial coordinate, however,
the surface value @xmath is not a priori known. In practice we therefore
specify the free parameter in the form of the central density and solve
the TOV equations via the quadrature method first. This provides us with
the outer boundary value of the coordinate @xmath for the stellar model
in question and we can solve the TOV equations in a second step with the
relaxation method.

#### 5.2.5 Asymptotic properties of the TOV equations

The asymptotic behaviour of the solutions of the TOV equations ( 5.48
)-( 5.51 ) at the surface of the star has serious implications for the
simulation of dynamic neutron stars with certain equations of state in a
strictly Eulerian framework. We will therefore discuss the asymptotic
behaviour first and then compare the results with the numerically
obtained solutions. Since the introduction of the rescaled radial
coordinate resulted from numerical requirements only, we use @xmath i.e.
the original system ( 5.9 )-( 5.12 ) for the asymptotic analysis. We
start with the behaviour at the origin, where we assume that

-   the energy density and thus the pressure are finite and positive,

-   the lapse function @xmath is finite and positive.

We have already seen that the central value of the energy density is a
free parameter and the pressure follows from the equation of state. The
central value of the lapse function, on the other hand, is determined by
matching @xmath to an exterior Schwarzschild metric. We also know from
section 5.2.1 that our assumptions imply @xmath and @xmath at the
origin. From Eq. ( 5.3 ) we therefore conclude that @xmath . Inserting
this result into Eq. ( 5.9 ) and using the second assumption we find
that @xmath and thus @xmath . Using this result in Eq. ( 5.12 ) leads to
@xmath , i.e. @xmath and the equation of state then shows that the
energy density has the same behaviour. In summary the results near the
origin are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.54)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.55)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding analysis for the surface is more complicated and the
results will later prove to be of more significance. For this analysis
it is convenient to work with the radial variable

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We start with the following assumptions.

-   The metric function @xmath is finite at the surface and also
    satisfies the inequality @xmath . This follows from Eq. ( 5.3 ) and
    the requirement that the mass satisfies the condition @xmath . The
    first inequality follows from Eq. ( 5.11 ) for any non vacuum model
    and the second implies that the neutron star extends beyond its
    Schwarzschild radius.

-   The lapse @xmath is finite and positive at the surface.

-   The energy density and the pressure vanish at the surface and their
    leading order terms are given by some positive powers of @xmath .

We write these assumptions as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are positive constants we have yet to
determine and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are non vanishing
constants subject to the restrictions mentioned above. We first insert
the expressions for @xmath and @xmath into the equation of state ( 5.7
). Comparison of the leading order terms then leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the polytropic exponent. Similarly the leading order in
Eq. ( 5.10 ) results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then combine Eqs. ( 5.9 ) and ( 5.12 ) to eliminate the lapse
function and insert ( 5.58 )-( 5.61 ). The result of comparing the two
leading orders is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This provides a second condition for @xmath and @xmath and with Eq. (
5.62 ) we conclude that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the polytropic index defined in ( 5.8 ). Finally we use
these results in Eq. ( 5.9 ) for the lapse function and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We summarise the asymptotic behaviour at the surface:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.70)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.71)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.72)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As a consequence we will not be able to Taylor expand @xmath and @xmath
about the surface @xmath unless a polytropic equation of state with
integer index @xmath is chosen. Indeed a more extensive analysis carried
out with the algebraic computing package GRTensor II shows that higher
order terms containing the polytropic index @xmath also appear in the
expansions of @xmath and @xmath so that these functions are subject to
the same limitations regarding Taylor expansion.
The most important result of the asymptotic analysis concerns the
behaviour of the energy density @xmath near the surface given by Eq. (
5.72 ). In particular we note that for a polytropic index @xmath or
exponent @xmath the gradient of @xmath with respect to the areal radius
@xmath will be infinite at the surface. The case @xmath , i.e. @xmath is
the limiting case where @xmath has a finite gradient. This special case
also implies that no fractional powers appear in the series expansions
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is considered to provide
a qualitatively good description of the average stiffness of the
equation of state of neutron stars and thus a popular choice for the
polytropic exponent. For @xmath or @xmath the energy density will have a
vanishing gradient at the surface.
It remains to check the asymptotic behaviour in terms of the rescaled
radial coordinate @xmath . From the definition of the speed of sound (
5.28 ) and the results above we conclude that near the surface

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which implies that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

All other functions have vanishing gradients with respect to @xmath near
the surface. Consequently the rescaled coordinate allows us to calculate
neutron star models for polytropic exponents up to @xmath without
encountering infinite gradients and the corresponding numerical
inaccuracies.

#### 5.2.6 Solutions of the TOV equations

In view of the results of the asymptotic analysis we have numerically
solved the TOV-equations for neutron star models with different
polytropic exponents @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding
models are listed in Table 3 where we have included two further models
with @xmath but different polytropic factor @xmath , which we will use
to also study the variation of the solutions with @xmath .

In the remainder of this work we will refer to these stellar models as
models 1-5. The code we have used for the calculation is based on the
quadrature method described in section 5.2.2 and uses a fourth order
Runge-Kutta scheme for the integration (see for example \shortciteNP
Press1989). We note, however, that the results of the relaxation method
agree with those of the quadrature scheme with high precision and the
corresponding plots are indistinguishable from those we show in this
section. For the calculations in this section we use the rescaled
coordinate @xmath and set @xmath in Eq. ( 5.48 ). The code has been
checked for convergence by calculating models 1-5 for different grid
resolutions starting with 250 grid points. The resulting convergence
factors @xmath for the variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath obtained for
doubling the grid resolution is shown in Table 4 for all 5 models. The
high resolution reference solution has been calculated for 2000 grid
points in all cases. For the fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme we would
expect a convergence factor of 16. Even though the results show some
variation around this value they are compatible with fourth order
convergence.
The numerical results obtained for the 5 stellar models we will now
discuss

have all been calculated by using about 600 grid points. In Fig. 33 we
plot the metric functions @xmath , @xmath , the energy density @xmath ,
the pressure @xmath , the mass @xmath and the sound speed @xmath as
functions of the areal radius @xmath for models 1, 3 and 5. We note that
the different central densities of these models have no impact on the
qualitative behaviour of the solutions and have only been chosen to
obtain neutron star models of similar size.

The results demonstrate the dependence of the behaviour of the star near
its surface on the polytropic exponent @xmath . According to the
asymptotic analysis we expect the gradient of the energy density to be
zero for @xmath in model 1, finite for the critical case @xmath in model
3 and infinite for model 5 where @xmath . This result is compatible with
the plots of @xmath in the middle left panel of Fig. 33 . The pressure
gradient on the other hand vanishes at the surfaces for any equation of
state with positive @xmath according to Eq. ( 5.73 ) which agrees with
the numerical results in the middle right panel. The speed of sound
shows the opposite behaviour and has an infinite gradient independent of
the polytropic index which is in agreement with the asymptotic result
given by Eq. ( 5.74 ). With respect to the metric we note that the
radial component @xmath has a local maximum, while the lapse @xmath is
monotonically increasing in the stellar interior. This behaviour becomes
clear if we look at the corresponding equations for @xmath and @xmath .
We already know that @xmath vanishes at the centre. If we differentiate
Eq. ( 5.10 ) with respect to @xmath only one term on the right hand side
is non zero at the centre, so that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath will

become positive as @xmath increases. At some point in the star, however,
the negative first term on the right hand side of Eq. ( 5.10 ) will
dominate the positive second term which goes to zero at the surface and
@xmath will become negative. Since Eq. ( 5.10 ) admits only one positive
solution for @xmath if @xmath , @xmath will monotonically decrease
beyond this point. We have already seen, however, that it cannot
decrease to @xmath or below inside the star since this conflicts with
the nonzero mass @xmath in Eq. ( 5.3 ). Consequently @xmath inside the
star and the right hand side of Eq. ( 5.9 ) will be positive throughout
the star which explains the monotonic behaviour of @xmath .
In order to study the dependence of the solutions on the polytropic
factor @xmath we compare the numerical results for models 2, 3 and 4 in
Fig. 34 . In contrast to the polytropic exponent, a variation of @xmath
does not qualitatively change the results. A larger factor @xmath leads
to a larger mass and radius of the neutron star model if all other
parameters are kept fixed. This behaviour has been observed for various
polytropic models and central densities and can be attributed to the
larger pressure that follows from a larger @xmath according to Eq. ( 5.7
). The star will thus be able to support more mass against self
gravitation and extend to larger radii.
We conclude the analysis of the TOV equations by studying the
1-parameter families of solutions corresponding to the five stellar
models. For this purpose numerous solutions of the TOV equations with
equations of state as given in Table 3 have been calculated for various
central densities. In Fig. 35 we plot the results in the form of
relations between central density @xmath , total radius @xmath , and
total mass @xmath of the star.

One obvious result is the maximum of the mass curves @xmath and @xmath
in the upper panels of the figure. It is a well known result that these
maxima separate the stable and unstable branches of the neutron star
families for a given equation of state (see for example \citeNP
Shapiro1983). The stable branches consist of models with central
densities below the critical value i.e. larger radii and the unstable
branches correspond to larger central densities and smaller radii. In
this context instability means that the frequency of the fundamental
radial oscillation mode of the neutron star becomes imaginary and thus
its amplitude will grow exponentially in time and the neutron star is
unstable against arbitrarily small radial perturbations. The eigenmode
spectrum of radial oscillations will be discussed in the next section
when we look at dynamic spherically symmetric stars.
Another interesting result is shown in the lower panel of Fig. 35 where
we plot the radius as a function of the central density. The polytropic
exponent @xmath again appears as a critical value for which the radius
converges to a finite value as the central density goes to zero. For
smaller exponents the radius diverges in this limit whereas it goes to
zero for exponents @xmath . We also discover this behaviour in the upper
right panel where the mass is plotted as a function of radius. For
@xmath a unique value of @xmath can be assigned to any sufficiently
large radius @xmath . In the critical case @xmath equilibrium models are
only found for radii below a maximal value, but the relation @xmath is
still one to one near this maximum. For @xmath this is no longer the
case and for radii just below the maximal equilibrium radius we find two
models with different mass. No such qualitatively different behaviour
has been found when the polytropic factor @xmath is varied instead of
@xmath . It is interesting to compare the mass-radius relation for
@xmath with the Newtonian case, where @xmath is also a critical value
and leads to the relation @xmath ( \citeNP Shapiro1983). The results in
Fig. 35 indicate that relativistic effects break this kind of
degeneracy.
This completes our analysis of static spherically symmetric stars and in
the next section we turn our attention to the dynamic case. The
equations and results of this section will then be used to derive a
fully non-linear perturbative formulation of radial oscillations on a
static TOV background.

### 5.3 Spherically symmetric dynamic stars in Eulerian coordinates

In this section we will develop an Eulerian formulation of a dynamic
spherically symmetric neutron star. For code testing purposes it is
interesting to also look at the corresponding scenario in the Cowling
approximation, i.e. with the metric frozen at its equilibrium values. We
will then use the results of the previous section to obtain a fully
non-linear perturbative formulation of the problem. In this new approach
to studying non-linear neutron star oscillations we eliminate terms of
zero order in the perturbations but keep all higher order terms and thus
obtain a formulation of the dynamic star which is equivalent to the
original non-perturbative set of equations. From the non-linear
perturbative formulation it is easy to derive the linearized equations
which we will use to investigate the eigenmode spectrum of radial
neutron star oscillations. After describing the numerical methods used
to evolve the dynamic neutron star in the non-linear case we have to
discuss the “surface problem” which is intrinsic to any Eulerian
formulation of non-linear oscillations that involve a radial
displacement of the stellar surface. The numerical methods we have used
to circumvent this problem will then be tested by comparing the
numerical results obtained in the linear regime with the analytic
solution of the linearized equations. By using vacuum flat space as the
background, we can emulate a non-perturbative “standard” approach to the
numerical evolution and compare the results with the perturbative scheme
using the TOV background. Even though the perturbative scheme leads to
highly accurate results for most stellar models, we have not been able
to find a perfectly satisfactory solution to the surface problem. We
have therefore decided to follow a more cautious approach and use a
simplified neutron star model to investigate non-linear effects in the
evolution of radial oscillations. This model has also been used to
further test the performance of the code. The surface problem will be
re-addressed with a Lagrangian approach in section 5.4 .

#### 5.3.1 The equations in the dynamic case

We start the Eulerian formulation of the dynamic case with the line
element in radial gauge and polar slicing

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are now functions of @xmath and @xmath and the
“hat” has been introduced to distinguish them from their static
counterparts. As in the static case we describe the matter as a perfect
fluid at zero temperature with a polytropic equation of state. As we
have seen in section 5.2.1 this enables us to write the energy momentum
tensor in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where again the “hat” on the functions @xmath , @xmath means that they
are functions of @xmath and @xmath . The time dependent pressure and
energy density are related by the polytropic law

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the polytropic parameters @xmath and @xmath are the same as in the
static case. The time dependent speed of sound is defined in analogy to
Eq. ( 5.28 ) by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In contrast to the static case the 4-velocity will now have a
non-vanishing radial component

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We have not denoted these quantities by a
“hat” since we do not use static counterparts in their case. The
normalisation condition @xmath relates these functions by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the line element ( 5.77 ) and the energy momentum tensor ( 5.78 )
the Einstein field equations @xmath result in two independent constraint
equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.83)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is a well known result that there are no gravitational degrees of
freedom in spherical symmetry and we therefore expect to be able to
determine the metric functions on each time slice without knowledge of
their history. This is compatible with the result that the field
equations can be given in the form of constraint equations only. The
degrees of freedom of the scenario are thus entirely contained in the
matter variables, whose evolution is determined by the equations of
hydrodynamics @xmath . In our case we can write these equations as a
quasi linear system of PDEs

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.85)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.88)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.89)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.90)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.91)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In practice we calculate the derivatives of the metric functions that
appear in these coefficients from the constraint equations ( 5.83 ), (
5.84 ) and a third field equation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.93)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is an automatic consequence of the two constraints, their
derivatives and the matter equations. We therefore calculate the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath without approximating any derivatives
with finite difference expressions.
We have already mentioned in the discussion of the static case that a
numerically superior performance is obtained if we transform to a new
radial coordinate @xmath defined by Eq. ( 5.47 ). We note however that
we need to calculate the corresponding static model first to obtain the
static sound speed @xmath . In the perturbative approach which we will
discuss below that is done as a matter of course. There we will provide
a formulation of the perturbative equations that includes both choices
for the radial coordinate analogous to Eqs. ( 5.48 )-( 5.51 ). In the
Cowling approximation the set of equations corresponding to ( 5.85 )-(
5.92 ) describes a dynamic, spherically symmetric perfect fluid in a
fixed gravitational potential. We obtain these equations by the
following modifications:

-   the constraint equations for the dynamic metric functions ( 5.83 ),
    ( 5.84 ) are replaced by the corresponding TOV equations ( 5.9 ), (
    5.10 ) which have to be solved only at the start of the evolution,

-   in the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath all
    occurrences of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath / @xmath and @xmath are
    replaced with their static analogues @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath respectively and @xmath is set to zero,

-   the coefficient function @xmath is replaced with the slightly
    modified version

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.94)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

These modifications are rather simple so that we incorporate both
options, the evolution with time dependent metric and the Cowling
approximation in one code. A user specified initial parameter determines
which version is to be run. Before we describe the numerical
implementation, we need to rewrite the equations of this subsection in a
perturbative form.

#### 5.3.2 A fully non-linear perturbative formulation

In this section we will decompose the time dependent quantities @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath into static background contributions and time
dependent perturbations. We will see that the TOV equations are still
present in the dynamic equations, for example in the terms @xmath in
Eq. ( 5.86 ). It is the elimination of these zero order terms and the
ensuing numerical inaccuracies which provides the motivation for our
perturbative formulation. We start by decomposing the time dependent
functions into a static background plus a time dependent perturbation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.95)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.96)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.97)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The radial velocity component @xmath vanishes in the static limit and
therefore represents a perturbation in itself. The time dependent
functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are dependent variables and thus
considered functions of the fundamental variables @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath according to Eqs. ( 5.79 ), ( 5.80 ) and ( 5.82 ). We
stress that the perturbations are finite and that no assumption with
regard to their size has been made.
We start rewriting the dynamic equations with the constraint equation
for @xmath . If we insert Eqs. ( 5.95 )-( 5.97 ) into ( 5.83 ) and
multiply with @xmath we obtain

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (5.99)
  -- -- -- -- --------

The crucial terms are the first on the left and the first two terms on
the right hand side. We know that these terms will cancel each other
identically according to Eq. ( 5.9 ) if a solution of the static
equations is chosen as a background. Numerically, however, this will not
be the case because of truncation errors. This residual error will
inevitably contaminate the numerical evolution of the dynamic scenario.
In other words the numerical accuracy we will obtain is limited by the
numerical accuracy of the static background and not by that of the
dynamic signal we are interested in. The severeness of this effect will
depend on the relative size of the perturbations with respect to the
background. For very large perturbations the numerical contamination
will be less significant and for very small perturbations we may satisfy
ourselves with a linearized code. For perturbations of intermediate
strength, however, which are still smaller than the background but are
large enough to give rise to non-linear effects, the numerical
contamination will severely affect the evolution and may give rise to
spurious phenomena.
We return to Eq. ( 5.99 ) and continue the perturbative formulation of
the dynamic case. Since we know that the zero order terms cancel each
other, we can simply subtract them from the equation. The perturbative
equation for @xmath then becomes

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.100)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where we have also implemented the transformation to the generalised
radial coordinate @xmath . Proceeding in the same way we rewrite the
constraint equation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.101)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

The reformulation of the matter equations ( 5.85 ) and ( 5.86 ) is
particularly simple due to their quasi linear nature. We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.102)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.103)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the coefficient functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.104)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.105)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.106)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.107)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.108)
     @xmath               (5.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Except for the coefficient @xmath where background terms have been
eliminated by using the TOV-equations we note the similarity with the
coefficients given in Eqs. ( 5.87 )-( 5.92 ) in the non-perturbative
formulation.
In order to derive the equations in the Cowling approximation we have to
proceed in analogy to the previous section.

-   The metric perturbations @xmath and @xmath are set to zero.

-   All occurrences of @xmath and @xmath are replaced with @xmath and
    @xmath which are given by the TOV equations ( 5.9 ), ( 5.10 ).

-   @xmath is set to zero.

-   The coefficient @xmath is replaced by

      -- -------- -- -- ---------
         @xmath         (5.110)
      -- -------- -- -- ---------

This completes our derivation of the equations for a dynamical
spherically symmetric neutron star. In later sections we will
numerically investigate the system of partial differential equations (
5.100 )-( 5.103 ) with the coefficient functions ( 5.104 )-( 5.109 ) and
the corresponding system in the Cowling approximation. Before that, we
will turn our attention towards the linearized equations and the
resulting eigenmode spectrum. These results will not only be used as
initial data, but also provide one of the fundamental test beds for the
code.

#### 5.3.3 The linearized equations and the eigenmode spectrum

(a) The equations
In this section we will discuss the linearized equations for a dynamic
spherically symmetric neutron star. For this purpose we will explicitly
assume that the background is given by a non-vacuum solution of the TOV
equations. If we further assume that all perturbations are small
compared with their background values and the radial velocity @xmath is
small compared with the speed of light, i.e. @xmath , the higher order
terms in Eqs. ( 5.100 )-( 5.109 ) become negligible and can be omitted
from the equations. It is convenient to follow e.g. \citeN Misner1973
and introduce the variable @xmath which measures the displacement of the
fluid elements. An observer who is comoving with the fluid and is
located at @xmath in the equilibrium case will find herself at position
@xmath during the evolution. The displacement vector @xmath is therefore
related to our variables by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We note that the background value of the lapse function is used in this
equation because higher order terms have been neglected. Another
variable which facilitates a particularly simple formulation of the
resulting equations is the rescaled displacement @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we insert this definition into the linearized form of equation (
5.103 ) and use the linearized versions of Eqs. ( 5.100 )-( 5.102 ) to
eliminate the perturbations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we obtain the
second order in time and space differential equation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the auxiliary functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.114)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.115)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.116)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These equations describe the dynamics of a spherically symmetric neutron
star in the linearized limit. If we insert the ansatz @xmath into Eq. (
5.113 ) we find that the solution has harmonic time dependence

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the spatial profile is determined by the ordinary differential
equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the ensuing discussion it is convenient to work with the areal
radius @xmath and therefore set @xmath . The ordinary differential
equation ( 5.118 ) can then be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the differential operator @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This type of ODE is called an eigenvalue problem and the particular
structure of the differential operator @xmath classifies it as a
Sturm-Liouville problem if the function @xmath satisfies so-called
homogeneous boundary conditions (see for example \citeNP Simmons1991).
Due to the asymptotic behaviour of the background solutions the
functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath will either diverge or vanish at
the boundaries, however, and the problem we are facing is a singular
Sturm-Liouville problem . An important subclass of this type of problems
is the self-adjoint eigenvalue problem which is defined by the
requirement that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for all solutions @xmath , @xmath . Here the inner product is defined by
the weighting function @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.122)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the boundaries, i.e. the centre and surface
of the star in our case. A short calculation shows that condition (
5.121 ) is ensured if the solutions satisfy the self-adjoint boundary
condition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.123)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Below we shall see that any solution @xmath of the eigenvalue problem (
5.118 ) will be @xmath at the origin and be finite at the surface. In
combination with the asymptotic behaviour of the TOV solutions
determined in section 5.2.5 we can see that Eq. ( 5.123 ) is satisfied
so that the differential equation ( 5.118 ) represents a self-adjoint
eigenvalue problem. For this type of equations one can show the
following properties (see for example \citeNP Coddington1955)

-   There exist an infinite number of solutions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    which are called eigenfunctions and the corresponding eigenvalues
    are real and can be ordered

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.124)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    We note that in our case the real eigenvalues are @xmath and the
    corresponding frequencies will be imaginary if @xmath .

-   After appropriate normalisation the eigenfunctions form an
    orthonormal set, i.e.

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.125)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

-   The eigenfunctions @xmath form a complete set, i.e. any function
    @xmath which satisfies the self-adjoint boundary conditions ( 5.121
    ) can be expanded in a series of eigenmodes

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.126)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where the eigenmode coefficients of the function @xmath are given by

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.127)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Before we investigate Eq. ( 5.118 ) numerically, we consider the
asymptotic behaviour of the solutions. At the origin the displacement
vectors @xmath and @xmath have to vanish because of the spherical
symmetry. If we therefore assume @xmath near the origin where @xmath ,
insert this ansatz into Eq. ( 5.118 ) and use the asymptotic behaviour
of the TOV solution, we obtain the leading order

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At the surface we only require @xmath and @xmath to be finite but allow
for non-zero displacements

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is of particular interest to consider the impact of these results on
the asymptotic behaviour of the energy density perturbation @xmath which
is related to the displacement by the linearized version of Eq. ( 5.102
)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.130)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

At the centre the @xmath behaviour of the displacement @xmath results in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the condition we imposed on @xmath also guarantees a finite
energy density perturbation at the origin. At the surface, however, the
leading term on the right hand side of Eq. ( 5.130 ) is the term
involving the derivative of the background energy density. This term is
responsible for the asymptotic behaviour of @xmath at the surface

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.132)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Consequently the energy density perturbation is zero at the surface for
@xmath , finite for @xmath and it diverges for @xmath i.e. @xmath . Even
worse we also obtain the result

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

independent of the polytropic index. The energy density perturbation
will therefore necessarily be larger than the background @xmath in a
finite interval around the surface. This is in obvious conflict with the
initial assumption @xmath we used in the linearisation process and
raises doubts about the validity of the results. Below we will see,
however, that the linearized equations can be derived without any
implicit contradiction from the fully non-linear Lagrangian formulation
of the problem. This is already illustrated by a closer investigation of
Eq. ( 5.130 ) which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.134)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is the Lagrangian energy density perturbation measured by an
observer moving with the fluid and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.135)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

[cf. Eq. ( 5.217 )]. The asymptotic behaviour of @xmath is perfectly
regular @xmath and the difficulties purely originate from the term
@xmath on the right hand side of Eq. ( 5.134 ). This correction term
which facilitates the transformation between the Eulerian and Lagrangian
perturbations is based on a Taylor expansion of @xmath which, as we have
already seen above, is not generally permissible. For polytropic indices
@xmath the derivative of @xmath does indeed diverge and Eq. ( 5.134 ) is
not a valid relation between the Eulerian and Lagrangian quantities.
This is the first indication that a Lagrangian formulation is a somewhat
more natural way of describing radial oscillations of neutron stars.
From this point of view it is a remarkable fact that the linearisation
of the Eulerian case leads to the “correct” equations in spite of the
internal inconsistency of the derivation. Finally it is worth pointing
out that the irregular behaviour of @xmath is not merely down to a poor
choice of dependent variables. It is certainly possible to formulate the
problem in Eulerian coordinates in terms of regular variables such as
@xmath or @xmath . We have seen, however, that such a regular
formulation of the problem still leads to the unphysical result of a
diverging total energy density @xmath if the equations of state has an
asymptotic power law behaviour @xmath with @xmath . In view of these
difficulties one may ask the question why we have decided to use an
Eulerian rather than a Lagrangian formulation in the first place. Our
main motivation for studying Eulerian schemes is to probe a method in
spherical symmetry which enables one to accurately model a wide range of
different types of non-linear neutron star oscillations. Below we shall
see that the Lagrangian approach is a very powerful tool for the study
of dynamic stars in spherical symmetry. However, it is a generic problem
of Lagrangian methods that it is not clear how to generalise them to two
or three spatial dimensions, where the paths of fluid elements may
intersect and give rise to caustics. The vast majority of neutron star
oscillations on the other hand will only be present if one drops the
assumption of spherical symmetry, so that their numerical simulation
requires the use of two or three spatial dimensions. In default of
higher dimensional generalisations of Lagrangian techniques these
simulations are generally performed in an Eulerian framework.
We will now turn our attention towards the numerical solution of the
linearized equations. From the asymptotic behaviour, we expect, however,
that the results we obtain for @xmath will diverge at the surface and
thus not represent a physical solution. From a numerical point of view
it turns out to be beneficial to reformulate Eq. ( 5.118 ) in terms of
the displacement vector @xmath . This is due to the asymptotic behaviour
of @xmath at the origin given by Eq. ( 5.128 ). Below we will use the
numerically calculated eigenmodes as initial data for the fully
non-linear evolutions and for that purpose the solution for @xmath would
have to be converted into data for @xmath or in the Lagrangian code
discussed in section 5.4 for @xmath . The corresponding division by
@xmath combined with the second order accuracy of the numerical
eigenmode solutions results in poor accuracy of these initial data near
the origin. We therefore rewrite Eq. ( 5.118 ) in terms of @xmath and
introduce the auxiliary variable @xmath to write the result as a first
order system

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.136)
     @xmath      (5.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We note that the occurrence of @xmath -derivatives in equation ( 5.136 )
is purely a convenient notation. In practice all these derivatives are
eliminated via the TOV equations. If we use the rescaled radial
coordinate, we have @xmath and the @xmath -derivative of @xmath can be
calculated from the relation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.138)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which is a consequence of the equation of state and the definition of
the sound speed. The only derivatives in Eqs. ( 5.136 ), ( 5.137 ) that
have to be represented by finite differencing are the @xmath
-derivatives of @xmath and @xmath .
In the Cowling approximation all these results remain unchanged except
for the function @xmath which has to be replaced by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.139)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the relation between displacement and energy density perturbation
which becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.140)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is an interesting fact that in both cases the results are simpler due
to the cancellation of terms if gravity is included.

(b) The numerical implementation
We have numerically calculated solutions of the eigenvalue problem (
5.136 ), ( 5.137 ) using a relaxation method. For this purpose we
introduce an additional differential equation for the eigenvalues

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.141)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which states that the eigenmode frequency is constant throughout the
star. The value of @xmath is not known at this stage but will result
from the relaxation algorithm. In order to solve the system ( 5.136 ), (
5.137 ), ( 5.141 ) we need to supply three boundary conditions. At the
centre we require that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.142)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.143)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The vanishing of the displacement @xmath at the origin is a necessary
condition in spherical symmetry. The value of @xmath at the origin is
allowed to take on any non-zero value because an eigenfunction is only
defined up to a constant factor. At the outer boundary we have the
condition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.144)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which follows from the definition of @xmath and the vanishing of the
energy density at the surface of the star. An initial guess for @xmath
enables us to calculate the initial functions @xmath and @xmath by
integrating Eqs. ( 5.136 ), ( 5.137 ) outwards. The solution including
the eigenvalue @xmath is then obtained by relaxation as described in
section 2.3.5 .

(c) Testing the code
For sufficiently low eigenmodes both alternative choices of the radial
coordinate lead to good agreement between the predicted frequencies up
to the fourth significant digit. As we will see below high order

eigenmode profiles show rapid oscillations near the surface of the star

which may not be well resolved if we work with the areal radius @xmath .
The frequencies deviate more significantly in these cases. In the rest
of this section we will therefore work with the rescaled coordinate and
set @xmath . The resulting code has been checked in four independent
ways. First we have computed the eigenfunctions of the fundamental and
the tenth mode for the neutron star models listed in Table 3 and checked
for convergence using 500, 1000 and 2000 grid points. The results shown
in Table 5 clearly demonstrate second order convergence as expected for
the second order finite differencing scheme applied in the relaxation
algorithm.
Next we have randomly chosen three of the stellar models listed in
\citeN Kokkotas2001 and recalculated radius, mass of the neutron stars
as well as the frequencies of the lowest three eigenmodes. The results
are compared in Table 6 and show good agreement.
For the third test we recall the 1-parameter families of neutron stars
shown in Fig. 35 . We have already mentioned that the maxima in the mass
vs. central density plots separate the stable and unstable branches of
neutron star models and that the frequency of the fundamental eigenmode
becomes zero at the critical point and imaginary on the unstable branch.
We have therefore determined the critical central densities for the five
neutron star models of Table 3 and calculated the frequency of the
fundamental modes just below and above the critical densities. The
numerical results are shown in Table 7 and confirm this picture. The
frequencies of the fundamental mode are very small but real for central
densities

just below the critical value and become imaginary for larger densities.
A further test for the eigenmode frequencies arises from a relation
between the period of the fundamental mode @xmath of a neutron star
model and the deviation of the radius @xmath from the critical radius
@xmath that has been suggested by \shortciteN Harrison1965 [see their
Eq. (155)]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.145)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In Table 8 we show the results obtained for neutron star models
identical to model 1 and 3 with central densities as indicated.

Even though a deviation from Eq. ( 5.145 ) up to @xmath is observed for
both models, this is rather small if one considers the variation of the
frequency @xmath over several orders of magnitude.

(d) The eigenmode solutions
We will now turn our attention to the eigenmode profiles of the physical
variables. We have already noted that the eigenvalue problem has an
enumerable infinite set of solutions which can be ordered with respect
to their eigenvalues. This order is also reflected in the spatial
profiles of the corresponding eigenfunctions. We have numerically
calculated the first four eigenmodes in terms of the displacement vector
@xmath for model 3 with polytropic exponent @xmath . The velocity @xmath
, the rescaled displacement @xmath and the energy density perturbation
@xmath then follow from Eqs. ( 5.111 ) where we use harmonic time
dependence, ( 5.112 ) and ( 5.130 ). The results are shown in Fig. 36 ,
where we have also included the solution for @xmath corresponding to the
tenth eigenmode. Since the eigenmode solutions are determined up to a
constant factor only, we have rescaled them to about unit amplitude. For
all variables we see that the number of nodes is given by the order of
the mode and the number of local maxima or minima is given by the order
minus one. This behaviour remains valid for higher modes and is
characteristic of the eigenmode solutions. In order to illustrate the
significance of the transformation to the rescaled radius @xmath we have
plotted @xmath as a function of @xmath as well. In the upper panels of
Fig. 36 we can see that the oscillations in the spatial profile of the
eigenmodes become more concentrated towards larger radii @xmath the
higher the order of the mode. In terms of the rescaled radius @xmath ,
however, the oscillations are evenly distributed over the entire
interval. This behaviour is reminiscent of the narrowing of the wave
pulse we observed in section 5.2.4 and illustrates why a superior
numerical performance is obtained when using the coordinate @xmath ,
especially when higher order modes are present in the evolution.

The corresponding eigenmodes obtained for the other stellar models look
qualitatively similar in all variables except for the energy density
perturbation @xmath . We have already noted that the asymptotic
behaviour of @xmath depends on the polytropic exponent @xmath . This is
confirmed by the numerical solutions shown in Fig. 37 where we plot the
profiles of the energy density perturbation obtained for the stellar
models 1 and 5 with polytropic exponents @xmath and @xmath respectively.
For model 1 the energy density perturbation goes to zero at the surface,
although with a non-zero gradient. In comparison the gradient of the
background density of the same model vanishes in Fig. 33 and the
quotient @xmath can indeed be shown to diverge in agreement with Eq. (
5.133 ). For the larger polytropic index 2.3 the perturbation @xmath
itself diverges at the surface as expected from Eq. ( 5.132 ).
The corresponding results obtained in the Cowling approximation are very
similar to those shown above. The only notable difference is the
frequency of the fundamental mode which does not decrease towards zero
as the central density approaches the critical value but instead remains
real and positive. This result is to be expected since a fluid will not
become gravitationally unstable if the gravitational field is kept
fixed.
The eigenmode solutions obtained in this section will be used
extensively as initial data in the non-linear evolutions. We have seen,
however, that the stellar surface represents a problematic area even in
the linearized case. The difficulties are more pronounced in the
non-linear case and need to be investigated in more detail before we can
study the fully non-linear numerical evolutions.

#### 5.3.4 The surface problem

When we formulated the description of non-linear radial oscillations of
neutron stars in section 5.3.1 we consciously omitted the issue

of boundary conditions. The difficulties involved in specifying outer
boundary conditions in an Eulerian code are so complex that we dedicate
a whole subsection to this topic. We have already mentioned that the
surface is defined by the condition @xmath which is equivalent to @xmath
for a polytropic equation of state. With respect to the fixed numerical
grid, however, the surface of the star is moving and we cannot apply
this condition at the outer grid boundary. This is a further indication
that one may have to emulate a Lagrangian treatment of the surface in
order to accurately model neutron star oscillations involving radial
displacements of the surface. The situation is graphically illustrated
in Fig. 38 where the total energy density profile is schematically
plotted as a function of radius. At time @xmath an equilibrium star
(solid curve) is perturbed with a velocity field that causes the star to
expand. The initial configuration also determines the extension of the
numerical grid indicated by the vertical line. At a later time @xmath
the star has expanded (long dashed curve). The outer part of the star
has therefore moved out of the numerical grid (dotted part of the curve)
and the corresponding information would be lost in a non-linear
numerical evolution. At time @xmath the star has shrunk and is
completely contained inside the numerical grid. Outside of the star the
energy density will be zero. In general, therefore, the energy density
profile or its derivatives will have a discontinuity at the stellar
surface. Worse from a numerical point of view is the region between the
stellar surface and the outer grid boundary. Even though the energy
density will be zero at these points theoretically, numerically this
will not exactly be the case. At some of these points the total energy
density will have small negative values due to numerical noise, unless
the values are manipulated in some form. A negative energy density,
however, means that the pressure can no longer be calculated from the
equation of state which normally terminates the evolution. There are
several possibilities for dealing with these difficulties. We will
discuss four methods and implement two of them in the course of this
work.

-   The first method consists in embedding the star in an atmosphere of
    low density. In this method the numerical grid extends well beyond
    the size of the neutron star and no information is lost at any stage
    of the evolution. The boundary conditions are then applied to the
    atmosphere whereas the star will always be confined to the interior
    numerical grid and the surface of the star is entirely described by
    the interior numerical evolution, for example by shock capturing
    methods. It is a non-trivial question, however, to what extent the
    atmosphere and the numerical treatment of the surface
    discontinuities will affect the evolution of the neutron star. For
    this reason it seems plausible to use an atmosphere of low density.
    A low density, however, will in general be accompanied by a small
    speed of sound and we have already seen in the discussion of the
    wave equation in section 5.2.4 that such regions require a careful
    numerical treatment. An insufficient resolution may result in
    spurious phenomena. In terms of a rescaled radius such as the
    coordinate @xmath defined in Eq. ( 5.47 ) we have been able to
    obtain a sufficient resolution, but a large number of grid points
    would be required to simulate an atmosphere of significant spatial
    extension.
    An interesting variation of this method consists in viewing the
    surface of the star as an interface to an exterior vacuum region and
    explicitly tracking the movement of the interface. Sophisticated
    techniques such as level set methods and fast marching methods have
    been developed for these purposes (see for example \citeNP
    Sethian1999) and may provide an answer to the surface problem in
    Eulerian formulations. One may even go a step further and recall the
    strikingly similar concept of Cauchy-characteristic matching and,
    thus, consider a combination of these ideas. It is, however, well
    beyond the scope of this work to investigate these methods in more
    detail and we will therefore focus on simpler techniques.

-   The second method is a modified version of the atmosphere approach
    discussed above. Instead of using an external atmosphere, we modify
    the equation of state of the neutron star at low densities and thus
    view the outer layers of the neutron star itself as an atmosphere.
    For that purpose we use an equation of state given by

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.146)
         @xmath               (5.147)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are coefficients determined by the
    continuity of @xmath and its first two derivatives with respect to
    @xmath . The coefficient @xmath and the transition density @xmath
    are free parameters that are specified by the user. A consequence of
    this definition is that @xmath at low densities and the behaviour
    will be similar to that of a @xmath polytrope in this region, i.e.
    extend beyond the surface of the original purely polytropic model.
    The low density part of the neutron star can thus be viewed as an
    atmosphere smoothly attached to a polytropic neutron star truncated
    at @xmath . Whenever the energy density falls below a threshold
    value @xmath during the evolution, it is set to this threshold
    value. The parameter @xmath also needs to be specified by the user.
    This requirement avoids the occurrence of negative total energy
    densities, but introduces ad hoc discontinuities in the @xmath
    profile. We take care of these discontinuities by introducing
    artificial viscosity of the modified von Neumann-Richtmyer form (see
    for example \citeNP Fox1962)

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.148)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is the viscosity parameter. In many cases @xmath leads
    to satisfactory results. This viscosity term is added to the
    pressure perturbation @xmath wherever it occurs in the equations.
    With careful choices of the free parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath we have obtained long term stable evolutions of localised
    wave pulses. The particular values we have to choose for a stable
    evolution, especially the density values @xmath and @xmath , do
    however depend sensitively on the initial data. Furthermore the
    manipulation of the energy density perturbation @xmath in cases of a
    negative total energy density leads to a contamination of the
    evolution of eigenmodes in the low density range. The resulting
    disturbances then travel into the stellar interior within a few
    oscillation periods. In view of these difficulties we have decided
    to use a different treatment of the stellar surface.

-   A fully satisfactory solution to the surface problem in one spatial
    dimension can be obtained with a Lagrangian formulation either of
    the surface or the whole star. In the first case this can be
    implemented by rescaling to a new radial coordinate

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.149)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is the time dependent total radius of the star. This
    transformation leads to a few extra terms in the equations in the
    radial gauge, but is more complicated to implement in terms of the
    rescaled coordinate @xmath . For this reason and because of the
    wider range of applications we have chosen instead to reformulate
    the non-linear radial oscillations entirely within a Lagrangian
    framework. Combined with the singularity avoiding properties of the
    polar slicing condition the resulting code can not only be used for
    the simulation of radial oscillations but also allows high
    resolution studies of spherically symmetric gravitational collapse.
    This code and the corresponding testing will be discussed in detail
    in section 5.4 .
    Even though Lagrangian methods represent a formidable tool for
    1-dimensional problems, we have already mentioned that there is no
    straightforward generalisation to two or three spatial dimensions,
    where the paths of fluid elements may intersect and give rise to
    caustics.

-   The method we will be using in the remainder of this section can be
    considered the inverse of the atmospheric treatments discussed
    above. Instead of adding matter in the form of an atmosphere the
    outer layers of the star are removed. In this context it is worth
    remembering that the solution of the TOV equations via quadrature
    does not go all the way out to @xmath and a fully non-linear
    perturbative code working with such a background intrinsically
    describes a truncated neutron star. The percentage of mass that we
    will remove from the star will be very small in most cases ( @xmath
    ). We will see below that the resulting code behaves well in the
    linearized limit in most cases.

#### 5.3.5 The numerical implementation in Eulerian coordinates

In section 5.3.2 we have derived the equations for a fully non-linear
perturbative formulation of a dynamic spherically symmetric star in
terms of the generalised coordinate @xmath . In the remainder of the
Eulerian discussion we will restrict ourselves to the rescaled version
and set @xmath and @xmath . In order to numerically solve these
equations, we also have to specify appropriate boundary conditions. We
start with the origin and recall that the displacement @xmath of a fluid
element at the centre of a spherically symmetric star vanishes. As a
consequence the radial velocity will also vanish at the origin. As far
as the energy energy density is concerned, we note that @xmath is a
component of a rank 2 tensor and therefore the spatial derivative @xmath
will vanish in spherical symmetry. The same is true for the background
density @xmath and therefore we obtain the inner boundary condition
@xmath . Finally we require the vanishing of @xmath to avoid a conical
singularity.
At the outer boundary we match the lapse function to an exterior
Schwarzschild metric as in the static case which results in the
condition @xmath . As far as the matter variables are concerned, the
situation is a bit more complicated. For the velocity we use the
regularity condition @xmath . In view of the definition of the radial
coordinate @xmath this is equivalent to demanding that the velocity has
a finite gradient with respect to @xmath at the surface. This condition
is satisfied by the eigenmode solutions obtained in section 5.3.3 . In
Fig. 36 we can see that the gradient @xmath vanishes for all three
polytropic exponents @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In contrast to the
velocity gradient the derivative of the energy density perturbation
@xmath will in general not vanish at the surface. If we consider the
stellar models listed in Table 3 it can be shown that @xmath will only
vanish in the case @xmath which is also illustrated in Figs. 36 and 37 .
In summary the boundary conditions are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.150)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.151)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.152)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

at the origin and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.153)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.154)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

at the surface.
In this context it is worth mentioning a subtlety concerning second
order finite differencing schemes used for evolution equations such as (
5.102 ), ( 5.103 ). In general this system of equations has one ingoing
and one outgoing characteristic at each boundary and physical
information has to be specified in the form of one condition for either
@xmath or @xmath at either boundary. The centred finite differencing
scheme (or variation thereof) used in second order techniques, however,
cannot be applied at the grid boundaries and the variables must be
evolved in an alternative way. The physical boundary conditions do not
necessarily provide enough information for this. In our case, for
example, we have two variables @xmath , @xmath that need to be updated
at two grid points respectively which requires four conditions, but only
two conditions are required to provide information for the
characteristics entering the numerical grid. The remaining boundary
values not determined by these two conditions have to be obtained in
alternative ways, for example by extrapolation or the use of one sided
derivatives in the evolution equations. We have obtained optimal
performance in the evolution of @xmath and @xmath by using conditions (
5.150 ) and ( 5.151 ) at the centre and ( 5.153 ) at the surface. The
outer boundary value of @xmath is then obtained by extrapolation on each
new time slice. It is worth pointing out that this problem is not
apparent in the implicit finite difference methods applied to the cosmic
string in section 4 or the Lagrangian code in section 5.4 .
Before we schematically outline the computational steps involved in the
time evolution we need to discuss one final numerical issue, the CFL
stability condition. We have mentioned in section 2.3.8 that the
stability criterion of Courant, Friedrichs and Lewy requires the
physical domain of dependence to be included in the numerical domain of
dependence. A standard method to ensure that this criterion is met in a
hydrodynamical evolution is based on calculating the slopes of the
characteristics at each point on the numerical grid. In our case we
consider the system of evolution equations ( 5.102 ), ( 5.103 ). The
quasi-linear nature of this system enables us to calculate the
characteristics from

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.155)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix and are
defined by the equation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.156)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The solution for the coefficient functions ( 5.105 )-( 5.107 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.157)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If the characteristics are straight lines, the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
condition is satisfied if the time step @xmath obeys the inequality

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.158)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We therefore calculate the eigenvalue fields @xmath , @xmath on each
time slice and determine the value of @xmath . Even though the
characteristics will in general not be straight lines, the deviation is
small on time scales of @xmath and we allow for this effect by
multiplying the resulting time step by a factor of 0.9. With that choice
and about 500 grid points we have obtained stable evolutions over
several 100000 time steps which corresponds to more than @xmath s of
proper time as measured by an observer at infinity.
We have got all ingredients now to summarise the individual steps
involved in the fully non-linear numerical evolution.

-   A static background model is calculated according to the TOV
    equations ( 5.48 )-( 5.51 ), where we set @xmath . For this purpose
    the polytropic exponent @xmath , the polytropic factor @xmath , the
    central density @xmath and the surface density @xmath need to be
    specified by the user. A non-zero surface density will result in a
    truncated neutron star model. The results are given in the form of
    data files containing the background variables @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath .

-   If initial data is required in the form of eigenmode profiles, the
    eigenmode solutions can be calculated according to the method
    described in section 5.3.3 . The order of the eigenmode is
    determined by the initial guess for the frequency which needs to be
    specified. The amplitude of the eigenmode is a free parameter in the
    evolution code.

-   There are several alternative choices for the initial data. Among
    these are localised perturbations of Gaussian shape and linear
    combinations of different eigenmodes.

-   With the initial velocity @xmath and energy density @xmath
    specified, the metric perturbations follow from the constraint
    equations ( 5.100 ) and ( 5.101 ). These equations are numerically
    integrated with a fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme.

-   The initial data is evolved according to the second order in space
    and time McCormack scheme described in section 2.3.4 . One evolution
    cycle consists of the following steps.
    a) Calculation of the Courant factor,
    b) predictor step for @xmath and @xmath ,
    c) application of the inner boundary conditions for @xmath and
    @xmath ,
    d) integration of the constraint equations to obtain preliminary
    values for @xmath and @xmath on the new time slice,
    e) corrector step for @xmath and @xmath ,
    f) application of boundary conditions for @xmath and @xmath ,
    g) integration of the constraint equation on the new slice to obtain
    the final values of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.3.6 The performance of the code in the linear regime

We will now investigate the performance of the code in the linear
regime, where we know the exact solution with high accuracy. If initial
data is provided in the form of an eigenmode profile @xmath and zero
@xmath , we know that the time dependent solution in the linear regime
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.159)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.160)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

For finite amplitudes this solution is not exact, but for sufficiently
small amplitudes the deviation of the exact solution from ( 5.159 ), (
5.160 ) is negligible compared with the truncation error of the
numerical scheme. We have therefore calculated the fundamental mode for
stellar model 3 of Table 3 using 1600 grid points and a truncation
density @xmath . This density corresponds to the removal of about @xmath
of the neutron star mass which is one order of magnitude smaller than
the accuracy of the numerically calculated total mass. The amplitude of
the eigenmode corresponds to an oscillation of the stellar radius of
about @xmath , i.e. a relative displacement of about @xmath . In Fig. 39
we show the time evolution of @xmath and @xmath together with the
deviation from the analytic solution ( 5.159 ), ( 5.160 ).

The numerical evolution reproduces the expected harmonic time dependence
with high accuracy. Because of its low frequency the fundamental mode is
particularly suitable for this graphical illustration. The code
reproduces the sinusoidal evolution of higher modes with comparable
accuracy, but the large number of oscillations is not well resolved in
plots similar to Fig. 39 . For the same reason we have shown the earlier
stages of the evolution up to @xmath only in the figure. The whole run
lasts more than ten times longer and shows no significant loss of
accuracy. It is worth mentioning that the accuracies obtained here are
limited not only by the evolution code but also by the results for the
static background, the eigenmode profiles and, most importantly, the
eigenmode frequencies used in the calculation of the analytic solution.
The same long term stability and high accuracy has been observed in
similar evolutions for a variety of different neutron star models with
polytropic indices @xmath . Below we will see, however, that the code
does not perform equally satisfactorily if we use a larger truncation
density in combination with a marginally stable neutron star model with
a central density just below the critical value.
For neutron star models sufficiently far away from the stability limit,
we can also check the performance of the code in the linear regime by
comparing the frequency spectrum of the time evolution with the values
predicted by the eigenmode calculations of section 5.3.3 . For this
purpose initial velocity fields have been calculated for models 1 and 3
by adding the first ten eigenmode profiles whereas the initial density
perturbation is set to zero. The combined amplitude of the perturbations
is similar to that used above for determining the deviation from
harmonic time dependence. In Fig. 40 we show the Fourier spectra for the
corresponding time evolutions of the

central density perturbation @xmath . The frequencies predicted by the
eigenmode analysis are indicated by vertical bars and show good
agreement with the peaks in the Fourier spectra.
Next we compare the performance of the perturbative approach with that
of a “standard” non-perturbative method. We have already mentioned that
we can simulate a non-perturbative approach by using vacuum flat space
for the background variables. In this case we only use the TOV-model to
determine the numerical grid as well as the areal radius @xmath and the
sound speed @xmath as functions of @xmath . The background variables,
however, are specified as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we insert
these values into the perturbative equations ( 5.100 )-( 5.109 ) they
will become identical to the non-perturbative system ( 5.83 )-( 5.92 )
(after transformation to the radial coordinate @xmath ) with @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath replaced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The occurrence of the constant 1 in the metric variables has no
implications on the numerical performance. We have thus evolved initial
data in the form of a fundamental eigenmode profile in the velocity
field @xmath for neutron star model 3. First we have used the
TOV-background and a resolution of 600 grid points. We have then
repeated the evolution with a flat space background using 600 and 1200
grid points in order to check the dependence of the non-perturbative
results on the spatial resolution. It is important to note that the same
code and the same evolution algorithm has been used in both cases. The
amplitude of the perturbation corresponds to an oscillation of the
surface of several metres. For this amplitude we still expect the
evolution to be dominated by the harmonic time dependence, although the
results of section 5.3.9 below indicate the presence of weak non-linear
effects. The numerical results are shown in Fig. 41 , where the central
density perturbation is plotted as a function of time.

We clearly see that the perturbative evolution results in the expected
sinusoidal time dependence. In the non-perturbative case the central
density shows similar oscillations but simultaneously the mean value
decreases significantly. In longer runs this decrease is revealed to be
exponential and thus indicates a starting evaporation of the star.
Neutron star model 3, however, is located on the stable branch as we can
clearly see in Fig. 35 and no collapse or evaporation is expected.
Indeed the higher resolution run indicates that the non-perturbative
scheme converges to the harmonic solution. In order to understand this
behaviour of the non-perturbative scheme we recall the presence of
background terms in the evolution equation for @xmath . If we consider
the coefficients @xmath and @xmath given by Eqs. ( 5.90 ), ( 5.92 ), we
can see that the evolution equation ( 5.86 ) contains the background in
the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.161)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We know that this term vanishes by virtue of the TOV equation

( 5.12 ) and it has been removed from the equations in the perturbative
formulation. In the non-perturbative case, however, it will manifest
itself in the form of a residual numerical error. This error is shown in
Fig. 42 for the first step in the evolution with 600 grid points
together with the entire source terms of @xmath as given by Eq. ( 5.86 )
in the non-perturbative and Eq. ( 5.103 ) in the perturbative case.
Because of the cosine time dependence of the velocity the source terms
should nearly vanish at @xmath . It can be seen, however, that the
source terms are dominated by the residual numerical error in the
non-perturbative scheme which is particularly large at the centre and
the surface. On the time scale of one oscillation period, about @xmath ,
the spurious acceleration of up to @xmath will have a significant impact
on the oscillation of several metres of the star. A closer investigation
of the velocity field reveals that the integral effect of the residual
error is an increase in the velocity field near the surface. We
attribute the gradual evaporation of the star to this disturbance in the
velocity field which gradually radiates matter off the numerical grid.
Considering that the same code has been used for the comparison just
described, it is necessary to check the perturbative scheme for similar
spurious effects. After all the main advantage of the perturbative
scheme lies in higher accuracy which may postpone the onset of a
spurious collapse or evaporation but not necessarily avoid it. We have
already mentioned, however, that no significant deviation from the
harmonic time dependence has been observed in the case of model 3 and
initial data in the form of eigenmodes over very long times. In order to
avoid even longer integration times and the associated computational
costs, we have chosen an alternative way of testing the code for this
behaviour. We use a stellar model identical to model 3 but with a
central density of @xmath which is just below the critical value given
in Table 7 . The initial data consist of the fundamental velocity mode
with an amplitude corresponding to a surface displacement of about
@xmath and we use a numerical grid with 600 grid points. In the first
calculation we have imposed a truncation density of @xmath and in a
second run the intrinsic value of the TOV

code @xmath is used. In Fig. 43 we show the resulting central density
perturbation as a function of time. For the small truncation density we
obtain the expected sinusoidal time dependence whereas the larger value
significantly affects the evolution, even though only a fraction of
@xmath of the stellar mass has been neglected in this case. This result
demonstrates the limitations of the code in its current form. For larger
truncation densities it does not necessarily guarantee mass conservation
which we attribute to the boundary condition ( 5.153 ) which is strictly
valid only if the numerical grid extends to @xmath . For sufficiently
small truncation densities the resulting numerical error is negligible
and has no significant effect on the evolution. For larger truncation
densities, however, it can result in spurious phenomena similar to those
observed in the non-perturbative case. This is particularly problematic
since the investigation of non-linear effects will require perturbations
of larger amplitudes and consequently larger truncation densities are
necessary in order to avoid total negative energy densities. From here
on we will therefore proceed in two different ways. In the remainder of
section 5.3 we will investigate a simplified neutron star model for
which the code ensures mass conservation for arbitrary amplitudes and
negative energy densities are still avoided. This model will necessarily
provide a less realistic description of a neutron star, but the general
structure of the eigenmodes remains the same and it is not unrealistic
to expect that non-linear effects such as mode coupling will be
qualitatively similar in more realistic models. Considering the
sensitivity of the numerical evolutions to the treatment of the surface,
it is, however, desirable to develop a formulation of the dynamic
neutron star which unambiguously provides a correct treatment of the
surface. This will be done in section 5.4 where we develop a fully
non-linear perturbative Lagrangian code.

#### 5.3.7 A simplified neutron star model

In the previous section we have seen that a sufficiently large
truncation density in combination with the boundary condition ( 5.153 )
may result in a continuous loss or gain of mass. In order to avoid total
negative energy densities, however, we have to use sufficiently large
truncation densities when we study non-linear effects in the time
evolution of large amplitude perturbations. We have therefore decided to
ensure mass conservation by using the alternative boundary condition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.162)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

at the surface instead of Eq. ( 5.153 ). This means that the surface of
the star remains at a fixed position in space and only fluid elements in
the interior of the star are displaced during the evolution. It is the
fixed location of the surface which avoids the main problems we have
encountered with the Eulerian formulation so far. The model we use for
the following analysis has the same equation of state as model 3 of
Table 3 and a central density @xmath which implies a radius @xmath and a
total mass @xmath . The truncation density is fixed at @xmath which
means that the simplified model contains @xmath of the mass of the
original star and extends to @xmath of the original radius. Apart from
changing the truncation density in the calculation of the TOV-background
and implementing the new boundary condition in the evolution code only
one further modification in the numerical setup described in section
5.3.5 is required. The outer boundary condition ( 5.144 ) in the
calculation of the eigenmodes is replaced by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.163)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The resulting eigenmodes can be ordered in the same way as described in
section 5.3.3 and the evolution of eigenmodes in the linear regime again
results in harmonic time dependence as in the original case with the
frequencies predicted by the eigenmode calculation. The first four
eigenmode profiles of @xmath and @xmath for the model mentioned above
are shown in Fig. 44 .

The plots show that the number of local maxima and minima of the

profiles still corresponds to the order of the mode.

#### 5.3.8 Testing the code with the new model

The only modification of the code that needed to be implemented for the
new model is the outer boundary condition ( 5.162 ). The performance of
the code in the linear regime is thus well established by the results of
section 5.3.6 and we merely have to demonstrate that no spurious results
are obtained for larger truncation densities. This is the only case
where we will depart from the model parameters listed in the previous
section and use a central density @xmath instead. We thus recover the
parameters of the model which lead to a spurious evaporation of the star
in Fig. 43 . For this model we have again evolved initial data in the
form of the fundamental mode of the velocity with an amplitude of @xmath
using 600 grid points. In Fig. 45 we show the resulting central density
@xmath together with the deviation from the harmonic solution of the
linearized case. For presentation purposes we only show the evolution up
to @xmath . The harmonic time dependence is reproduced with reasonable
accuracy as the deviation increases linearly up to about @xmath . In
general we have found the eigenmode frequency the quantity most
vulnerable to numerical error as can be seen for example by varying the
resolution. Because of this observation and the oscillatory character of
the deviation in the figure we attribute the error mainly to the limited
accuracy of the frequency rather than the numerical error of the time
evolution itself. The increasing phase shift between the numerical and
the analytic solution arising from the limited accuracy of the frequency

will result in a linear increase of the deviation as observed in Fig. 45
. In spite of the small deviation this calculation is in sharp contrast
with that shown in Fig. 43 , where a much smaller truncation density
resulted in an exponential decay of the central density. We conclude
that using a large truncation density in combination with the boundary
condition ( 5.162 ) the code performs well in the linearized regime.
We now return to the model parameters of the previous section and use
@xmath . In order to test the code for convergence in the non-linear
regime we have evolved the second eigenmode with an amplitude
corresponding to a maximal displacement of fluid elements of @xmath .
The calculation has been carried out with 400, 800 and 1600 grid points
and the resulting convergence factors are shown in Fig. 46 . In spite of
variations around the expected value 4, the results for all variables
are compatible with second order convergence.
For the next test we will use the code in the Cowling approximation,
since the static metric provides a straightforward recipe to calculate
conserved quantities. We have seen in section 5.3.2 that only minor
modifications are required to switch between the Cowling approximation
and a dynamic metric. The conservation properties with a fixed metric
will therefore represent a good test for the matter evolution in the
general case. The first step in the derivation of a conserved quantity
is to find a time-like Killing field. The existence of such a vector
field follows from the static nature of the metric in the Cowling
approximation. The Killing vector can be found by looking at the Killing
equation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.164)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The resulting 10 differential equations can be solved rather easily and
define the solution up to a constant factor. We choose this factor so
that the Killing field can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.165)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conserved quantity then follows from contraction of the Killing
field with the energy momentum tensor

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.166)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

By virtue of conservation of energy momentum this vector satisfies the
condition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.167)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

With the metric ( 5.2 ) and the energy momentum tensor

( 5.78 ) this equation can be written in conservative form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.168)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath and @xmath components of are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.169)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.170)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we consider a general conservation law in one dimension

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.171)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

we obtain after integration over @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.172)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In our case the flux function is given by @xmath and vanishes at @xmath
and @xmath because the velocity @xmath vanishes at both boundaries.
Consequently

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.173)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

is a conserved quantity.
In order to test the conservation properties of the code we have evolved
the same initial data as in the convergence analysis with the metric
fixed at the background values. In Fig. 47 we show @xmath as a function
of time as calculated with 800 grid points. The quantity is conserved
with a relative accuracy better than @xmath . Even higher accuracy is
obtained for smaller amplitudes of the initial data. We have thus
demonstrated that the code performs well in the linear as well as the
non-linear regime. The applicability of the code to a wide range of
amplitudes will be crucial when we study non-linear effects in the
evolution of eigenmodes in the next subsection.

#### 5.3.9 Non-linear mode coupling

(a) Measuring the eigenmode coefficients
We will now use the simplified neutron star model described in section
5.3.7 to study the coupling of eigenmodes in non-linear evolutions of
radial oscillations. In order to measure the presence of the individual
eigenmodes in the evolution we recall the Sturm-Liouville problem (
5.118 ) which determines the eigenmode solutions in terms of the
rescaled displacement vector @xmath . In section 5.3.3 we have seen that
the solutions @xmath form a complete orthonormal system with respect to
the inner product defined in Eq. ( 5.122 ). This property enables us to
quantify the contributions of the different eigenmodes in the evolution
at any given time. We need to calculate the displacement @xmath of a
fully non-linear evolution from the fundamental variables @xmath and
@xmath . For this purpose we eliminate @xmath from Eqs. ( 5.111 ) and (
5.112 ) and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.174)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The initial values of @xmath follow from the initial data which we
provide in the form of an eigenmode in the velocity field @xmath and
zero energy density perturbation @xmath . We can see from Eq. ( 5.130 )
that the initial displacement @xmath vanishes as a consequence. At any
time @xmath we can then expand the non-linear displacement @xmath in
terms of the eigenmodes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.175)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the time dependent coefficients are given by the inner product

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.176)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In practice we prefer to calculate the eigenmode coefficients from the
time derivative of this equation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.177)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have dropped the @xmath and @xmath dependence for convenience.
If we substitute Eq. ( 5.174 ) for @xmath we obtain the final result

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.178)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can thus calculate the time derivative of the coefficients and use
the initial values to obtain the coefficients at any given time @xmath .
In our case all coefficients are zero initially because of the vanishing
of @xmath . The integral appearing in the definition of the inner
product is calculated with the fourth order Simpson method (see for
example \shortciteNP Press1989).
It is also interesting to consider the relative coefficients defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.179)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

whenever @xmath is a non-zero function. If we multiply this equation

by @xmath and sum over @xmath , we can use Eq. ( 5.175 ) to obtain the
relation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.180)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which can be used to check the completeness of the numerically
calculated eigenmodes. For this purpose we have evolved the second
eigenmode with a large amplitude corresponding to a maximum displacement
of @xmath and calculated the sum of the first ten weighted coefficients
@xmath using 600 grid points. The result is shown in Fig. 48 and
demonstrates that Eq. ( 5.180 ) is satisfied to within less than one per
cent. This does not only confirm the completeness of the system of
eigenmodes, but also indicates that the energy essentially remains
within the lowest ten eigenmodes. In order to check the orthonormality
we have calculated the inner products of the eigenmodes. The results for
the lowest five eigenmodes are shown in Table 9 and demonstrate that

the orthonormality condition ( 5.125 ) is satisfied with high accuracy.

(b) Non-linear coupling between eigenmodes
In order to study the coupling of modes due to non-linear effects we
have provided initial data in the form of one velocity eigenmode. The
order of the eigenmode @xmath and the amplitude of the initial data
@xmath are free parameters that determine the physical setup. We will
specify the amplitude of the initial perturbation by the maximum value
of the eigenmode profile of the displacement vector @xmath corresponding
to the initial velocity perturbation. This is a measure for the maximum
displacement a fluid element of the interior of the star will undergo.
During the evolution we calculate the eigenmode coefficients @xmath with
@xmath according to the method described above. Due to the oscillatory
character of the modes, the coefficients will also oscillate during the
evolution. This is shown in Fig. 49 where we plot the coefficients
@xmath and @xmath for evolving the second eigenmode. A large amplitude
corresponding to a maximum displacement of @xmath has been used

for this calculation and we can clearly see the transfer of energy
between the second and the fourth mode. It is interesting to see that
the energy transferred to the fourth mode does not remain there but
instead is periodically passed back and forth between the two modes. We
observe a qualitatively similar behaviour for the other eigenmodes,
although these are excited less efficiently. If we want to investigate
this coupling between eigenmodes more systematically, we need to
quantify the degree to which a particular mode has been excited in an
evolution. For this purpose we will use the maximum value of the
corresponding coefficient obtained during that evolution. We will refer
to these maxima by @xmath as opposed to @xmath used for the time
dependent coefficients. We have thus evolved the eigenmodes @xmath , 2
and 3, referred to

as case 1, 2 and 3 from now on, with amplitudes ranging between @xmath
and @xmath . At some stage in the range between about @xmath and @xmath
we observed the onset of shock formation. The accuracy of the eigenmode
coefficients resulting from these evolutions is not clear. In this
discussion we have therefore only used amplitudes for which no
discontinuities are observed.

For the numerical runs we have used 3200 grid points and an integration
time of @xmath . Test runs over significantly longer times did not lead
to significantly different results for the @xmath which is compatible
with the periodic exchange of energy shown in Fig. 49 . The high grid
resolution on the other hand enables us to measure small eigenmode
coefficients with good accuracy.

Case 1:
We start our analysis with case 1, where the fundamental mode is excited
initially. In Fig. 50 we plot the coefficients @xmath as a function of
the initial amplitude @xmath for the first ten

eigenmodes. We find that the coefficient @xmath increases linearly with
the amplitude @xmath as expected. A closer investigation of the higher
eigenmode coefficients, however, reveals the presence of two distinct
regimes.

-   In a weakly non-linear regime for amplitudes up to about @xmath all
    coefficients @xmath increase quadratically with the amplitude @xmath
    . Deviations from this quadratic power law at very small amplitudes
    are due to the limited numerical accuracy in calculating the
    coefficients.

-   At larger amplitudes all eigenmode coefficients except for @xmath
    show a transition to power laws with larger exponent which marks a
    moderately non-linear regime.

We have illustrated this behaviour in Fig. 51 where the eigenmode
coefficients have been approximated with quadratic power laws

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.181)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The coupling coefficients @xmath which represent the coupling strength
in the weakly non-linear regime have been obtained from least square
fits of quadratic power laws to the eigenmode coefficients in amplitude
ranges between @xmath and @xmath . It is interesting to investigate the
dependence of the coupling coefficients on the order of the eigenmodes.
This is shown in the upper left panel of Fig. 53 , where we plot @xmath
over the order @xmath .

The solid line in this figure shows a power law fit for these coupling
coefficients given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.182)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This result is compatible with the expectation that @xmath as @xmath .
Otherwise an infinite number of modes would each be excited with a
finite amount of energy. In the moderately non-linear regime the
eigenmode coefficients @xmath show a higher order growth with the
amplitude @xmath . For the most efficiently excited modes 2, 3 and 4 we
have been able to approximate the eigenmode coefficients with the
following combinations of power laws

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.183)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.184)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.185)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here the higher order power laws have been obtained from fitting the
eigenmode coefficients after subtracting the quadratic contributions.
The resulting fits are shown in Fig. 52 . The higher order contributions
for the higher eigenmodes is rather weak so that it is difficult to
obtain accurate measurements of the

corresponding power law exponents. It is thus not clear whether the
regular pattern suggested by Eqs. ( 5.183 )-( 5.185 ) remains valid for
higher modes. The steepening of the curves in the

moderately non-linear regime, however, can be clearly seen in Fig. 51 .

Case 2:
We will now address the question to what extent these results remain
valid if we initially excite higher modes. For this purpose we have
repeated the

numerical analysis by providing initial data in the form of the second
velocity mode. The resulting eigenmode coefficients are shown as a
function of the amplitude @xmath in Fig. 54 . The presence of the two
distinct regimes is again clearly demonstrated by the figures and a
closer investigation confirms the quadratic growth of the eigenmode
coefficients in the weakly non-linear regime. This is demonstrated in
Fig. 55 where the corresponding quadratic power law fits are shown for
the eigenmodes. We also observe a similar dependence of the quadratic
coupling coefficients @xmath on the mode number. In case 1 we observed a
power law relation given by Eq. ( 5.182 ) between the coefficients
@xmath and the mode number @xmath . In case 2 we can also approximate
the coefficients @xmath reasonably well with an inverse cubic power law
if we use the number @xmath instead which is demonstrated in the right
panel of Fig. 53 . The lower order modes 1 and 3 do not fit into this
pattern and we shall readdress their behaviour in the quadratic regime
below when we discuss case 3.
Apart from these similarities there are some interesting differences
between case 1 and case 2:

-   The transition from the weakly to the moderately non-linear regime
    occurs at smaller amplitudes than in case 1. This is particularly
    pronounced in the case of mode 6 (see Fig. 55 ).

-   The regular pattern observed in case 1 in the moderately non-linear
    regime for the strongly excited modes 2, 3 and 4, which is expressed
    in Eqs. ( 5.183 )-( 5.185 ), is now being observed for the
    eigenmodes of even order @xmath . We obtain excellent fits for the
    data if we model the even eigenmode coefficients with the following
    linear combinations of power laws.

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.186)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.187)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.188)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.189)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    In Fig. 56 we show the curves resulting from the higher order power
    laws as well as those corresponding to the linear combinations. For
    the odd modes the higher order contributions are rather small so
    that we cannot accurately measure the corresponding power law
    indices. The steepening of the curves and thus the onset of the
    moderately non-linear regime, however, is clearly visible.

-   Whereas the quadratic coupling coefficients @xmath shown in the
    right panel of Fig. 53 show a continuous decrease with the order of
    the mode starting with mode 4, a clear preference of the second mode
    to couple to modes of even order @xmath is observed in the
    moderately non-linear regime. This is indicated by the rather
    efficient coupling to mode 4 and the significantly steeper increase
    of the eigenmode coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for larger
    amplitudes @xmath in Fig. 55 .

-   A small flattening of the even eigenmode coefficients at large
    amplitudes in Fig. 56 may indicate the onset of saturation effects.
    A possible mechanism for saturation is the formation of
    discontinuities. As we have already mentioned we have chosen an
    amplitude range in which no shock formation is observed. At the high
    end of our amplitude range, it may be possible, however, that
    similar dissipative effects due to the strong non-linearity start
    having an effect on the coupling of eigenmodes.

Case 3:
Next we consider case 3 where we perturb the star with the third
velocity mode. The fundamental observations we have made in the previous
two cases

are confirmed by the results in this case. In the weakly non-linear
regime all eigenmode coefficients (except for @xmath ) grow
quadratically with the amplitude @xmath . The corresponding quadratic
coupling coefficients can once more be approximated with a power law
with exponent @xmath . We find, however, that the relevant mode number
is now @xmath . This behaviour is graphically illustrated in the lower
panel of Fig. 53 where the coupling coefficients are shown together with
the power law approximation. The results of this figure suggest the
following regular pattern: For initial data in the form of eigenmode
@xmath the quadratic coupling coefficients starting with mode @xmath are
well approximated by an inverse cubic power law of a relative mode
number @xmath which is @xmath for mode @xmath , @xmath for mode @xmath
and so on.
We still have to analyse the quadratic coupling coefficients of the
modes below @xmath . In case 1 and 2 we did not have enough data to
derive any results for these modes. For case 3 we have listed the
corresponding coefficients @xmath in Table 10 . The coefficients @xmath
are approximately reduced by a factor of 2 each time the mode number is
increased which may indicate an exponential decrease of the quadratic
coupling coefficients for the low order modes.

This is only a vague conclusion from a small data set, however, and
needs to be confirmed by studies of higher eigenmodes.
In the moderately non-linear regime we have seen for case 2 a preferred
coupling to modes with an even order @xmath . In analogy we find that
the third eigenmode couples more efficiently to modes of order @xmath
for larger amplitudes. Again we can approximate the results with good
accuracy with combinations of two power laws analogous to Eqs. ( 5.186
)-( 5.189 )

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.190)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.191)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.192)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.193)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We recognise the same pattern of increasing integer power law indices in
the higher order terms that we have already found in case 1 and 2. These
results are graphically illustrated in Fig. 57 . Again the higher order
contributions in the other eigenmodes is clearly present but too weak to
facilitate an accurate measurement of the exponents.
We conclude the study of non-linear mode coupling with a summary of the
key results.

-   We clearly observe two distinct regimes in the non-linear coupling
    of eigenmodes. In the weekly non-linear regime, normally up to
    amplitudes of several metres, all eigenmode coefficients grow
    quadratically with the amplitude @xmath . In the moderately
    non-linear regime we observe a steeper increase of the coefficients
    @xmath .

-   In the quadratic regime the coupling coefficients @xmath generally
    decrease with increasing order of the eigenmodes. If the initial
    perturbation is given in the form of mode @xmath , we can model the
    behaviour of the quadratic coupling coefficients with an inverse
    cubic power law of the mode number starting with mode @xmath . The
    coupling to lower modes does not obey the same pattern, but we also
    observe a decrease of the @xmath with increasing mode number for
    these modes. This decrease may have exponential character.

-   In the moderately non-linear regime an initially present mode @xmath
    shows a preference to couple to modes of order @xmath where @xmath
    is an integer number. In these cases we can accurately model the
    dependence of the eigenmode coefficients on the amplitude @xmath
    with the sum of a quadratic and a higher order power law with
    exponent @xmath : @xmath for @xmath .

-   In some cases we observe a flattening of the eigenmode coefficients
    at amplitudes of about @xmath which may indicate the onset of
    saturation.

#### 5.3.10 Discussion of the non-linear mode-coupling

In the previous section we have studied the coupling of eigenmodes due
to non-linear effects by evolving a single eigenmode with varying
amplitude. Concerning the transfer of energy to other modes we have
found two distinct regimes, a weakly non-linear regime where the
excitation of modes grows quadratically with the initial amplitude and a
moderately non-linear regime, where this increase can be reasonably well
described by power laws of higher order.
In the analytic study of non-linear mode coupling one normally views the
eigenmode coefficients as harmonic oscillators and the non-linear
interaction between eigenmodes is represented in the form of driving
terms which are quadratic or of higher order in the amplitudes (see for
example \citeNP VanHoolst1996)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.194)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath , @xmath are the quadratic, cubic and higher order
coupling coefficients and summation over @xmath is assumed. In our
analysis the initial data consists in one isolated eigenmode @xmath , so
that the right hand side can be approximated by @xmath In analytic
studies this series expansion is normally truncated at second or third
order. In view of our results the omission of higher order terms seems
to be justified in the weakly non-linear regime, where our fully
non-linear simulations confirm that quadratic terms in the initial
amplitude dominate the coupling between eigenmodes. This is no longer
true, however, in the moderately non-linear regime, where higher order
terms are more important. In particular the regular pattern suggested
for example by Eqs. ( 5.186 )-( 5.189 ) indicates that the excitation of
higher order modes is dominated by increasingly higher order powers of
the initial amplitude. It is not clear how this behaviour can be
modelled in the framework of a finite series expansion of the type (
5.194 ). It rather seems that the use of fully non-linear methods such
as the numerical technique described in this work is necessary in order
to obtain a comprehensive description of the coupling between eigenmodes
in the moderately non-linear regime. In terms of the maximum
displacement of fluid elements in the star this corresponds to initial
amplitudes as low as a couple of metres.
We have also observed that given an initial mode @xmath the coupling to
modes @xmath is particularly efficient in the moderately non-linear
regime. We interprete this as a resonance effect, which we illustrate in
the simple case of a forced oscillator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the frequency and @xmath the amplitude of the external
force. The particular integral of this ordinary differential equation is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.196)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which implies resonance if @xmath . If we assume that resonance occurs
for any integer multiple of the frequency @xmath in the general
non-linear case, we can schematically write the eigenmode coefficients
in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.197)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath may depend on the frequencies. The analytic study of
non-linear mode coupling up to cubic order leads to eigenmode
coefficients which resemble this pattern [see for example Eqs. (18),
(19) of \citeNP VanHoolst1996]. In our case the external force is
provided by the non-linear coupling to the initial mode @xmath , so that
@xmath . We therefore obtain resonance in Eq. ( 5.197 ) if @xmath . As
can be seen for example in Fig. 40 , the eigenfrequencies of radial
neutron star oscillations are fairly equally spaced in the frequency
domain with the exception of the fundamental mode and we can reasonably
well approximate @xmath for @xmath . The condition for resonance then
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.198)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which is exactly the relation we have observed in section 5.3.9 .
From the relativistic point of view the non-linear coupling of
eigenmodes in the weak and moderately non-linear regime is of particular
interest in the discussion of unstable modes of rotating neutron stars.
The underlying principle of these unstable oscillation modes is the
increase in amplitude of the oscillation due to the emission of
gravitational waves. The increased amplitude in turn gives rise to
stronger gravitational radiation and so on. The conservation of energy
is ensured in this case by the spin-down of the neutron star and the
resulting decrease of rotational energy which sets a natural upper limit
on this run-away effect. The physical mechanism which facilitates this
remarkable instability is known as the CFS-instability ( \citeNP
Chandrasekhar1970, \citeNP Friedman1978). In order for a neutron star
oscillation mode to be subject to the CFS-instability two conditions
must be satisfied: (1) the mode must be retrograde with respect to the
star but prograde with respect to a distant inertial observer and (2)
the energy loss in the rotating frame due to dissipative effects must be
smaller than the amount of energy gained from the gravitationally driven
instability. The particular importance of the so-called @xmath -modes in
this respect arises from the fact that the dominating @xmath @xmath
-mode satisfies the first CFS-condition for arbitrarily small values of
the angular frequency of the neutron star ( \citeNP Andersson1998). One
of the most important questions raised in connection with the @xmath
-modes concerns the efficiency with which energy is dissipated for
example due to viscosity or non-linear effects.
Considering the gradual increase in the oscillation amplitude, it is
important to understand how the instability of the mode is affected in
the weakly non-linear regime. To our knowledge the numerical studies
presented in this work provide the first fully non-linear time
evolutions of neutron star oscillations with high accuracy for
amplitudes going all the way down to the weakly non-linear regime. Our
results may therefore pave some of the way towards understanding
non-linear effects in a wider class of neutron star oscillations. In
particular we have managed to quantify the transfer of energy from low
into higher eigenmodes. The picture that emerges from these evolutions
is that only a rather small fraction of energy is shifted away from the
low eigenmodes. In particular the results shown in Fig. 49 indicate that
the energy shifted towards higher eigenmodes does not accumulate in time
but is rather transferred back and forth between the initially present
and the higher mode. Correspondingly we do not observe an efficient
cascade of energy into higher modes. It is not clear, however, to what
extent this picture will change if the energy residing in the higher
order modes is gradually dissipated. In the context of @xmath -modes it
is expected that the energy in higher order modes is dissipated on a
much shorter timescale than that of the dominating @xmath mode. The
numerical techniques and the code developed in this work may facilitate
a corresponding study in the framework of radial oscillations by
introducing an artificial damping of higher order modes and an external
force which drives the fundamental mode. One may then look for steady
state situations arising from this model, where the amount of energy
transfered to higher modes and thus dissipated equals that gained from
the external driving mechanism.
From a numerical point of view we emphasise the new perturbative
approach which enabled us to obtain highly accurate fully non-linear
evolutions over a large range of amplitudes. This technique can be
applied for any physical problem where there exists a non-trivial static
limit. The dynamic evolution can always be considered a finite
perturbation of the static case and a corresponding perturbative
formulation will provide a numerical accuracy that is determined by the
amplitude of the perturbation rather than the static background. We
expect this method to be particularly effective in higher dimensional
evolutions where the grid resolution is rather limited by computational
costs and the ensuing residual error arising from background terms in a
non-perturbative formulation will be more significant.

### 5.4 Radial oscillations in a Lagrangian formulation

In the previous section we have seen that an Eulerian description of
radial oscillations encounters difficulties at the stellar surface for
several reasons. For certain equations of state the eigenmode profiles
predicted by the linearized theory result in a diverging energy density
perturbation. A purely numerical problem arises from the movement of the
stellar surface with respect to the numerical grid. Highly sophisticated
techniques may be required to adequately describe the surface of a
neutron star in Eulerian coordinates and it is not clear to what extent
these will lead to a fully satisfactory performance in the linear regime
where the exact solution is known to high accuracy and facilitates a
quantitative test for the code. It is interesting to see that these
problems vanish immediately once the problem is described in a formalism
where the coordinates follow the movement of the fluid elements. Even
though it is not obvious how to generalise a Lagrangian approach to
scenarios in two or three spatial dimensions, it still seems to be the
natural choice for the 1-dimensional case. Lagrangian codes have often
been based on the formulation of \citeN May1966 and \citeyear May1967
who following \citeN Misner1964 use a vanishing shift vector and define
the radial coordinate in terms of the interior rest mass. In order to
facilitate a simple comparison with the Eulerian code discussed in
section 5.3 , however, it will be convenient for us to use as similar a
gauge choice to the Eulerian case as possible. For this purpose we will
follow \shortciteN Schinder1988 and use a Lagrangian gauge in
combination with the polar slicing condition which is also implemented
in the Eulerian code (cf. section 5.3.1 ). As a particularly useful
consequence the singularity avoiding properties of this condition in
combination with the Lagrangian gauge make this code highly suitable for
studying spherically symmetric gravitational collapse. We will not
exhaustively study this type of scenarios in this work, but will use the
analytic solution by \citeN Oppenheimer1939b which describes the
collapse of a homogeneous dust sphere for testing the code.

#### 5.4.1 The equations in the Lagrangian formulation

The derivation of the Lagrangian equations for a dynamic spherically
symmetric neutron star was largely inspired by the work of \shortciteN
Schinder1988. We will, however, slightly deviate from their approach and
work with a different set of variables and equations.
We start by considering the line element of a spherically symmetric
space time in polar slicing and Lagrangian gauge. As a result of the
polar slicing condition, we are able to choose the same time coordinate
@xmath as in the Eulerian case. The radial coordinate @xmath will label
the fluid elements and generally differ from the areal radius @xmath
which is intrinsically not comoving with the matter. Finally we choose
standard angular coordinates @xmath and @xmath as above. Below we will
see that the polar slicing condition implies a non-vanishing shift
vector so that the line element becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.199)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It turns out to be convenient for our discussion if we introduce the
variables

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.200)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.201)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.202)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the velocity is identical to that used in the Eulerian case. As
before we use the “hat” to distinguish between the time dependent
variables and their counterparts in the static case. We note that we
need to distinguish between the time dependent areal radius @xmath and
the static value @xmath , since the areal radius corresponding to the
position of a fluid element is a dependent variable and will generally
vary with time. In the Eulerian case the areal radius was a coordinate
and therefore intrinsically independent of time. If we compare the
Lagrangian line element ( 5.199 ) with the Eulerian one given by Eq. (
5.77 ) we therefore have to use the time dependent @xmath in the latter
line element instead of @xmath . The coordinate transformation relating
the two line elements is described by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.203)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The transformation law for the metric components corresponding to the
transformation from coordinates @xmath to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.204)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and leads to the two non-trivial equations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.205)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.206)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As a consequence the shift vector @xmath is related to the components of
the Lagrangian metric by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.207)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In terms of the extrinsic curvature defined in Eq. ( 2.19 ) this
relation can be written as @xmath and we have recovered the polar
slicing condition. The non-vanishing shift vector ( 5.207 ) is the price
we have to pay for keeping the polar slicing condition in the Lagrangian
gauge.
As far as the matter is concerned, we use again a single component
perfect fluid and thus the energy momentum tensor given by Eq. ( 5.78 ).
Since the fluid elements do not move with respect to the radial
coordinate @xmath , the 4-velocity has zero spatial components and is
determined by the normalisation @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.208)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The resulting field equations @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.209)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.210)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.211)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Similarly the conservation of energy and momentum @xmath leads to two
evolution equations for the matter variables

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.212)
     @xmath      (5.213)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the system is closed by the polytropic equation of state ( 5.79 ).
It is worth pointing out that the appearance of the time derivative in
the field equation ( 5.211 ) does not contradict the absence of
gravitational degrees of freedom in spherical symmetry. This equation
can be shown to be a consequence of the constraints ( 5.209 ), ( 5.210 )
and the matter equations ( 5.212 ), ( 5.213 ). In this sense the degrees
of freedom still reside in the matter variables and the metric is
determined at each time irrespective of its history. In practice,
however, we will use the rather simple equation ( 5.211 ) to evolve the
variable @xmath instead of evolving @xmath via the matter equation (
5.212 ).
If we consider the static limit of the system of equations ( 5.209 )-(
5.213 ) we expect to recover the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations (
5.48 )-( 5.51 ). That this is indeed the case can be seen if we set all
time derivatives including the velocity @xmath to zero and assume that
@xmath is identical to the coordinate @xmath we used in the static case.
The second condition can always be satisfied since the fluid elements
are not moving and can be labelled by the areal radius of their position
or the rescaled coordinate @xmath defined in Eq. ( 5.47 ). Then Eq. (
5.210 ) directly reduces to Eq. ( 5.11 ) or the transformed version
thereof expressed in terms of the coordinate @xmath . From Eq. ( 5.206 )
we conclude that @xmath and the constraint ( 5.209 ) becomes identical
to ( 5.49 ). Finally the matter equation ( 5.213 ) reduces to Eq. ( 5.51
) and the evolution equations ( 5.211 ) and ( 5.212 ) vanish
identically.

#### 5.4.2 The linearized evolution equations

We have seen that the static limit of the evolution equations ( 5.209
)-( 5.212 ) is given by the TOV equations. We can therefore linearise
the dynamic equations around this background and compare the results
with the Eulerian case described in section 5.3.3 . In order to
distinguish between Eulerian and Lagrangian perturbations we will use a
capital @xmath in the Lagrangian case. The only exception is the radial
displacement which is identical in both formulations so that we keep the
variable name @xmath .
We start the linearisation with the definition of the radial velocity
@xmath ( 5.200 ). In terms of the radial displacement this equation
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.214)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We note that the background value of the lapse @xmath appears in the
denominator instead of the time dependent @xmath . In the same way we
will neglect higher order terms in the other equations. If we substitute
this expression for @xmath in the evolution equation ( 5.211 ) for
@xmath and integrate over time, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.215)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The constant of integration vanishes because a zero displacement @xmath
of the fluid elements implies @xmath . We can use this expression for
@xmath in the definition ( 5.202 ) to obtain the result for the
auxiliary variable @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.216)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The energy density perturbation then follows from substituting Eqs. (
5.214 )-( 5.216 ) in the evolution equation ( 5.212 ) and integrating
over time. With the constant of integration vanishing as before the
result is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.217)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

From the definition of the speed of sound we can calculate the pressure
perturbation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.218)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we substitute the results ( 5.214 )-( 5.218 ) in the evolution
equation ( 5.213 ) we get exactly the second order differential equation
( 5.113 ) of the Eulerian case with the coefficient functions ( 5.114
)-( 5.116 ). No substitution for @xmath is necessary here, because all
terms containing @xmath drop out by virtue of the TOV background
equations. Writing the displacement as a product @xmath we obtain again
harmonic time dependence and finally arrive at the ordinary differential
equation ( 5.118 ) so that we can use the whole machinery developed in
section 5.3.3 to calculate the eigenmodes. It is interesting, however,
to contrast Eq. ( 5.217 ) for the Lagrangian @xmath with the Eulerian
analogue Eq. ( 5.130 ). We have seen in section 5.3.3 that the extra
term in the Eulerian relation leads to the problematic asymptotic
behaviour of @xmath at the surface. No such problem occurs in the
Lagrangian case which thus provides a self-consistent way of deriving
the linearized equations.

#### 5.4.3 The equations for the numerical implementation

The Lagrangian evolution of a dynamic neutron star in spherical symmetry
is described by the system of equations ( 5.200 ), ( 5.209 )-( 5.211 ),
( 5.213 ), where the auxiliary variables @xmath and @xmath are defined
by Eqs. ( 5.201 ) and ( 5.202 ). This choice of variables and equations,
however, did not lead to an entirely satisfactory performance of the
code. This became most obvious in the simulation of the
Oppenheimer-Snyder dust collapse where the energy density showed an
increasing deviation from the analytic solution near the centre of the
star. When the dust sphere had collapsed close to its Schwarzschild
radius, the deviation was larger than @xmath . In order to understand
this inaccuracy, we consider Eq. ( 5.210 ) which relates the energy
density to the mass. If we solve this equation for @xmath we see that
the mass appears in the form @xmath , which will be of the order @xmath
near the origin. The second order accuracy of the finite differencing
scheme we have used, however, implies that the variable @xmath is known
with a local error @xmath only and consequently the numerical derivative
@xmath has an error @xmath . Near the origin the radius @xmath is of the
same order of magnitude as @xmath and the error of @xmath and thus the
energy density @xmath is large. This problem is a consequence of the
@xmath behaviour of the mass @xmath near the origin combined with the
strong variation of the variables in the dust collapse and persists in a
perturbative formulation. In the numerical evolution we therefore use
the variable

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.219)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

instead of the mass @xmath . The Lagrangian equations ( 5.200 ), ( 5.209
)-( 5.211 ), ( 5.213 ) then become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.220)
     @xmath      (5.221)
     @xmath      (5.222)
     @xmath      (5.223)
     @xmath      (5.224)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is now defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.225)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the static limit these equations reduce to the TOV equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.226)
     @xmath      (5.227)
     @xmath      (5.228)
     @xmath      (5.229)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to derive a fully non-linear perturbative formulation, we
decompose the time dependent quantities into static background
contributions and time dependent perturbations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.230)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.231)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.232)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.233)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.234)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

With these definitions the fully non-linear perturbative version of
Eqs. ( 5.220 )-( 5.224 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath               (5.235)
     @xmath               (5.236)
              @xmath      (5.237)
              @xmath      (5.238)
     @xmath               (5.239)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This is the final system of equations used in the numerical
implementation.

#### 5.4.4 Initial data and boundary conditions

In order to numerically evolve the system of partial differential
equations ( 5.235 )-( 5.239 ) we have to specify initial data and
boundary conditions. We will start with the initial data.
In the Eulerian case we have determined the physical setup by providing
initial data for the matter variables @xmath and @xmath . This gave us
energy density and velocity at each radial position @xmath . In order to
provide the same information in the Lagrangian case it is not sufficient
to give initial data in the form of @xmath and @xmath because the
meaning of the spatial coordinate @xmath is not determined at this
stage. Indeed it can easily be seen that the system of equations ( 5.220
)-( 5.224 ) is invariant under any transformation @xmath which
corresponds to a relabelling of the fluid elements. Consequently we also
need to establish a relation between the Lagrangian coordinate @xmath
and the areal radius @xmath on the initial slice. The initial data for
@xmath serve this purpose. Alternatively this additional requirement
becomes obvious if we consider the structure of the system ( 5.220 )-(
5.224 ). These equations contain the time derivatives of @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . In addition to the lapse function @xmath only one
of these quantities is determined by the constraint equations ( 5.220 ),
( 5.221 ). The remaining three variables follow from the time evolution
and thus require the specification of initial data. In the perturbative
formulation the background functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
follow from the solution of the TOV equations and we prescribe initial
data for the perturbations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The values of
@xmath and @xmath are then calculated from the constraint equations (
5.235 ) and ( 5.236 ). For this purpose we use an implicit second order
scheme based on the finite differencing given for these equations in
appendix A .
The specification of boundary conditions, in particular at the stellar
surface, turned out to be the most problematic part in the Eulerian
formulation of the dynamic star. In contrast the boundary conditions are
well defined in the Lagrangian case. At the centre we demand

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.240)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.241)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.242)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first two conditions guarantee that the centre of the star does not
move which immediately follows from the spherical symmetry and the third
condition avoids the appearance of a conical singularity. At the surface
we require

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.243)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.244)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which follows from the definition of the surface and the matching to an
exterior Schwarzschild metric. If @xmath is the number of grid points
used, the finite differencing of the evolution equations ( 5.235 )-(
5.239 ) results in @xmath algebraic relations between the @xmath
function values. The boundary conditions ( 5.240 )-( 5.244 ) provide the
remaining 5 relations to determine the evolution and no additional
treatment of boundary values is required.

#### 5.4.5 The finite differencing of the equations

We numerically solve the system of partial differential equations (
5.235 )-( 5.239 ) by using an implicit second order in space and time
finite differencing scheme. The particular choice of stencils has been
guided by the presence of derivatives in the individual differential
equations. This is illustrated in Fig. 58 where the grid points @xmath
and @xmath are shown for the time levels

@xmath and @xmath . The filled circles indicate grid points that have
been used for the finite differencing, the crosses those points which
have not been used. The constraint equations ( 5.235 ) and ( 5.236 )
contain spatial derivatives only. It is therefore suitable to use two
neighbouring grid points on the new time slice @xmath . In contrast
Eqs. ( 5.237 ) and ( 5.238 ) contain time derivatives only and we use
two grid points at spatial position @xmath on neighbouring time slices
for the finite differencing. Both kinds of derivatives are present in
Eq. ( 5.239 ) and we need to use all four grid points as a consequence.
Fig. 58 also illustrates an extra option that has been included in the
finite differencing. In the case of the Oppenheimer-Snyder dust collapse
it turns out to be necessary to interpret the values of the energy
density @xmath , @xmath as cell averages and correspondingly use a
staggered grid for these variables. This is indicated by the empty
circles in Fig. 58 . In the finite differencing equations we will
therefore introduce a parameter @xmath which allows us to switch between
a staggered and the “normal” grid for @xmath and @xmath . The
staggering, however, is only needed for the dust collapse and will not
be used when we simulate neutron stars.
The resulting finite difference equations are listed in appendix A
together with the additional relations we use to calculate auxiliary
functions and derivatives of the background variables. The parameter
@xmath will be zero in all cases except for the simulation of the
Oppenheimer-Snyder dust collapse, where we will use the staggered grid
for the energy density and set @xmath . Before we turn our attention
towards solving this system of algebraic equations, we need to comment
on some of its properties.

-   If we use the staggered grid to calculate the energy density, the
    outer boundary condition ( A.35 ) is only a formal condition because
    @xmath decouples from the remaining @xmath variables. In the
    analysis of the dust collapse we will therefore use the interior
    values @xmath for @xmath only.

-   We also note that the finite difference expression ( A.25 ) for
    @xmath is only a first order accurate approximation if the staggered
    grid is used for the energy density. This does not affect the
    accuracy of the numerical scheme, however, since this derivative
    appears in the form of the pressure gradient @xmath only in Eq. (
    5.239 ). The only scenario where we use the staggering is the dust
    collapse, where the pressure and thus its gradient vanish
    identically.

-   Finally we note that the finite differencing scheme used here
    slightly differs from that used for the evolution of cosmic strings
    in section 4.4.3 . The scheme used here was partly inspired by the
    work of \shortciteN Schinder1988 and partly resulted from attempts
    to eliminate numerical noise that we encountered during the
    development of the code. It turned out, however, that this noise
    originated from the numerical inaccuracy associated with the @xmath
    behaviour of the variable @xmath we discussed above. We have no
    reason therefore to question the applicability of the
    Crank-Nicholson scheme described in section 2.3.6 .

In order to solve the system of @xmath non-linear algebraic relations we
use the Newton-Raphson method described in section 2.3.5 . The initial
guess is given by the values on the previous time slice and convergence
is typically achieved after three iterations.

#### 5.4.6 Testing the code

In order to check the performance of the code we subject it to three
independent tests. As in the Eulerian case, we will compare the
numerical results with the approximative analytic solution obtained from
the linearized equations of a dynamic spherically symmetric neutron
star. Secondly we will test the convergence properties of the code in
the non-linear regime. Finally we calculate the deviation of the
numerical results from the analytic solution by \citeN Oppenheimer1939b
which describes the collapse of a homogeneous dust sphere.
We start by testing the performance of the code in the linear regime. In
the Eulerian analysis we have seen that the eigenmodes for stellar
models with polytropic indices @xmath lead to a diverging energy density
perturbation at the surface and thus could not be used for a time
evolution. We have seen, however, that this divergence results from a
coordinate singularity at the stellar surface and the Lagrangian energy
density perturbation is well behaved for any polytropic index. It is
tempting therefore to use a stellar model with a large polytropic index
to test the performance of the Lagrangian code in the linear regime. We
choose a model with polytropic exponent @xmath , polytropic factor
@xmath and central density @xmath . This is the third model of Table 6
where we compared our results of the eigenmode frequencies with those of
\citeN Kokkotas2001.
In general we have achieved better performance with the Lagrangian code
if the outer boundary condition @xmath is satisfied

exactly. In the remainder of the Lagrangian discussion we will therefore
use the relaxation method described in section 5.2.2 to calculate the
TOV background. Unless specified otherwise we will use the rescaled
coordinate @xmath for this calculation and the time evolution and thus
set @xmath .
The next step consists in calculating the eigenmode profiles for the
variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These results enable us to
specify initial data and calculate the analytic solutions. In this case
the initial perturbation of the star consists in a displacement @xmath
of the fluid elements corresponding to the fundamental mode with a
surface amplitude of about @xmath . The initial velocity is set to zero
and the energy density corresponding to this eigenmode follows from
Eq. ( 5.217 ). The remaining initial variables are calculated from the
constraint equations ( 5.235 ), ( 5.236 ). The resulting data on the
initial slice are then evolved in time according to the method described
in the previous section. The analytic solution for the fundamental
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.245)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.246)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.247)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the frequency derived from the eigenmode calculation. In
Fig. 59 we show the numerical results obtained for 1600 grid points
together with their deviation from the harmonic solutions. These results
show that the code reproduces the analytic solution

with a relative accuracy of about @xmath . For presentation purposes the
time evolution is shown up to @xmath only. No significant loss of
accuracy has been observed for longer evolutions.
We have also compared the frequency spectrum resulting from time
evolutions with the corresponding predictions by the eigenmode
calculation. For this purpose we have used the same stellar model as in
the previous test as well as model 1 of Table 3 which has a polytropic
index @xmath . In both cases the initial perturbation is given by the
sum of the first ten eigenmodes in the displacement @xmath . The
combined amplitude is about @xmath in both cases, so that the deviation
from the linear approximation should again be very small. In Fig. 60 we
show the Fourier spectra of the central energy density perturbation
@xmath obtained for time evolutions over @xmath using 600 grid points.
The vertical bars indicate the frequencies predicted for the first 10
eigenmodes and coincide well with the peaks in the power spectra.
In order to test the performance of the code in the non-linear regime

we have performed a convergence analysis for an initial displacement
with the profile of the second eigenmode and an amplitude of about
@xmath for the stellar model with @xmath and @xmath . In this amplitude
range non-linear effects are present, but shock formation is not yet
expected for initial data with sufficiently weak spatial variation. We
have evolved these initial data using 400, 800 and 1600 grid points and
have calculated the time dependent convergence factor according to the
method described in section 3.5.3 . Since the exact solution is not
known, we use the reference solution for 1600 grid points in its place.
The result obtained for the variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath is shown in Fig. 61 and demonstrates second order convergence
throughout the evolution.
Finally we have tested the code with the analytic solution by \citeN
Oppenheimer1939b which describes the collapse of a homogeneous
spherically symmetric dust cloud. \shortciteN Petrich1986 have expressed
this analytic solution in polar slicing combined with radial or
isotropic gauge. Even though we are using a Lagrangian gauge condition
here, we can use their results for a comparison with our numerical
simulation.
In their calculation of the analytic solution \shortciteANP Petrich1986
use a Lagrangian coordinate @xmath and a time parameter @xmath which
varies from @xmath to @xmath as the dust sphere collapses from initial
radius to @xmath . On a given time slice @xmath , where @xmath is the
time coordinate defined by the polar slicing condition, @xmath is given
as a function of @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.248)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the values of @xmath and @xmath at the
surface of the dust cloud. If we label the initial slice by @xmath ,
this equation implies that @xmath everywhere on the initial slice. At
any given time @xmath the areal radius is then shown to be related to
the coordinate @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.249)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Schwarzschild mass of the dust cloud. If we consider
the special case of this equation at the surface and on the initial
slice we can calculate @xmath from

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.250)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the initial radius of the dust sphere. For reasons that
will be given below we will identify the radial coordinate @xmath with
the areal radius of the initial location of the fluid elements. We can
therefore set @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 5.249 ) and use the result to
calculate @xmath on the initial slice. Since both coordinates are
comoving with the fluid elements, this relation between @xmath and
@xmath remains valid at any time @xmath . In order to calculate @xmath
at a given time @xmath we still need to find the value @xmath . This is
done by inverting the relation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.251)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for which we use a Newton-Raphson method. Once @xmath has been
calculated, we can use Eq. ( 5.248 ) to calculate @xmath on that time
slice. The physical variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then
follow from Eq. ( 5.249 ) and further relations by \shortciteANP
Petrich1986 which we write in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.252)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.253)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.254)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the central value of the lapse function and @xmath and
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.255)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.256)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In practice we specify the initial energy density and radius of the dust
sphere and set the velocity to zero. The functions @xmath and @xmath are
then calculated from the constraint equations and the total mass of the
sphere follows from the definition ( 5.219 ).
From the numerical point of view the dust collapse is a special

case in several aspects which restricts our choice of the available
options of the code.

-   By definition the pressure vanishes in the dust sphere. As a result
    there is no static configuration analogous to the static neutron
    star governed by the TOV equations. We therefore need to use vacuum
    flat space as the background and run the code in the
    non-perturbative mode.

-   The vanishing of the pressure also implies that the speed of sound
    is zero throughout the dust sphere so that it cannot be used to
    rescale the radial coordinate according to Eq. ( 5.47 ). The radial
    coordinate @xmath is therefore defined by the areal radius of the
    initial positions of the fluid elements and we use the condition
    @xmath in the code.

-   The surface of a neutron star with a polytropic equation of state is
    defined by the vanishing of the energy density @xmath which provided
    the outer boundary condition in the numerical evolution. For the
    dust sphere this relation is not valid any more and the energy
    density is finite at the outer boundary. The exact value, however,
    is not known, so that we cannot use it to derive an alternative
    boundary condition. The boundary condition @xmath is trivially
    satisfied in the case of a dust sphere and does not provide any
    extra information either. If we consider the structure of equations
    ( 5.220 )-( 5.224 ), however, we can see that all spatial
    derivatives of the energy density appear in the form of pressure
    gradients. These terms are identically zero in this case and
    disappear from the equations. We can therefore use the staggered
    grid for the energy density and thus eliminate the need of a
    boundary condition for @xmath . For this purpose we set the
    parameter @xmath to 1 in the evolution of the dust sphere.

In Figs. 62 and 63 we show the results obtained for a dust sphere with
initial density @xmath and radius @xmath which corresponds to a total
mass of @xmath . A grid resolution of 800 points has been used for this
calculation. The results demonstrate the good accuracy with which the
code reproduces the analytic solution. Near the surface of the dust
sphere, however, the numerical error increases significantly as the
sphere approaches its Schwarzschild radius. We attribute this behaviour
to the steep gradient of the lapse function near the surface that arises
in the late stages of the evolution.
This simulation also illustrates the singularity avoiding properties of
the polar slicing condition. As the dust sphere collapses towards its
Schwarzschild radius, the lapse function decreases towards zero and the
evolution is practically frozen. This effect, the so called collapse of
the lapse , is responsible for the apparent slow down of the collapse of
the radial function @xmath that can be seen in the upper left panel of
Fig. 62 . It is this property that makes polar slicing a popular choice
for the numerical analysis of 1-dimensional gravitational collapse.

### 5.5 Do shocks form at the surface for low amplitude oscillations?

We will now address a question that implicitly arose in the discussion
of the linearized equations in the Eulerian formulation. We have seen in
Eq. ( 5.133 ) that the linearized equations predict a diverging ratio
@xmath at the surface. For polytropic indices @xmath we know that the
divergence of @xmath is a result of the Taylor expansion used to relate
the Eulerian energy density perturbation to the Lagrangian one in Eq. (
5.130 ) and thus a non-physical result. For polytropic exponents @xmath
, however, Eq. ( 5.130 ) represents a valid relation to first order in
the perturbations, so that the Eulerian density perturbation will indeed
be large compared with the background value near the surface. This
behaviour raises the question whether non-linear effects will affect the
evolution near the surface and give rise to the formation of
discontinuities. From a different point of view one may consider the
speed of sound which vanishes at the surface for a polytropic exponent
@xmath and the particle speed @xmath which is finite because of the
movement of the stellar surface. Consequently the velocity of the fluid
elements will exceed the speed of sound and one may again ask whether
this leads to shock formation. We will investigate this by using the
exact treatment of the surface provided by the Lagrangian code.
For this purpose we consider the neutron star model 3 of Table 3 and
provide initial data in the form of a displacement @xmath corresponding
to a single eigenmode. For reasonably low order eigenmodes and
amplitudes up to several metres we have not observed any significant
deviation from the expected harmonic time dependence. For eigenmodes of
very high order, however, this picture changes. We illustrate this in
the case of an initial displacement of the fluid elements corresponding
to a high order eigenmode (about 50) and an amplitude of about @xmath at
the surface. The high resolution of 3200 grid points has been used for
this calculation to adequately resolve the high order mode. We stress
that this evolution is only possible because of the high resolution near
the surface provided by the rescaled variable @xmath .

In Fig. 64 we show snapshots of the time evolution of the energy density
perturbation at times @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We note that only the small radial range
@xmath is shown in the figure. In terms of the areal radius this
corresponds to a range of about @xmath below the surface. We can see
that for this small amplitude a steep gradient forms near the surface
after about @xmath which corresponds to less than two oscillation
periods of the eigenmode. This indicates the formation of a
discontinuity. At later times than shown here the code fails to converge
which we attribute to the numerical noise caused by the shock formation
and the extreme sensitivity of the code near the surface of the star. In
order to demonstrate that this result is not merely due to numerical
inaccuracies, we have evolved the same initial data with the smaller
amplitude of @xmath . In Fig. 65 we show the same snap shots for this
evolution as in Fig. 64 . In this case we obtain harmonic time
dependence as expected in the linear limit.

By using eigenmodes with even higher order we have observed shock
formation at the surface for smaller amplitudes. In view of the results
for low order modes where no significant non-linear effects are observed
for similar amplitudes, we conclude that the magnitude of non-linear
effects is not only determined by the size of the perturbations relative
to the background variables, but also by the length scale on which the
perturbations vary significantly. We finally note that the surface of a
neutron star is too complicated to be accurately described by the
polytropic equation of state used for these evolutions. It is not clear
whether discontinuities will form in the same way for more realistic
descriptions of neutron stars. Nevertheless our results demonstrate that
the surface requires a careful numerical treatment.

## 6 Conclusions

In this work we have presented the application of different numerical
techniques to solve Einstein’s field equations. We have laid the
foundation for our discussion by describing in detail the ADM “3+1” and
the characteristic Bondi-Sachs formulation of the field equations
together with various aspects of numerical analysis.
In the framework of “3+1” formulations of the Einstein field equations
the restriction to a finite grid in numerical computations results in
difficulties concerning the specification of outer boundary conditions
and the interpretation of gravitational waves. These problems are
naturally resolved in a characteristic formulation, but the foliation of
spacetime based on the characteristic surfaces may break down in regions
of strong curvature due to the formation of caustics. The combination of
the two schemes in the framework of Cauchy-characteristic matching
enables one to make use of the advantages of both methods while avoiding
the respective drawbacks. In this work we have completed the
cylindrically symmetric stage of the Southampton Cauchy-characteristic
matching project by providing a new long term stable CCM code including
both gravitational degrees of freedom. A Geroch decomposition of the
4-dimensional spacetime allows us to reformulate the problem in terms of
the norm of the axial Killing vector @xmath and the Geroch potential
@xmath on an asymptotically flat 3-dimensional quotient spacetime. These
geometrical fields describe the gravitational degrees of freedom in
simple terms and appear to be a natural choice of variables for the
description of a cylindrically symmetric vacuum spacetime. The conformal
compactification of the resulting 3-dimensional spacetime allows us to
impose exact boundary conditions at null infinity. In contrast to the
previous work we have also applied the Geroch decomposition to the
interior Cauchy region and thus been able to use the same variables
throughout the numerical grid. This leads to a substantial
simplification of the interface and the evolution equations and
facilitates a long term stable evolution with both gravitational degrees
of freedom present. The effectiveness of the code has been demonstrated
by reproducing the analytic Weber-Wheeler solution and the vacuum
spacetime with two degrees of freedom due to Xanthopoulos. The code has
been shown to be second order convergent over the dynamically relevant
time intervals. Our results demonstrate the importance of a “good”
choice of variables in order to obtain a stable, accurate code even in
the 1-dimensional case. For higher dimensional problems the structure of
the null-geodesics will be much more complicated because of the angular
dependence. As a consequence the transformation between the Cauchy and
the characteristic variables at the interface will also be more
complicated and thus more vulnerable to instabilities. In view of our
results it seems preferable to search for natural variables, such as the
Geroch variables in the cylindrically symmetric case, to describe the
two regions rather than follow the “brute force” calculations which
arise for example from a direct application of the ADM-formulation in
the Cauchy region.

Next we have derived a characteristic formulation of the equations
governing a dynamic cosmic string in cylindrical symmetry. A feature of
the cosmic string equations is that they admit exponentially diverging
unphysical solutions. By using the Geroch decomposition it is again
possible to reformulate the problem in terms of fields which describe
the string on an asymptotically flat @xmath -dimensional spacetime and
the two auxiliary fields @xmath and @xmath . As well as avoiding the
need to introduce artificial outgoing radiation boundary conditions the
inclusion of null infinity as part of the numerical grid has the
advantage that we can enforce outer boundary conditions for the string
variables which rule out the unphysical solutions. As special cases of
the dynamic equations we also obtain the equations for a static cosmic
string in curved or Minkowski spacetime. These sets of equations have
been solved by using a relaxation scheme in the static cases and an
implicit method for the dynamic scenario.
A convergence analysis for all codes demonstrates clear second order
convergence. The dynamic code has also been shown to reproduce the
results of the two exact vacuum solutions by Weber & Wheeler and
Xanthopoulos. Finally the dynamic code reproduces the results for the
static cosmic string in that initial data corresponding to a static
solution do not change significantly when evolved in time. For both the
exact vacuum solutions and the static initial data the code shows
excellent long term stability.
After demonstrating the reliability of the code we have used it to
analyse the interaction between an initially static cosmic string and a
Weber-Wheeler type pulse of gravitational radiation. We have found that
the gravitational wave excites the string and causes the string
variables @xmath and @xmath to oscillate. In terms of unphysical
rescaled variables we find that the frequencies of the oscillations are
essentially independent of the strength of the coupling between string
and gravity described by @xmath and of the width and amplitude of the
Weber-Wheeler pulse. We have also found that the frequency of @xmath is
independent of the relative coupling constant @xmath while that of
@xmath is proportional to @xmath . When this result is translated back
into the physical units we find that the frequency of the scalar field
is proportional to the mass of the scalar field and the frequency of the
vector field is proportional to the mass of the vector field as
predicted by the linearized theory. This result is confirmed by
investigating two further scenarios. Firstly we consider the evolution
of static initial data for the string coupled to the gravitational
field, but with a Gaussian perturbation to one of the string variables,
and secondly we consider the same scenario but in a Minkowskian
background with the gravitational field decoupled. In both cases we
obtain the same relationship between the frequencies and the mass.
An interesting numerical result arising from the use of an implicit
numerical scheme concerns the structure of the interface between the
interior and the compactified outer region. In contrast to the rather
complicated interpolation techniques that were necessary to transform
between the Cauchy and characteristic variables in the explicit vacuum
CCM-code, we have been able to “localise” the interface in the implicit
scheme by using two grid points for the spatial position @xmath , one
containing the variables of the inner region, one containing those used
in the outer region. The interface then merely consists in relating
these variables and their derivatives by using their definitions and
applying the chain-rule. In our case the resulting relations were
trivial and could easily be incorporated into the main evolution
algorithm. We attribute this substantial simplification to the
simultaneous calculation in implicit schemes of all function values on
the new time-slice. In explicit schemes, on the other hand the
calculation of the new function values is normally subject to a certain
hierarchical order.

In the final part of this work we have presented a new numerical
approach which enables us to evolve radial oscillations of neutron stars
over a large amplitude range with high accuracy. In radial gauge and
polar slicing the dynamic star is described by two constraint equations
for the metric and a quasi-linear system of two evolution equations for
the matter variables. The crucial step in our approach is to decompose
the dynamic variables into static background contributions which are
determined by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations and time
dependent perturbations. We have used this decomposition to rewrite the
system of equations in a perturbative form. We do, however, keep all
terms of higher order in the perturbations and thus obtain a formulation
equivalent to the original set of equations. The motivation for our
approach is given by the fact that background terms (terms of zero
order) are in general present in the dynamic equations. These terms
cancel each other analytically by virtue of the background equations.
Numerically, however, this is generally satisfied up to a residual
numerical error only which will constitute a spurious source term in the
evolution of the perturbations and contaminate the numerical results. In
order to avoid this effect, we use the background equations to remove
all zero order terms from the perturbative equations. We thus ensure
that the numerical accuracy is determined by the perturbations instead
of the static background.
We have compared the resulting perturbative code with a “standard”
non-perturbative method by evolving the fundamental eigenmode of a
dynamically stable neutron star using an amplitude of several metres.
Whereas the perturbative scheme reproduces the expected harmonic
oscillations with high accuracy, the non-perturbative scheme leads to an
exponential decay of the central energy density perturbation after a few
oscillations which we attribute to the numerical contamination caused by
the background terms.
Even though the perturbative code performs well in the linear regime for
a wide variety of neutron star models, we have observed a spurious
exponential growth of the physical variables in the evolution of
marginally stable neutron star models if we truncate the neutron star at
a sufficiently large density and thus omit the outer low density layers
from the numerical evolution. The need to truncate the neutron star at
finite densities arises from the occurrence of negative energy densities
near the surface of the star due to numerical inaccuracies. In a purely
Eulerian formulation the outer grid boundary does not coincide with the
surface of the star in a non-linear evolution. When the star shrinks
inside the numerical grid negative energy densities will occur because
the numerical evolution is not able to accurately model the vacuum
region between the stellar surface and the outer grid boundary. It is
interesting to see that the surface represents a problematic area even
in the comparatively simple linearized case. For equations of state with
an asymptotic behaviour @xmath and @xmath the Eulerian energy density
perturbation diverges at the surface of the star. We have shown how this
problem arises from the transformation between Lagrangian and Eulerian
perturbations and is not present in a Lagrangian formulation.
In order to alleviate the surface problem in the Eulerian case in a
simple manner we have used a fixed boundary condition by setting the
radial velocity @xmath at the outer grid boundary. Furthermore we have
truncated the outer layers of the neutron star, so that the resulting
model contains @xmath of the original mass. We have thus demonstrated
second order convergence of the code in the non-linear regime and
checked the conservation properties of the code in the Cowling
approximation. We have finally used the simplified neutron star model to
study the coupling between eigenmodes due to non-linear effects. For
this purpose we have provided initial data in the form of an isolated
eigenmode and quantified the excitation of other modes in terms of the
inner product, defined by the self-adjoined eigenvalue problem of the
linearized case, between the non-linear data and the eigenmode
solutions. The high accuracy of the perturbative scheme enables us to
vary the amplitude of the initial data over a wide range corresponding
to a maximum displacement of fluid elements between several cm and about
@xmath . For significantly larger amplitudes we observe the formation of
steep gradients which makes the accurate measurement of the eigenmode
coefficients problematic.
In our study we have provided initial data in the form of either of the
first three eigenmodes in the velocity field while the energy density
perturbation has been set to zero. We have then measured the maximum
coefficients for the first 10 or 15 eigenmodes. Our results clearly show
the existence of two distinct regimes. In the weakly non-linear regime
with amplitudes up to several metres all eigenmode coefficients increase
quadratically with the amplitude. If the order of the initially excited
mode is @xmath , we have also found that the coupling coefficients in
the weakly non-linear regime decrease with increasing order of the
eigenmodes starting with mode @xmath . This decrease can be approximated
well with an inverse cubic power law. In the moderately non-linear
regime we have observed a different behaviour of the modes. An initially
present mode @xmath has been found to couple more efficiently to the
eigenmodes @xmath , where @xmath , 3, 4 and so on. For these modes we
can model the resulting eigenmode coefficients with a sum of a quadratic
power law and a power law of index @xmath with good accuracy. The
remaining eigenmode coefficients also show a steeper increase with
amplitude than in the weakly non-linear regime, but the power law
contribution with exponent larger than two is generally too small to
facilitate an accurate measurement.
Finally we have developed a fully non-linear Lagrangian code for the
evolution of spherically symmetric dynamic neutron stars. We have
demonstrated how the numerical difficulties encountered in the Eulerian
case are resolved in the Lagrangian formulation. The code has been shown
to accurately reproduce the analytic solution of the linearized
equations for low amplitudes and the analytic solution of Oppenheimer
and Snyder describing the collapse of a spherically symmetric
homogeneous dust sphere. We have furthermore demonstrated second order
convergence of the code. The code has been used to investigate
non-linear effects near the stellar surface arising in low amplitude
oscillations. Whereas we do not observe a significant deviation from the
linear regime for low order eigenmodes and amplitudes of several metres,
high order eigenmodes of the order of 50 with amplitudes of @xmath lead
to the formation of steep gradients near the surface due to non-linear
effects. We conclude that the magnitude of non-linear effects is not
only determined by the relative size of the perturbations with respect
to the background but also on the length scale on which the
perturbations vary significantly. The high resolution at the surface
required for these evolutions has been obtained by the use of a rescaled
radial coordinate which naturally takes into account the vanishing of
the speed of sound at the surface and facilitates a formulation of the
equations in terms of which the slopes of the characteristics are by and
large independent of the position in the star.

## Appendix A The finite differencing of the Lagrangian equations

We use an implicit second order in space and time finite differencing
scheme for the numerical evolution of the fully non-linear perturbative
Lagrangian equations ( 5.235 )-( 5.239 ). The parameter @xmath enables
us to use the energy density @xmath , @xmath on the “normal” grid (
@xmath ) or the staggered grid ( @xmath ). The staggering, however,
affects the energy density only. It is therefore suitable to describe
the finite differencing for a general function @xmath , @xmath and the
energy density @xmath , @xmath . The function @xmath always represents
the background variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Similarly @xmath
stands for the perturbations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
In that notation Eqs. ( 5.235 ) and ( 5.236 ) are converted into finite
differences by using

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In order to calculate the derivatives of the background variables we use
the TOV equations to express them in terms of undifferentiated variables

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The remaining auxiliary variables follow from the definitions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The finite difference expressions used for Eqs. ( 5.237 ) and ( 5.238 )
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the total pressure @xmath is defined by Eq. ( A.12 ). Finally we
finite difference Eq. ( 5.239 ) according to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The auxiliary variables are again defined by Eqs. ( A.8 )-( A.14 ). We
also use the relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The last relation is needed for the Newton-Raphson method we use to
solve the resulting system of non-linear algebraic equations (cf.
section 2.3.5 ).
These finite difference equations result in @xmath algebraic relations,
where @xmath is the total number of grid points. In order to determine
the @xmath variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we
also need the 5 boundary conditions ( 5.240 )-( 5.244 ) which we now
write as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------