This thesis describes the application of numerical techniques to solve
Einstein's field equations in three distinct cases. First we present the first
long-term stable second order convergent Cauchy characteristic matching code in
cylindrical symmetry including both gravitational degrees of freedom. Compared
with previous work we achieve a substantial simplification of the evolution
equations as well as the relations at the interface by factoring out the
z-Killing direction via the Geroch decomposition in both the Cauchy and the
characteristic region. In the second part we numerically solve the equations
for static and dynamic cosmic strings of infinite length coupled to gravity and
provide the first fully non-linear evolutions of cosmic strings in curved
spacetimes. The inclusion of null infinity as part of the numerical grid allows
us to apply suitable boundary conditions on the metric and the matter fields to
suppress unphysical divergent solutions. The code is used to study the
interaction between a Weber-Wheeler pulse of gravitational radiation with an
initially static string. In the final part of the thesis we probe a new
numerical approach for highly accurate evolutions of non-linear neutron star
oscillations in the case of radial oscillations of spherically symmetric stars.
For this purpose we view the evolution of the physical quantities as deviations
from a static equilibrium configuration and reformulate the equations in a
fully non-linear perturbative form. The high accuracy of the new scheme enables
us to study the non-linear coupling of eigenmodes over a wide range of initial
amplitudes.