###### Contents

-    1 Basic structure of the coupled-cluster formalism
    -    1.1 Introduction
    -    1.2 Formalism
    -    1.3 Linked-cluster theorem and Wightman functionals
-    2 Hamiltonian renormalization Groups
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 Traditional approaches and their problems
        -    2.2.1 Glazek-Wilson formulation
        -    2.2.2 Wegner Formulation
    -    2.3 Coupling coherence condition
    -    2.4 General formulation of the similarity renormalization group
    -    2.5 The coupled-cluster renormalization group
    -    2.6 The decoupling conditions versus the variational principle
    -    2.7 The symplectic structure
    -    2.8 The constrained induced phase space
    -    2.9 Example I: @xmath theory
    -    2.10 Example II: Extended Lee Model
    -    2.11 Conclusion
-    3 Renormalization problem in many-body system
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 The extended Lee Model
    -    3.3 Nuclear matter equations
    -    3.4 The renormalized nuclear matter equations
    -    3.5 Conclusion
    -    3.6 Some final remarks
-    4 QCD properties and effective quark chiral models
    -    4.1 QCD Symmetries
    -    4.2 Non-perturbative features of QCD
    -    4.3 Effective low-energy quark interaction
    -    4.4 Fierz-transformation and the effective quark interaction
-    5 QCD inspired pictures for baryons
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Baryons as chiral solitons; Skyrme model
    -    5.3 Bag models
    -    5.4 Diquark-quark picture; Relativistic Faddeev approach
-    6 Baryons structure in a non-local quark confining NJL model
    -    6.1 Introduction
    -    6.2 A non-local NJL model
    -    6.3 Meson channel
    -    6.4 Diquark channels
        -    6.4.1 Diquark Solution
    -    6.5 Three-body sector
        -    6.5.1 Numerical method for the coupled BS equations
        -    6.5.2 Nucleon Solution
    -    6.6 Summary and Outlook

## Chapter 1 Basic structure of the coupled-cluster formalism

### 1.1 Introduction

In order to understand fully the properties of quantum many-body
systems, various methods have been developed which aim to go beyond
perturbation theory. One of the simplest approaches has been the
so-called configuration-interaction method which diagonalises the
Hamiltonian in a finite subspace of the full many-body Hilbert space. An
extension of this method has been introduced via various versions of
coupled-cluster methods [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] . The coupled cluster method
(CCM) in its simplest form originated in nuclear physics around forty
years ago in the work of Coester and Kümmel [ 1 ] . The
configuration-interaction method (CIM), and various version of
coupled-cluster methods: normal coupled cluster method (NCCM) [ 1 , 2 ]
and the extended coupled cluster method (ECCM) [ 3 , 4 ] form a
hierarchy of many-body formulations for describing quantum systems of
interacting particles or fields [ 5 ] . They are denoted generically as
independent-cluster (IC) parametrizations, in the sense that they
incorporate the many-body correlations via sets of amplitudes that
describe the various correlated clusters within the interacting system
as mutually independent entities. The intrinsic non-perturbative nature
of the methods is considered to be one of their advantages which make
them almost universally applicable in many-body physics. The IC methods
differ from each other in the way they incorporate the locality and
separability properties; in a diagrammatic language they differ in their
linking properties. Each of the IC methods has been shown [ 4 ] to
provide an exact mapping of the original quantum mechanical problem to a
corresponding classical mechanics in terms of a set of
multiconfigurational canonical field amplitudes. The merit of IC has
been outlined in Ref. [ 5 ] and literature cited therein.

### 1.2 Formalism

In this section we concentrate on the NCCM and the ECCM from a formal
viewpoint.

Exponential structures arise frequently in physics for similar
underlying fundamental reasons. For example, in the Ursell-Mayer theory
in statistical mechanics, in the Goldstone linked-cluster theorem [ 6 ]
and the Gell-Mann and Low theorem [ 7 ] . The complexity of the vacuum
(the ground state) of an arbitrary many-body system in the NCCM
parametrization [ 1 , 2 , 5 ] is expressed by an infinite set of
correlation amplitudes @xmath which have to be determined by the
dynamics,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a time-dependent scale factor. The coefficients @xmath
and @xmath are time dependent. The intermediate normalization condition
@xmath is explicit for all times @xmath . We restrict ourselves to the
non-degenerate system, so that the exact states of the system may
sensibly be refereed to some suitably chosen single reference state
denoted as @xmath . The state @xmath is a ground state, e.g. a special
(Hartree) bare vacuum in quantum field theory (QFT). The function @xmath
can be chosen rather generally, but is tied to the choice of generalized
creation operators @xmath ; the state @xmath is annihilated by @xmath
@xmath (where @xmath , the identity operator) and is a cyclic vector in
the sense that the algebra of all possible operators in the many-body
Hilbert space @xmath is spanned by the two Abelian subalgebras of
creation and annihilation operators defined with respect to it. In this
way we can define proper complete orthonormal sets of mutually commuting
configuration creations operators @xmath and their Hermitian adjoint
counterparts @xmath , defined in terms of a complete set of many-body
configuration @xmath . These are, in turn, defined by a set-index @xmath
, which labels the cluster configuration created by @xmath with respect
to the reference state @xmath . Therefore, @xmath defines a subsystem or
cluster within the full system of a given configuration and the actual
choice of these clusters depends upon the particular system under
consideration. We assume that the creation and annihilation subalgebras
and the state @xmath are cyclic, so that all ket states in the Hilbert
space @xmath can be constructed from linear combinations of states
@xmath ; and for the bra states with respect to states @xmath . It is
well-known in the many-body application that the above parametrization
Eq. ( 1.2 ), guarantees automatically proper size-extensivity (see
section 1.3) and conformity with the Goldstone linked-cluster theorem [
6 ] to all levels of truncation. In contrast, the
configuration-interaction method is size extensive and linked only in
the full, infinite-dimensional space [ 5 ] . The NCCM parametrization of
bra- and ket-states Eq. ( 1.2 ), in its asymmetrical (independent) form,
does not manifestly preserve their Hermitian congugacy, hence we have
here a biorthogonal formulation of the many-body problem. However, this
is the most reasonable parametrization if one is to preserve the
canonical form of the equations of motion with respect to phase space
@xmath and the Hellmann-Feynman theorem ¹ ¹ 1 According to
Hellmann-Feynman theorem, if we perturb the Hamiltonian, @xmath (where
@xmath is infinitesimally small quantity) then the ground state energy
changes as @xmath with @xmath . [ 4 , 5 ] . Nevertheless,
non-hermiticity is negligible if the reference state and its complement
are not strongly correlated [ 40 ] . We may hope that @xmath and @xmath
are small (in a somewhat ill-defined non-perturbative sense), in other
words, we may require that some of the coherence has already been
obtained by optimizing the reference state. (This can be done, for
example, by a Hartree-Bogolubov transformation). Then the remaining
correlations can be added via the CCM ² ² 2 The application of this
procedure to two-dimensional @xmath theory has been shown to give a
stable result outside the critical region [ 41 ] . . Therefore, defining
a good reference state can in principle control the accuracy of CCM.

In the CIM, one defines the ket and bra states as follows,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the normalization condition @xmath can not be imposed trivially.
Although the CIM has a simpler parametrization than the CCM, it does not
satisfy the size-extensivity after truncation and contains unlinked
pieces emerging from the products of noninteracting subclusters. A
formal relation between the CIM and coupled cluster theory will be
demonstrated in section 1.3.

While all ground-state expectation values @xmath and amplitudes @xmath
are linked in NCCM, the amplitudes @xmath contain unlinked terms. This
is resolved in the ECCM [ 3 , 5 ] where we reparametrize the Hilbert
space such that all basic amplitudes are linked,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The inverse relationships between the ECCM and the NCCM counterparts are
given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.4)
  -- -- -- -------

The ECCM amplitudes @xmath are canonically conjugate (which comes from
time dependent variation) ³ ³ 3 The equation of motion for the ECCM
amplitudes can be obtained from a variational principle [ 4 ] by
requiring the action-like functional

@xmath (1.5)

to be stationary against small variations of amplitudes. After some
straightforward algebra, one can obtain

@xmath (1.6)

The stationary conditions lead us to the pair of equations of motion,

@xmath (1.7)

Therefore, @xmath are obviously canonically conjugate to each other in
the usual terminology of classical Hamiltonian mechanics. We will
elaborate more on this property of the coupled-cluster theory in the
context of the renormalization group in the chapter 2.7. . It must be
clear that this parametrization for the ECCM is not unique, however it
is complete and sufficient to specify the ECCM phase space. It has been
pointed out earlier that this choice of parametrization is the most
convenient one [ 3 ] . The ECCM is believed to be the unique formulation
of quantum many-body with full locality and separability at all levels
of approximation. The individual amplitudes @xmath (or @xmath ) in both
parametrizations are determined independently by solving an infinite set
of non-linear equations which emerge from the dynamics of the quantum
system. In practice, one needs to truncate both sets of coefficients. A
consistent truncation scheme is the so called SUB( @xmath ) scheme,
where the @xmath -body partition of the operator @xmath (or @xmath ) is
truncated so that the general set-index @xmath contains up to @xmath
-tuple excitation (e.g., of single particle for bosonic systems with a
reference state). Determination of the amplitudes corresponds to summing
infinite sets of diagrams which in perturbation language take into
account arbitrary high-order contributions in the coupling constant,
therefore the NCCM and ECCM are not an expansion in this coupling
constant. This property demands a precise truncation scheme for
hierarchies without losing the renormalizability of the theory. We will
consider this problem in the next chapter.

In the following, we confine our consideration to a real Klein-Gordon
field, as an example. The configuration operators are specified by
@xmath with subalgebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding @xmath and @xmath operators are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Fock vacuum. The individual amplitudes @xmath which
describe excitations of @xmath Fock particles have to be fixed by the
dynamics of the quantum system. Using Fock states in QFT has often been
ambiguous due to problems connected with Haag’s theorem [ 9 ] (Haag’s
theorem says that there can be no interaction picture - that we cannot
use the Fock space of noninteracting particles as a Hilbert space - in
the sense that we would identify Hilbert spaces via field polynomials
acting on a vacuum at a certain time). It is well-known that the
algebraic structure, does not, in general, fix the Hilbert space
representation and therefore dynamical considerations are required. The
IC formalism invokes dynamics rigorously. The dynamical principle to fix
the physical vacuum is Poincaré invariance,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are generators of the Poincaré group
(Hamiltonian, momentum, angular momentum and boost operators,
respectively). The excited states are no longer invariant under these
symmetry operations and the spectrum can be obtained in an extended
version of IC [ 10 ] . By putting the Ansatz Eqs. ( 1.2 , 1.2 ) into the
conditions Eq. ( 1.10 ) one can obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (1.11)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.12)
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same fashion one can impose the condition @xmath , which leads to
the following condition, having made used of the equation ( 1.13 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly for Hamiltonian and boost operators we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations ( 1.2 , 1.12 , 1.13 , 1.14 ) lead us to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that @xmath depend on scalar quantities only and momentum is
preserved. The same result can be obtained for the ECCM parametrization.
To complete the determination of phase space, we use the energy
hierarchy Eq. ( 1.15 ), where @xmath is a normal ordered Hamiltonian and
the vacuum energy vanishes. Conceptually, it is evident that Eq. ( 1.15
) suffices to fix all amplitudes without invoking Eq. ( 1.16 ), but
explicit verification to all orders seems to be impossible.

The fully linked feature of the @xmath term in Eq. ( 1.15 ) can be made
explicit by denoting it as @xmath , which can be written as a set of
nested commutators,

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.18)
  -- -- -- --------

This procedure is still rigorous. Lorentz symmetry, stability and
causality are examples of features normally expected to hold in physical
quantum field theories. In renormalized QFT stability and causality are
closely intertwined with Lorentz invariance. For example, stability
includes the need for energy positivity of Fock states of ordinary
momenta, while causality is implemented microscopically by the
requirement that observables commute at spacelike separation [ 11 ] ,
so-called microcausality. In addition, both are expected to hold in all
inertial frames. A stable and causal theory without Lorentz symmetry
could in principle still be acceptable [ 12 ] . In the framework of
many-body theory, medium contributions always affect the local and
global properties of hadrons especially at high density. In dense
matter, the Pauli principle and cluster properties can affect causality
since they restrict the permissible process in a scattering reaction. To
understand these effects we need firstly to consider if our formalism
itself can in principle preserve the causal structure of given physical
system. Let us introduce a new set @xmath which are connected to
previous @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.8 ) via a generalized Bogolubov
transformation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the most general linear transformation, which preserves
commutator relations ( @xmath is an annihilation operator and @xmath is
the Hermitian conjugate of @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that @xmath . This obviously preserves the commutator relations
for boson fields and preserves microcausality explicitly. The bare “
@xmath vacuum” defined by @xmath , is replaced by a bare “ @xmath
vacuum” which satisfies @xmath . Using Thouless theorem [ 14 ] , @xmath
can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are known functions of the matrices @xmath and
@xmath and the vector @xmath [ 14 ] . It is obvious that @xmath is a
low-order approximation to the CCM wave function Eq. ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.2 ).
The above-mentioned parametrization of vacuum wave function can be
generalized to the CCM wave function, however it may require a nonlinear
transformation from which it can be constructed. The inspiration for
this transformation can be taken from the extension IC formulation for
excited states [ 10 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the correlation operator @xmath is known from Eq. ( 1.2 ) and
@xmath is a new amplitude which includes momentum conservation. This new
amplitudes has to be determined and it changes the momentum of the
bosons before creation. It is not hard to derive equations for the
energy spectrum which lead us to @xmath -body effective Hamiltonians [
15 ] and yields the folded diagrams of degenerate many-body perturbation
theory [ 16 ] . This nonlinear transformation manifestly invalidates the
commutator relation Eq. ( 1.20 ) and accordingly the microcausal
commutation relations of the boson field. It should be noted that
causality of the underlying theory can not be fully determined at this
level and one needs to take into account the dynamics of the underlying
quantum system. Causality in the context of IC formulation can be
ensured by requiring

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes space-time coordinates @xmath and @xmath is
Klein-Gordon field operator which is expressed in terms of Fock space
operators by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath form a complete orthonormal set of states. Eq. ( 1.24 ) can
be evaluated explicitly by using the following identity [ 4 , 5 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the canonical coordinate and momenta of the NCCM or the
ECCM parametrization. By making use of Eqs. ( 1.2 , 1.18 ) and ( 1.25 )
one can find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and we define @xmath . By exploiting Eq. ( 1.26 ) one can
show

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is the Pauli-Jordan function [ 11 ] defined for
field operators expanded in plane-wave basis. When @xmath , we can
perform a Lorentz transformation on the second term, taking @xmath . The
two terms are therefore equal and cancel to give zero, hence, Eq. ( 1.24
) is satisfied. It should be noted that for a general quantum system by
considering just the dynamics of the underlying system, determining the
amplitudes @xmath and verifying Eq. ( 1.24 ) at every level of
truncation one can ensure causality. Obviously this might introduce a
lower limit of truncation in a consistent SUB(n) scheme which contains
causality.

In relativistic quantum mechanics there is another distinct type of
causality, the fact that there is a well-posed initial value problem,
so-called Cauchy causality. In the local field theory the Poincaré
invariance implies the existence of a unitary representation of the
Poincaré group that acts on the Hilbert space. In other words, the
transformed final state is uniquely determined by time evolving the
transformed initial state. Therefore, Cauchy causality is a consequence
of Poincaré invariance and is independent of any consideration
concerning microcausality.

One of the standard approaches in the nuclear many-body theory is to
introduce an effective interaction and reduce the full many-body problem
to a problem in a small model-space. As an example for the meson-nucleon
system below threshold, it was shown that one has either hermitian
effective operators with all desirable transformation properties under
the Poincaré group or non-hermitian ones obtained by the CCM with
desirable simplicity [ 13 ] . Thus effective operators introduced by the
CCM can not manifestly preserve Cauchy causality, at any level of
truncation. However, it economically disentangles and reduces the
complexities of the many-body problem. It is notable that in some cases,
the violation of relativistic invariance due to truncation is consistent
with errors introduced via the approximation [ 14 ] . In practice one
should not expect that Poincaré invariance holds for an approximation,
and forcing the approximated wave function to obey Lorentz invariance
might lead to inconsistent results. Having said that, we will show that
in the context of coupled-cluster renormalization group framework, one
can in principle define a truncation scheme where Poincaré invariance is
preserved.

### 1.3 Linked-cluster theorem and Wightman functionals

In this section we proceed from a formal view to show the relation
between the CIM and the coupled cluster method. We will show that the
CCM is a natural reparametrization of the CIM which incorporates the
full size-extensivity. For this purpose we exploit the reconstruction
theorem [ 17 ] , well known in axiomatic Quantum field theory [ 18 ] :

Denote the state vector of the vacuum by @xmath (in the language of the
CCM @xmath is the full interacting ground state @xmath ). The physical
vacuum expectation value of products of local fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

are tempered distributions ⁴ ⁴ 4 Tempered distributions generalize the
bounded (or slow-growing) locally integrable functions; all
distributions with compact support and all square-integrable functions
can be viewed as tempered distributions. over @xmath . These @xmath are
called Wightman distributions. If the hierarchy of distributions @xmath
is known then the Hilbert space can be constructed. This is the
so-called reconstruction theorem [ 17 ] .

Now consider a configuration @xmath consisting of several clusters. A
cluster here is a subset of points so as all the points in one cluster
have a large space-like separation from all the points in any other
clusters. One may expect that in infinite separation between the
clusters, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

the index @xmath and @xmath denote the cluster and number of points in
the @xmath -th cluster, respectively. @xmath indicates a subset of the
@xmath belonging to this cluster. Thus we require that in the vacuum
state the correlation of quantities relating to different regions
decreases to zero as the space-like separation of the regions increases
to infinity. Therefore it makes sense to introduce another hierarchy of
functions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes a partition of the set of points @xmath into subsets
labeled by the index @xmath . The sum is over all possible partitions,
The objects @xmath are called truncated functions or correlated
functions ⁵ ⁵ 5 For free fields all truncated functions with @xmath
vanish, thus it suffices to know the two-point functions. . Within the
hierarchy @xmath the truncated functions can be computed recursively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.32)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The asymptotic property Eq. ( 1.30 ) of the @xmath is converted to the
simpler property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

if any space like separation @xmath goes to infinity.

Let us now consider a hierarchy of functions @xmath (for simplicity
totally symmetric under permutation of their arguments). We define a
generating functional @xmath for an arbitrary function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath can be found from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now one can simply use the definition Eq. ( 1.31 ) to obtain a relation
between the hierarchy @xmath and the hierarchy of the truncated
functions @xmath in terms of respective generating function, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation is called the Linked cluster theorem [ 18 ] . Having in
mind the relations Eqs. ( 1.34 ) and ( 1.36 ), one observes that the CCM
parametrization introduced in Eqs. ( 1.2 ) and ( 1.2 ) is a natural
reparametrization of the CIM defined in Eq. ( 1.2 ) which incorporates
the size-extensivity [ 5 ] , at finite levels of truncation. This leads
to a cluster decomposition and linked decomposition property of CCM at
any level of truncation. Thus for extensive variables as the energy, the
linked terms lead to contributions which obey the proper linear scaling
in the particle number. The CIM contains unlinked diagrams for the
ground-state energy expectation value, and thereby suffers from the
so-called size-extensivity problems.

The cluster decomposition condition Eq. ( 1.30 ) is fundamental to a
quantum field theory. It may break down partly when, in a
statistical-mechanical sense, the theory is in a mixed phase [ 19 ] .
This implies that there is more than one possible vacuum state, and
therefore the cluster decomposition should be restored in principle if
one builds the Hilbert space on one of the vacua.

Notice that in QCD, the cluster decomposition for colour singlet objects
can break down due to the confinement. In axiomatic local quantum field
theory with an indefinite metric space @xmath (e.g., Minkowski space)
the following theorem holds; for the vacuum expectation values of two
(smeared local) operators @xmath and @xmath with spacelike distance
@xmath from each other [ 20 , 21 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the mass gap. (Herein, we assume @xmath , however, a
positive @xmath is possible for the indefinite inner product structure
in @xmath .) In order to avoid the decomposition property for product of
unobservable operators @xmath and @xmath which together with Kugo-Ojima
criterion ⁶ ⁶ 6 The Kugo-Ojima confinement scenario describes a
mechanism by which the physical state space contains only colourless
states, the colored states are not BRS-singlets and therefore do not
appear in @xmath -matrix elements, since they are confined [ 20 , 22 ] .
[ 20 , 22 ] for the confinement is equivalent to failure of the
decomposition property for coloured clusters, there can not be a mass
gap in the indefinite space @xmath . This would thus eliminate the
possibility of scattering a physical state into color singlet states
consisting of widely separated colored clusters (the “behind-the-moon”
problem). However, this has no information for the physical spectrum of
the mass operator in @xmath which indeed does have a mass gap. In
another words, there is a mass gap (but not in the full indefinite space
@xmath ) in the semi-definite physical subspace induced by the BRST
charge operator @xmath , @xmath , where states within are annihilated by
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where states in @xmath are called BRST-coboundaries in the terminology
of de Rham cohomology and do not contribute in @xmath [ 23 ] . It has
been shown [ 24 ] that there is a connection between Kugo-Ojima
criterion and an infrared enhancement of the ghost propagator. In Landau
gauge, the gluon-ghost vertex function offers a convenient possibility
to define a non-perturbative running coupling. The infrared fixed point
obtained from this running coupling determines the two-point color-octet
interactions and leads to the existence of unphysical massless states
which are necessary to escape the cluster decomposition of colored
clusters [ 20 ] . Notice that a dynamical mechanism, responsible for
breaking of cluster decomposition for colored objects, is yet to be
discovered, since our knowledge about color confinement is still
preliminary.

## Chapter 2 Hamiltonian renormalization Groups

### 2.1 Introduction

The main goal of traditional renormalization theory is to determine when
and how the cancellation of divergences originating from the locality of
quantum field theory may occur. This is essential if one wants to have
meaningful quantitative results. However, it is by no means obvious how
quantum fluctuations associated with short distance scales can be
incorporated and controlled through the choice of only a few parameters,
typically the bare masses and coupling constants, or by the counterterms
in renormalized perturbation theory.

The development of Wilson’s renormalization group (RG) formalism [ 25 ]
allowed physicists to produce a logically consistent picture of
renormalization in which perturbation theory at arbitrary high energy
scale can be matched with the perturbation expansion at another scale,
without invoking the details of intermediate scales. In the Wilsonian
approach, all of the parameters of a renormalizable field theory can be
thought of as scale-dependent objects and their flows are governed by
the so-called RG differential equations.

Motivated by Wilson’s picture, effective field theory (EFT) approaches
have been introduced to replace complicated fundamental theories with
simpler theories based only on the relevant degrees of freedom at the
physical scale of interest [ 26 ] . The basis of the EFT concept is the
recognition of the importance of different typical energy scales in
nature, where each scale has its own characteristic degrees of freedom.
In strong interactions the transition from the fundamental to the
effective level is induced by a phase transition that takes place around
@xmath via the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry, which generates
pseudoscalar Goldstone bosons. This coincides, of course, with the
emergence of nuclei and nuclear mather, as opposed to the quark-gluon
plasma and quark matter expected to occur at high temperature and high
density. Therefore, at low energies ( @xmath ), the relevant degrees of
freedom are not quarks and gluons, but pseudoscalar mesons and other
hadrons. The resulting description is a chiral EFT, which has much in
common with traditional potential models. In particular, there might be
an intermediate regime where a non-relativistic model is inadequate but
where relatively few hadronic degrees of freedom can be used to
faithfully describe both nuclear structure and response. If this is the
case, one should be able to describe strongly interacting hadronic
systems in this effective model.

The power of Hamiltonian methods is well known from the study of
non-relativistic many-body systems and from strongly-interacting few
particle systems, even though a Lagrangian approach is usually chosen
for relativistic theories. One might prefer to obtain the effective
interaction using the covariant Lagrangian formalism and then consider
the ground state and collectively excited states in the non-covariant
Hamiltonian formalism by exploiting many-body techniques. For the
description of physical states and in particular bound states, the
Hamiltonian formalism is preferable over the Lagrangian one. This is due
to the fact that such problems are not naturally defined covariantly.
For a bound state the interaction time scale is infinite, and thus a
time-independent approach is better suited. However, the Lagrangian can
not generally be converted to a Hamiltonian if the effective Lagrangian
contains higher-order time-derivatives, since no Legendre transformation
exits for such a case. Therefore one may wish to obtain the effective
interaction in a unified self-consistent way within the Hamiltonian
formalism. The renormalization group transformation is used to derive
the physical Hamiltonian that can describe experiment. To implement a RG
calculation, one should define a space of Hamiltonians and find a
certain RG transformation which maps this space into itself. Then one
should study the topology of the Hamiltonian space, by searching for the
fixed points and studying the trajectories of the Hamiltonian with
respect to these fixed points. At the fixed points we have a
scale-invariant quantum field theory. Near the fixed point, the
irrelevant operators in the original Hamiltonian have small
coefficients, and we are only left with the relevant and marginal
operators. The coefficients of these operators correspond to the
parameters of the renormalized field theory. In this way, in a
renormalizable field theory, we disregard information about the
evolution of irrelevant terms. The fact that irrelevant terms can be
dropped near the fixed point does not necessarily imply that they are
unimportant at low-energy scales of experimental interest. This depends
on how sensitive the physical observables are to physics near the scale
of the cutoff. Therefore, it is of interest to develop a RG method in
which the irrelevant variables are treated on an equal footing with the
relevant and marginal variables (the schemes presented here have this
advantage).

Hamiltonian methods for strongly-interacting systems are intrinsically
non-perturbative and usually contain a Tamm-Dancoff type approximation,
in the sense that one expands the bound state in states containing a
small number of particles. This truncation of the Fock space gives rise
to a new class of non-perturbative divergences, since the truncation
does not allow us to take into account all diagrams for any given order
in perturbation theory. Therefore renormalization issues have to be
considered carefully. Two very different remedies for this issue are the
use of light-front Tamm-Dancoff field theory (LFFT) [ 27 ] and the
application of the coupled cluster method (CCM) [ 5 , 28 ] . However,
both methods are too complicated to attack the issue in a
self-consistent way. In the last decade extensive attempts have been
made to give a workable prescription for renormalization within the
Hamiltonian formalism [ 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] . Commonly unitary
transformations are used to decouple the high- and low-energy modes
aiming at the partial diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. One of the
most elegant approaches in this context is the similarity
renormalization group (SRG) proposed by Glazek and Wilson [ 29 ] (and by
Wegner [ 30 ] independently). The SRG [ 29 , 30 ] is designed to be free
of small energy denominators and to eliminate interactions which change
the energies of the unperturbed states by a large amount. However, there
are several problems with this approach: it is hard to incorporate loop
expansions within the method, the SRG can not systematically remove
interactions which change the number of particles (i.e, when the
Hamiltonian is not diagonal in particle number space), and most
importantly, the computations are complex and there is no efficient
non-perturbative calculation scheme.

In this chapter we introduce a new method [ 32 , 33 ] for obtaining the
low-energy effective operators in the framework of a CCM approach. The
transformation constructed avoids the small denominators that plague
old-fashioned perturbation theory. Neither perturbation theory nor
unitarity of the transformation are essential for this method. The
method is non-perturbative, since there is no expansion in the coupling
constant; nonetheless, the CCM can be conceived as a topological
expansion in the number of correlated excitations. We show that
introducing a double similarity transformation using linked-cluster
amplitudes will simplify the partial diagonalization underlying
renormalization in Hamiltonian approaches. However, a price must be
paid: due to the truncation the similarity transformations are not
unitary, and accordingly the hermiticity of the resultant effective
Hamiltonian is not manifest. This is related to the fact that we have a
biorthogonal representation of the given many-body problem. There is a
long tradition of such approaches. The first we are aware of are
Dyson-type bosonization schemes [ 34 ] . [Here one chooses to map the
generators of a Lie algebra, such that the raising generators have a
particularly simple representation.] The space of states is mapped onto
a larger space where the physically realizable states are obtained by
constrained dynamics. This is closely related to CCM formalism, where
the extended phase space is a complex manifold, the physical subspace
constraint function is of second class and the physical shell itself is
a Kähler manifold [ 35 ] . The second is the Suzuki-Lee method in the
nuclear many-body (NMT) problem [ 36 , 37 ] , which reduces the full
many-body problem to a problem in a small configuration space and
introduces a related effective interaction. The effective interaction is
naturally understood as the result of certain transformations which
decouple a model space from its complement. As is well known in the
theory of effective interactions, unitarity of the transformation used
for decoupling or diagonalization is not necessary. Actually, the
advantage of a non-unitarity approach is that it can give a very simple
description for both diagonalization and ground state. This has been
discussed by many authors [ 38 ] and, although it might lead to a
non-hermitian effective Hamiltonian, it has been shown that hermiticity
can be recovered [ 35 , 39 ] . Notice that defining a good model space
can in principle control the accuracy of CCM [ 40 , 41 ] .

To solve the relativistic bound state problem one needs to
systematically and simultaneously decouple 1) the high-energy from
low-energy modes and 2) the many- from the few-particle states. We
emphasize in this chapter that CCM can in principle be an adequate
method to attack both these requirements. Our hope is to fully utilize
Wilsonian Exact renormalization group [ 25 ] within the CCM formalism.
Here the high energy modes will be integrated out leading to a modified
low-energy Hamiltonian in an effective many-body space. Notice that our
formulation does not depend on the form of dynamics and can be used for
any quantization scheme, e.g., equal time or light-cone.

### 2.2 Traditional approaches and their problems

The Tamm-Dancoff approximation [ 42 ] was developed in the 1950’s to
describe a relativistic bound state in terms of a small number of
particles. It was soon revealed that the Tamm-Dancoff truncation gives
rise to a new class of non-perturbative divergences, since the
truncation does not allow us to take into account all diagrams at a
given order in perturbation theory. On the other hand, any naive
renormalization violates Poincaré symmetry and the cluster decomposition
property (the cluster decomposition means that if two subsystems at very
large space-like separation cease to interact then the wave function
becomes multiplicatively separable). One of the simplest example of the
Tamm-Dancoff approximation is the constituent picture of QCD where one
describes a QCD bound state @xmath within a truncated Fock-space,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we use a shorthand notation for the Fock-space where @xmath is a quark,
@xmath an antiquark, and @xmath stands for a gluon. Now the bound-state
problem is solved via the Schrödinger equation @xmath . It is well known
that in the complicated equal-time vacuum bound states contain an
infinite number of particles that are part of the physical vacuum on
which hadrons are built. On the other hand, interactions in a field
theory couple states with arbitrarily large difference in both free
energy and numbers of particles. Thus any Fock-space expansion can
hardly be justified without being supplemented with a prescription for
decoupling of the high-energy from the low-energy modes and the
many-body from few-particle states. In the context of the Hamiltonian
formulation this problem can be expresed by asking how the Hamiltonian
matrix is diagonalized in particle- and momentum-space.

In his earliest work Wilson [ 43 ] exploited a Bloch type transformation
[ 44 ] to reduce the Hamiltonian matrix by lowering a cutoff which was
initially imposed on the individual states. Later Wilson abandoned this
formulation in favour of a Lagrangian one. The most important reason was
that the Bloch transformation is ill-defined and produces unphysical
divergences. These divergences emerge from denominators which contain a
small energy difference between states retained and states removed by
the transformation, and appear across the boundary line at @xmath .

Two remedies for this issue are the use of light front coordinates [ 27
] and application of the CCM [ 28 ] . In the light-front Tamm-Dancoff
field theory (LFFT) the quantization plane is chosen to coincide with
the light front, therefore the divergences that plagued the original
theories seem to disappear [ 45 ] since here vacuum remains trivial.
Furthermore, not having to include interactions in boost operators
allows a renormalizable truncation scheme [ 46 ] . One of the most
important difficulties in LFFT is the complicated structure of the
renormalization process [ 47 ] . In principle, ad-hoc counterterms can
not be prevented if one is to preserve the underlying symmetry. In the
standard form of CCM, on the other hand, the amplitudes obey a system of
coupled non-linear equations which contain some ill-defined terms
because of ultraviolet divergences. It has been shown [ 48 ] that the
ill-defined amplitudes, which are also called critical topologies, can
be systematically removed, by exploiting the linked-cluster property of
the ground state. This can be done by introducing a mapping which
transfers them into a finite representations without making any
approximation such as a coupling expansion. Thus far this resummation
method has been restricted to superrenormalizable theories due to its
complexity.

Recently Wilson and Glazek [ 29 ] and independently Wegner [ 30 ] have
re-investigated this issue and introduced a new scheme, the similarity
renormalization group (SRG). The SRG resembles the original Wilsonian
renormalization group formulation [ 43 ] , since a transformation that
explicitly runs the cutoff is developed. However, here one runs a cutoff
on energy differences rather than on individual states. In the SRG
framework one has to calculate a narrow matrix instead of a small
matrix, and the cutoff can be conceived as a band width (see
Fig. [2.1]). Therefore by construction the perturbation expansion for
transformed Hamiltonians contains no small-energy denominators. Here we
review the general formulation of the SRG.

#### 2.2.1 Glazek-Wilson formulation

The detailed description of Glazek-Wilson RG method can be found in Ref.
[ 29 ] . Here we only concentrate on the key elements of their method.
We introduce a unitary transformation aiming at partially diagonalizing
the Hamiltonian so that no couplings between states with energy
differences larger than @xmath are present. The unitary transformation
defines a set of Hamiltonians @xmath which interpolate between the
initial Hamiltonian ( @xmath ) and the effective Hamiltonian @xmath .
This @xmath plays the role of a flow parameter. We will assume that
@xmath is dominated by its diagonal part which we will denote @xmath
with eigenvalues @xmath and eigenstates @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the Hamiltonian at scale @xmath can be written @xmath , where
@xmath is non-diagonal part. Notice that @xmath is not necessarily the
bare free Hamiltonian which is independent of @xmath . In order to
introduce the infinitesimal unitary transformations which induce the
infinitesimal changes in @xmath when @xmath changes by an infinitesimal
amount, we need to define various zones of the operators We introduce an
auxiliary function @xmath of the states with labels @xmath and @xmath
for a given @xmath . If we denote the eigenvalue of @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The modulus of the function @xmath is close to @xmath when one of the
energies is much larger than the other and also much larger than the
cutoff @xmath and @xmath approaches @xmath when the energies are similar
or small in comparison to the cutoff. One then introduces smooth
projectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By means of @xmath and @xmath one can separate each matrix into two
parts @xmath , where we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and corresponding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath and @xmath are needed in order to ensure smoothness
and differentiability, and consequently a continuous transition between
different parts of the Hamiltonian matrix. They are the key elements in
making the diagonalization free of small-energy denominators. These
functions are implemented as a “form factor“ in every vertex of the
interaction. We construct an infinitesimal unitary transformation
eliminating the part of Hamiltonian which has only non-zero elements far
away from the diagonal, thus they can not produce small-energy
denominators. This continuous unitary transformation satisfies,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generator @xmath is anti-Hermitian and is chosen in such a way that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is arbitrary in the far-off-diagonal region. In terms of
@xmath , the matrix elements of Eq. ( 2.7 ) satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that @xmath can be arbitrary in the far-off diagonal region where
@xmath if it is finite and its derivative is finite. In the above
equation we have two unknowns, @xmath and @xmath . As additional input
we use the fact that, for a given @xmath , the Hamiltonian @xmath can be
additionally unitary transformed without violating the relation @xmath .
We regroup the above equation in the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The unknowns on the left hand-side are determined by first solving Eq. (
2.10 ) neglecting the commutator on the right-hand side; the result is
then substituted into the right-hand side, and solved iteratively until
convergence is reached. The @xmath and @xmath parts of the operator
@xmath can be defined,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By evaluating the matrix elements of both sides of the above equations
in different zones of the operators, one obtains differential equations
for matrix elements of @xmath . Therefore, from Eqs. ( 2.10 , 2.11 ) one
can immediately obtain the generator @xmath and the Hamiltonian flow
equation in terms of the matrix elements @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is obvious from the above equations that no small-energy denominators
@xmath arises out-side of the band (off-diagonal region), and within the
band zone, we have @xmath . The equations ( 2.12 , 2.13 ) can be solved
iteratively.

#### 2.2.2 Wegner Formulation

Wegner’s formulation of the SRG is defined in a very elegant way aiming
at diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in a block-diagonal form with the
number of particles conserved in each block. Again, a unitary
transformation is used with flow parameter @xmath that range from @xmath
to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We separate the Hamiltonian in a diagonal part @xmath and the remainder
@xmath . We use the fact that @xmath is invariant under the unitary
transformation, therefore we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that @xmath falls monotonically if @xmath increases. One can
use Eq. ( 2.14 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to ensure that @xmath falls monotonically, one can simply
choose the generator as @xmath or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can show by making use of this definition that,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath falls monotonously and is restricted from below, When
@xmath the derivative vanishes and we have @xmath , at this limit the
procedure of block-diagonalization is completed. At this point, the
unitary transformation Eqs ( 2.14 , 2.17 ) is completely defined. The
only freedom is in the choice of separation of the Hamiltonian into a
“diagonal” and a “rest” part. Of course this depends on the given
physical problem. As a illustration of the method, we show how
perturbation theory can be applied in this formalism. For a given values
of @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the superscript denotes the order in the bare coupling constant.
The part @xmath is the free Hamiltonian. The index @xmath denotes the
rest of the Hamiltonian. Note that generally the diagonal part in the
flow equation is the full particle number conserving part of the
effective Hamiltonian. The choice of only @xmath as the diagonal part
leads to the simplest band-diagonal structure where the particle number
is conserved. We use the basis of the eigenfunctions of the free
Hamiltonian @xmath to obtain the matrix elements of Eqs ( 2.14 , 2.17 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the energy differences are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath and @xmath are the energies of the creation and annihilation
particles, respectively. To leading order in perturbation theory, one
finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The flow-parameter @xmath has dimension @xmath and is related to the
similarity width @xmath (ultraviolet cutoff) by @xmath . This implies
that matrix elements of the interaction which change the number of
particles are strongly suppressed, since we have @xmath . The similarity
generator in Wegner’s formulation corresponds to the choice of a
gaussian similarity function with uniform width. In the next leading
order, one has to deal separately with the diagonal and rest parts. In
analogy to the Glazek-Wilson method we introduce @xmath , and the
solution reads,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is obvious that for the non-diagonal term a smooth form factor
appears in a natural way to suppress the off-diagonal interaction. In
other words, the particle number changing interactions are eliminated
while a new terms are produced. The procedure can be extended to
arbitrarily high orders. The counterterms can be determined
order-by-order using the idea of coupling coherence, namely that under
similarity transformation Hamiltonian remains form invariant (see next
section).

### 2.3 Coupling coherence condition

One of the most severe problems for the traditional light-front RG is
that an infinite number of relevant and marginal operators are required
[ 49 ] . This is due to the fact that light-front cutoff violates the
underlying symmetry, e.g., Lorentz invariance and gauge symmetries.
Since these are continuous symmetries, their violation in principle
leads to infinite number of symmetry violating counterterms (with new
couplings), in order to maintain the symmetry of the effective
Hamiltonian. In terms of the effective field theory approach, some sort
of fine tuning is required to fix the strength of the new couplings so
that the underlying symmetry is restored. One should note that in order
to reduce the number of momentum degrees of freedom, one must introduce
a real cutoff, such as a momentum cutoff or a lattice cutoff. However,
dealing with divergences do not require necessarily a decrease in
degrees of freedom. In fact, one may even increase the degrees of
freedom, e.g., the Pauli-Villars or the dimensional regularization
methods [ 50 ] . The main idea behind the coupling coherence
renormalization condition [ 51 , 52 ] is that the Hamiltonian is
form-invariant on the RG trajectory. This condition isolates and repairs
the hidden symmetries [ 51 , 52 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order words, rewriting the Hamiltonian in different degrees of
freedom does not change the operator itself. One may think of @xmath as
QCD written in terms of constituent quarks and gluons and @xmath as the
same QCD Hamiltonian written in terms of canonical quarks and gluons,
associated with partons and current quarks. The SRG and the
coupled-cluster RG with coupling coherence allows one to construct
effective theories with the same number of couplings as the underlying
fundamental theory, even when the cutoff violate symmetries of the
theory. This does not preclude the emergence of the new couplings,
however, they depend on the original coupling and will vanish if the
fundamental couplings are turned off. This boundary condition together
with the RG equations determines their dependence on the fundamental
coupling.

As an illustrative example [ 52 ] , we consider following interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are scalar fields. We want to investigate that
under what conditions the couplings are independent of each other.
Consider the Gell-Mann-Low equations [ 53 ] up to one-loop in
perturbation theory, ignoring the masses,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Assume that there is only one independent
coupling @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath are functions of @xmath . Now one
can simplify Eq. ( 2.28 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the leading order, the above equations have two distinct solutions,
one is when @xmath and @xmath . In this case we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore we recover the @xmath symmetric theory. The other solution is
@xmath and @xmath which leads to two decoupled scalar fields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can conclude that @xmath and @xmath do not run independently with
the cutoff if and only if there is a symmetry which connects their
strength to @xmath . The condition that a limited number of couplings
run with cutoff independently reveals the symmetries broken by the
regulator and repairs them. More interesting, it may be used as well to
uncover symmetries that are broken by the vacuum. This may reconcile the
trivial vacuum in light-front field theory and vacuum symmetry breaking
problem.

### 2.4 General formulation of the similarity renormalization group

In this section we pave the way for an introduction of the
coupled-cluster RG, and consider the similarity renormalization group in
a more general framework without requiring the unitarity. The discussion
in this section is partially based on the work of Suzuki and Okamoto [
37 ] . Let us consider a system described by a Hamiltonian @xmath which
has, at the very beginning, a large cut-off @xmath . We assume that the
renormalized Hamiltonian @xmath up to scale @xmath can be written as the
sum of the canonical Hamiltonian and a “counterterm” @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our aim is to construct the renormalized Hamiltonian by obtaining this
counterterm. Now imagine that we restrict the Hamiltonian to a lower
energy scale @xmath , where we want to find an effective Hamiltonian
@xmath which has the same energy spectrum as the original Hamiltonian in
the smaller space. The cut-off @xmath can be conceived as a flow
parameter. The value of @xmath corresponds to the initial bare regulated
Hamiltonian. Formally, we wish to transform the Hamiltonian to a new
basis, where the medium-energy modes @xmath , decouple from the
low-energy ones, while the low-energy spectrum remains unchanged. We
split the Hilbert space by means of flow-parameter @xmath into two
subspaces, the intermediate-energy space @xmath containing modes with
@xmath and a low-energy space @xmath with @xmath . Our renormalization
approach is based on decoupling of the complement space @xmath from the
model space @xmath . Thereby the decoupling transformation generates a
new effective interaction @xmath containing the effects of physics
between the scales @xmath and @xmath . One can then determine the
counterterm by requiring coupling coherence [ 31 , 51 , 52 ] , namely
that the transformed Hamiltonian has the same form as the original one
but with @xmath replaced by @xmath everywhere. (This is in contrast to
the popular Effective Field Theory approach, where one includes all
permissible couplings of a given order and fixes them by requiring
observable computed be both cutoff-independent and Lorentz covariant.)

We define two projector operators, also called @xmath and @xmath , which
project a state onto the model space and its complement, satisfy @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We introduce an isometry operator @xmath
which maps states in the @xmath - onto the @xmath - space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath is the basic ingredient in a family of
“integrating-out operators”, and passes information about the
correlations of the high energy modes to the low-energy space. The
operator @xmath obeys @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
The counterintuitive choice that @xmath maps from model to complement
space is due to the definition Eq. ( 2.36 ) below (c.f. the relation
between the active and passive view of rotations). In order to give a
general form of the effective low-energy Hamiltonian, we define another
operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath is a real number.) The inverse of @xmath can be obtained
explicitly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The special case @xmath is equivalent to the transformation introduced
in ref. [ 54 ] to relate the hermitian and non-hermitian effective
operators in the energy-independent Suzuki-Lee approach. We now consider
the transformation of @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can prove that if @xmath satisfies the desirable decoupling
property,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

or more explicitly, by substituting the definition of @xmath and @xmath
from Eqs. ( 2.34 )–( 2.35 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

that @xmath is an effective Hamiltonian for the low energy degrees of
freedom. In other words, it should have the same low-energy eigenvalues
as the original Hamiltonian. The proof is as follows:

Consider an eigenvalue equation in the @xmath space for a state @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

By multiplying both sides by @xmath and making use of the decoupling
property Eq. ( 2.38 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation means that @xmath in Eq. ( 2.40 ) agrees with one of the
eigenvalue of @xmath and @xmath is the corresponding eigenstate. Now we
demand that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This requirement uniquely determines the counterterm @xmath .

In the same way we can also obtain the @xmath -space effective
Hamiltonian, from the definition of @xmath . It can be seen that if
@xmath satisfies the requirement in Eq. ( 2.39 ), then we have
additional decoupling condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the above condition is not independent of the decoupling
condition previously introduced in Eq. ( 2.38 ) in the exact form, but
this is not the case after involvement of some approximation
(truncation). We will argue later that both of the decoupling conditions
Eqs. ( 2.38 ) and ( 2.43 ) are necessary in order to have a
sector-independent renormalization scheme. The word “sector” here means
the given truncated Fock space. Let us now clarify the meaning of this
concept. To maintain the generality of the previous discussion, we use
here the well known Bloch-Feshbach formalism [ 44 , 55 , 56 ] . The
Bloch-Feshbach method exploits projection operators in the Hilbert space
in order to determine effective operators in some restricted model
space. This technique seems to be more universal than Wilson’s
renormalization formulated in a Lagrangian framework. This is due to the
fact that in the Bloch-Feshbach formalism, other irrelevant degrees of
freedom (such as high angular momentum, spin degrees of freedom, number
of particles, etc.) can be systematically eliminated in the same
fashion.

Assume that the full space Schrödinger equation is @xmath and for
simplicity @xmath has been normalized to one. The similarity transformed
Schrödinger equation now reads @xmath , where we defined @xmath and
@xmath is a similarity transformed Hamiltonian. This equation is now
separated into two coupled equations for @xmath - and @xmath -space.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may formally solve Eq. ( 2.45 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and substitute this equation into Eq. ( 2.44 ) to obtain a formally
exact uncoupled equation in @xmath -space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective Hamiltonian @xmath constructed in this fashion is
explicitly energy dependent. This equation resembles the one for
Brueckner’s reaction matrix (or “G”-matrix) equation in nuclear
many-body theory (NMT). In the same way for arbitrary operator @xmath
(after a potential similarity transformation), we construct the
effective operator. Let us define a similarity transformed operator
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are eigen functions of Hamiltonian and we have
@xmath and @xmath . We now write @xmath and @xmath in terms of their
solution in the @xmath -space obtained in Eq. ( 2.46 ). One can
immediately show

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

By plugging the above equations into Eq. ( 2.49 ), one can obtain the
effective operator in the @xmath -space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that Eq. ( 2.4 ) can be converted into the form of Eq. ( 2.48 )
with the effective Schrödinger equation Eq. ( 2.47 ) when @xmath ¹ ¹ 1
To this end, we organize Eq. ( 2.4 ) when @xmath ,

@xmath @xmath @xmath (2.53) @xmath @xmath

One now can use Eq. ( 2.46 ) to rewrite the last part of the above
equation into the form of

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

where we used @xmath and @xmath . Having made used of Eqs. ( 2.51 , 2.53
, 1 ), one can immediately obtain Eq. ( 2.47 ) with the effective
Hamiltonian in the form of Eq. ( 2.48 ). .

The @xmath -dependence in Eqs. ( 2.48 ) and ( 2.4 ) emerges from the
fact that the effective interaction in the reduced space is not assumed
to be decoupled from the excluded space. However, by using the
decoupling conditions introduced in Eqs. ( 2.38 ) and ( 2.43 ), we
observe that energy dependence can be removed, and the effective
operators become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The decoupling property makes the operators in one sector independent of
the other sector. The effects of the excluded sector is taken into
account by imposing the decoupling conditions. This is closely related
to the folded diagram method in NMT for removing energy-dependence [ 57
] . (It is well-known in NMT that @xmath -dependence in the @xmath
-matrix emerges from non-folded diagrams which can be systematically
eliminated using the effective interaction approach). The above argument
was given without assuming an explicit form for @xmath and thus the
decoupling conditions are more fundamental than the prescription used to
derive these conditions. We will show later that one can choose a
transformation @xmath , together with the model space and its
complement, which avoids the occurrence of “small energy denominators”.
We now show that Lorentz covariance in a given sector does not hinge on
a special form of similarity transformation. Assume the existence of ten
Poincaré generators @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the structure coefficients. One can show that if the
operators @xmath satisfy the decoupling conditions @xmath and @xmath it
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to a relativistic description even after simultaneously
integrating out the high-frequency modes and reducing the number of
particles. Indeed we conjecture that requiring the decoupling conditions
makes the effective Hamiltonian free of Lorentz-noninvariant operators
for a given truncated sector regardless of the regularization scheme.
However, one may still be faced with an effective Hamiltonian which
violates gauge invariance (for e.g., when sharp cutoff is employed).

Note that the solution to Eq. ( 2.39 ) is independent of the number
@xmath . One can make use of Eq. ( 2.39 ) and its complex conjugate to
show that for any real number @xmath , the following relation for the
effective low-energy Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The case @xmath is special since the effective Hamiltonian is hermitian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hermiticity can be verified from the relation [ 58 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the operator @xmath is anti-hermitian, @xmath is a unitary
operator. From the above expression Eq. ( 2.59 ) can be written in the
explicitly hermitian form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

As was already emphasized, renormalization based on unitary
transformations is more complicated and non-economical. Thus we will
explore a non-unitary approach. An interesting non-hermitian effective
low-energy Hamiltonian can be obtained for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

This form resembles the Bloch and Horowitz type of effective Hamiltonian
as used in NMT [ 55 ] , and was the one used by Wilson in his original
work on quantum field theory [ 44 ] (see section II). In the context of
the CCM, this form leads to the folded diagram expansion well known in
many-body theory [ 16 ] . It is of interest that various effective
low-energy Hamiltonians can be constructed according to Eq. ( 2.55 ) by
the use of the mapping operator @xmath which all obey the decoupling
property Eq. ( 2.38 ) and Eq. ( 2.43 ). Neither perturbation theory nor
hermiticity is essential for this large class of effective Hamiltonians.

### 2.5 The coupled-cluster renormalization group

The CCM approach is, of course, just one of the ways of describing the
relevant spectrum by means of non-unitary transformations. According to
our prescription the model space is @xmath , where @xmath is a bare high
energy vacuum (the ground state of high-momentum of free-Hamiltonian)
which is annihilated by all the high frequency annihilation operators
@xmath (for a given quantization scheme, e.g., equal time or light-cone)
, the set of indices @xmath therefore defines a subsystem, or cluster,
within the full system of a given configuration. The actual choice
depends upon the particular system under consideration. In general, the
operators @xmath will be products (or sums of products) of suitable
single-particle operators. We assume that the annihilation and its
corresponding creation @xmath subalgebras and the state @xmath are
cyclic, so that the linear combination of state @xmath and @xmath span
the decoupled Hilbert space of the high-momentum modes, @xmath , where
@xmath . It is also convenient, but not necessary, to impose the
orthogonality condition, @xmath , where @xmath is a Kronecker delta
symbol. The complement space is @xmath . Our main goal is to decouple
the @xmath -space from the @xmath -space. This gives sense to the
partial diagonalization of the high-energy part of the Hamiltonian. The
states in full Hilbert space are constructed by adding correlated
clusters of high-energy modes onto the @xmath -space, or equivalently
integrating out the high-energy modes from the Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the operators @xmath and @xmath have been expanded in terms of
independent coupled cluster excitations @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the primed sum means that at least one fast particle is created or
destroyed @xmath , and momentum conservation in @xmath is included in
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath are not generally commutable in the
low-energy Fock space, whereas they are by construction commutable in
the high-energy Fock space. One of the crucial difference between our
approach and the traditional CCM [ 3 ] is that, here @xmath and @xmath
are only @xmath -number in the high-energy Fock space, but they are
operators in the low-energy Fock space (unless when @xmath ). We have in
the Wilsonian high-energy shell @xmath (see Fig. 2.2). Therefore, one
can guarantee the proper size-extensivity and consequently conformity
with the linked-cluster theorem at any level of approximation in the
Wilsonian high-energy shell. Nevertheless one can still apply the
standard CCM to the induced effective low-energy Hamiltonian to extend
the proper size-extensivity to the entire Fock space.

It is immediately clear that states in the interacting Hilbert space are
normalized, @xmath . We have two types of parameters in this procedure:
One is the coupling constant of the theory ( @xmath ), and the other is
the ratio of cutoffs ( @xmath ). The explicit power counting makes the
degree of divergence of each order smaller than the previous one.
According to our logic, Eq. ( 2.63 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath defined in Eq. ( 2.64 ) and Eq. ( 2.65 ). We
require that effective Hamiltonian @xmath obtained in this way remains
form invariant or coherent [ 31 , 51 , 52 ] . This requirement satisfies
on an infinitely long renormalization group trajectory and thus does
constitutes a renormalized Hamiltonian. Thereby one can readily identify
the counter terms produced from expansion of Eq. ( 2.67 ).

The individual amplitudes for a given @xmath , @xmath , have to be fixed
by the dynamics of quantum system. This is a complicated set of
requirements. However, we require less than that. Suppose that after a
similar transformation of Hamiltonian, @xmath , we obtain an effective
Hamiltonian of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary operator in the low frequency space. The
@xmath and @xmath indices should be chosen such that the last term in
Eq. ( 2.68 ) contains at least one creation- operator and one
annihilation-operator of high frequency. By using Rayleigh-Schrödinger
perturbation theory, it can be shown that the free high-energy vacuum
state of @xmath is annihilated by Eq. ( 2.68 ) and remains without
correction at any order of perturbation theory. Having said that, we
will now consider how to find the individual amplitudes @xmath that
transfer the Hamiltonian into the form Eq. ( 2.68 ). We split the
Hamiltonian in five parts:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath contains only the low frequency modes with @xmath , @xmath
is the free Hamiltonian for all modes with @xmath , @xmath contains low
frequency operators and products of the high frequency creation
operators @xmath and @xmath is the hermitian conjugate of @xmath . The
remaining terms are contained in @xmath , these terms contain at least
one annihilation and creation operators of the high energy modes. Our
goal is to eliminate @xmath and @xmath since @xmath annihilates the
vacuum. The ket-state coefficients @xmath are worked out via the
ket-state Schrödinger equation @xmath written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bra-state coefficients @xmath are obtained by making use of the
Schrödinger equation defined for the bra-state, @xmath . First we
project both sides on @xmath , then we eliminate @xmath by making use of
the ket-state equation projection with the state @xmath to yield the
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively one can in a unified way apply @xmath on the Schrödinger
equation for the bra-state and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 2.70 ) and Eqs. ( 2.71 ) or ( 2.72 ) provide two sets of
formally exact, microscopic, operatorial coupled non-linear equations
for the ket and bra. One can solve the coupled equations in Eq. ( 2.70 )
to work out @xmath and then use them as an input in Eqs. ( 2.71 ) or (
2.72 ).

It is important to notice that Eqs. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.71 ) can be also
derived by requiring that the effective low-energy Hamiltonian defined
in Eq. ( 2.67 ), be stationary (i.e. @xmath ) with respect to all
variations in each of the independent functional @xmath . One can easily
verify that the requirements @xmath and @xmath yield Eqs. ( 2.71 ) and (
2.70 ). The combination of Eqs. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.71 ) does not
manifestly satisfy the decoupling property as set out in Eqs. ( 2.38 )
and ( 2.43 ). On the other hand Eqs. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.72 ) satisfy these
conditions. Equations ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.72 ) imply that all interactions
including creation and annihilation of fast particles (“ @xmath ”) are
eliminated from the transformed Hamiltonian @xmath in Eq. ( 2.67 ). In
other words, these are decoupling conditions leading to the elimination
of @xmath and @xmath from Eq. ( 2.69 ), which is, in essence, a
block-diagonalization. Therefore it makes sense for our purpose to use
Eqs. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.72 ) for obtaining the unknown coefficients. We
postpone the discussion of the connection between decoupling and
variational equations in next section.

So far everything has been introduced rigorously without invoking any
approximation. In practice one needs to truncate both sets of
coefficients @xmath at a given order of @xmath . A consistent truncation
scheme is the so-called SUB( @xmath ) scheme, where the @xmath -body
partition of the operator @xmath is truncated so that one sets the
higher partition with @xmath to zero up to a given accuracy @xmath .
Notice that, Eqs. ( 2.71 ) and ( 2.72 ) provide two equivalent sets of
equations in the exact form, however after the truncation they can in
principle be different. Eqs. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.72 ) are compatible with
the decoupling property at any level of the truncation, whereas Eqs. (
2.70 ) combined with ( 2.71 ) are fully consistent with HFT at any level
of truncation. Thus the low-energy effective form of an arbitrary
operator can be computed according to Eq. ( 2.55 ) in the same
truncation scheme used for the renormalization of the Hamiltonian. In
particular, we will show that only in the lowest order ( @xmath ),
equations ( 2.71 ) and ( 2.72 ) are equivalent, independent of the
physical system and the truncation scheme.

Although our method is non-perturbative, perturbation theory can be
recovered from it. In this way, its simple structure for loop expansion
will be obvious and we will observe that at lower order hermiticity is
preserved. Now we illustrate how this is realizable in our approach.
Assume that @xmath and @xmath are of order @xmath , we will diagonalize
the Hamiltonian, at leading order in @xmath up to the desired accuracy
in @xmath . We use the commutator-expansion Eq. ( 1.18 ) to organize
Eq. ( 2.70 ) perturbatively in order of @xmath , aiming at elimination
of the high momenta degree of freedom up to the first order in the
coupling constant, thus yields

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
                 @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Notice that @xmath is chosen to cancel @xmath in the
effective Hamiltonian, hence it is at least of order of @xmath ,
consequently it generates a new term @xmath which is of higher order in
@xmath and can be canceled out on the next orders by @xmath . The logic
for obtaining the equations above is based on the fact that @xmath
should be smaller than @xmath (for sake of convergence) and that the
equations should be consistent with each other. Since @xmath and @xmath
, from Eq. ( 2.73 ) we have the desired relation @xmath . Notice that if
@xmath then one needs to keep all coupled equations in Eq. ( 2.73 ) up
to @xmath . In other words, there is no perturbative expansion in ratio
of cutoffs. This may introduce small-energy denominator i. e, @xmath ,
since one may obtain the solution of these equations, e. g., @xmath in
form of a geometrical series which can be resummed and leads to a
small-energy denominator ² ² 2 Thanks to Prof. F. Wegner, for bringing
this point to my attention. . Having said that as far as the
renormalization is concern we are always interested on condition that
@xmath . Furthermore, for @xmath one should resort to the
non-perturbative decoupling equations which are by construction free of
small-energy denominator. The same procedure can be applied for Eq. (
2.72 ) which leads to the introduction of a new series of equations in
order of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      
                 @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively, we can use Eq. ( 2.71 ) to yield the equations

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath                  
                 @xmath      
     @xmath                  (2.75)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

It is obvious that at order @xmath , Eqs. ( 2.74 ) and ( 2.75 ) are the
same and @xmath , which indicates that the similarity transformation at
this level remains unitary. It should be noted that diagonalization at
first order in the coupling constant introduces a low-energy effective
Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 2.67 ) which is valid up to the order @xmath . In
the same way, diagonalization at second order in @xmath modifies the
Hamiltonian at order @xmath and leads generally to a non-unitarity
transformation. In this way one can proceed to diagonalize the
Hamiltonian at a given order in @xmath with desired accuracy in @xmath .
Finally, the renormalization process is completed by introducing the
correct @xmath factors which redefine the divergences emerging from
Eq. ( 2.67 ).

### 2.6 The decoupling conditions versus the variational principle

In section 2.3 we introduced the effective low-energy phase space @xmath
induced by integrating out the high-energy modes. We argued later that
the induced low-energy phase space can be obtained either from Eqs. (
2.70 , 2.72 ) which are manifestly compatible with the decoupling
conditions or from Eqs. ( 2.70 , 2.71 ) compatible with the variational
principle and the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. Here we will show that in
fact this two formulations are related through an isomorphic
transformation (or in a strict sense by a symplectomorphism). In what
follows, for simplicity, we absorb the factor @xmath in Eq. ( 2.66 )
into the definition of @xmath and @xmath , hence we assume @xmath ,
therefore we have desirable convergence relation @xmath . In the spirit
of Schrödinger representation in quantum field theory, one may now
define a generalized many-body ket and bra wave functional at a given
scale @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that by construction, we have @xmath at any level of
approximation. Notice that the bra and ket are parametrised
independently, since they are not hermitian-adjoint of each other.
Therefore, we have a biorthogonal representation of the many-body
system. We will illuminate below the main underlying reasons behind this
parametrization. With this definition the effective low-energy
Hamiltonian Eq. ( 2.67 ) is rewritten as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the bra and ket wave functional are built by adding independent
clusters of high-energy correlation (where @xmath ) in the vacuum of the
free high-energy Hamiltonian, or by integrating out the high-energy
modes from the Hamiltonian. The unknown low-energy operators @xmath are
obtained by solving the Schrödinger equation in the high-energy shell (
@xmath ) and are decoupling equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The decoupling equations Eqs. ( 2.78 , 2.79 ) imply that all
interactions containing creation and annihilation of “ @xmath ”
high-momentum particles are eliminated from the transformed Hamiltonian
while it generates new low-momentum interactions through @xmath . These
equations show the changes of the generalized wave functional and
accordingly the effective Hamiltonian with the flow-parameter @xmath .
Alternatively one can obtain @xmath by requiring that the effective
low-energy be stationary @xmath with respect to all variations in each
of the independent functional @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is introduced in Eq. ( 2.78 ). Notice that we have already
shown that Eq. ( 2.80 ) is as well derivable from dynamics . The
decoupling conditions Eqs. ( 2.78 , 2.79 ) seems generally to be in
conflict with variational equations ( 2.80 , 2.81 ). Here we will show
that in fact this two formulations are related via an isomorphic
transformation (or in a strict sense by a symplectomorphism). Let us
introduce a new set of variables @xmath within the low-energy phase
space, by transforming the induced low-energy phase space operators set
@xmath into a new set @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the low-energy operator @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same way, one may conversely write @xmath in terms of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the following orthogonality property,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the canonical transformation Eq. ( 2.82 ) to rewrite the
decoupling equations @xmath and @xmath in terms of derivative with
respect to new variables, one can immediately show,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same fashion, having made use of the closure identity @xmath in
the high-energy Fock space @xmath , and Eq. ( 2.85 ), one can rewrite
the other decoupling equation @xmath in the form of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.87)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in final step we have made use of the orthogonality relation Eq. (
2.85 ) and the relation in Eq. ( 2.86 ). The operator @xmath is defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath is symmetric and doubly linked. It is obvious from
Eqs. ( 2.86 , 2.87 ) that the requirement of @xmath and @xmath lead
directly to the decoupling conditions @xmath and @xmath . However the
reverse is not always correct. Therefore, the decoupling conditions are
weaker than the variational equations. A set of similar canonical
variables as in Eq. ( 2.82 ) (where the variables are @xmath -numbers),
was introduced by Arponen, Bishop and Pajanne [ 3 ] in the context of
the traditional CCM and turned out to be quite practical.

We have already proved (in section 2.4) that the effective low-energy
operators Eq. ( 2.67 ) or Eq. ( 2.77 ) equipped with decoupling
conditions Eqs. ( 2.78 , 2.79 ) have the same low-energy eigenvalues as
the original Hamiltonian. The decoupling conditions are thus sufficient
requirements to ensure partial diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in the
particle and momentum space.

Having obtained the effective bra and ket Eq. ( 2.76 ) at a given scale
@xmath , one can compute the effective low-energy of an arbitrary
operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may now pose the question if the approximation (truncation) used to
obtain the induced bra- and ket-state, and accordingly the effective
Hamiltonian, is sufficient to obtain the effective low-energy of a given
operator by Eq. ( 2.89 ). On the other hand, one might be curious about
the necessity of the double similarity transformation and as well the
introduction of two independent sets of variables @xmath , since one
could have defined a single transformation @xmath where @xmath is
defined in Eq. ( 2.66 ) (without introducing a new set of variables
@xmath , and invoking the definition of the bar state). In this case,
the variables set @xmath would be determined by Eq. ( 2.78 ) alone. Let
us pursue this idea and apply the Hellmann-Feynman theorem ³ ³ 3 The
Hellmann-Feynman theorem is originally introduced for the ground state,
however its proof is more general and can be applied here. to such a
parametrization. In our framework, the Hellmann-Feynman theorem states
that if we perturb the Hamiltonian @xmath , where @xmath is an
infinitesimally small (a source term) and @xmath is an arbitrary
operator, such that the effective Hamiltonian changes as @xmath then we
have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define an effective low-energy operator @xmath . We can find
the effective low-energy operator @xmath by using the Hellmann-Feynman
theorem,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used @xmath . If we now calculate @xmath from the first
decoupling equation ( 2.78 ) which involves only @xmath , having
retained only @xmath terms, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, one can show that,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.93)
  -- -- -- --------

where the operator @xmath is introduced. Now one can make use of Eq. (
2.93 ) to show that the right-hand side of Eq. ( 2.91 ) can be recast in
the following form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the notation @xmath by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Interestingly, Eq. ( 2.95 ) satisfies the second decoupling condition
Eq. ( 2.79 ). Thereby Eq. ( 2.94 ) becomes exactly equivalent to Eq. (
2.89 ). Therefore the use of the the Hellmann-Feynman theorem and
assuming the coupled-cluster parametrization leads naturally to the
definition of the bra-state in Eq. ( 2.76 ) and emergence of a new set
of variable @xmath . In other words, no other bra-state parametrization
(including hermitian-adjoint of ket-state) is compatible with the
Hellmann-Feynman theorem.

It is well known that the traditional multiplicative renormalization is
not sufficient for the renormalization of more than one composite
operator inserted into the renormalized Green functions. To avoid ad hoc
subtractions, one can introduce the composite operators into the
Lagrangian with a space-time dependent source (coupling). It has been
shown that the renormalization of the source produces requires counter
terms to render all Green functions containing the insertion of
composite operators renormalized [ 59 ] . These new counterterms do not
affect the renormalization of the original theory.

The main advantage of the compatibility of our parametrization with the
Hellmann-Feynman theorem underlies that here the effective low-energy of
an arbitrary operator, can be obtained in the same truncation scheme SUB
@xmath used for the Hamiltonian matrix ⁴ ⁴ 4 As Thouless pointed out,
the Hellmann-Feynman theorem immediately implies that an expectation
value @xmath of an arbitrary operator is computed diagrammatically from
the same set of Goldstone diagrams as for the energy @xmath , where all
interaction is replaced by the operator @xmath . . Moreover, the
above-mentioned technique used in Lagrangian formalism, can be employed
in our framework by means of the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. Therefore,
the renormalization of an arbitrary operator can be calculated in a
unified way. This is indeed, one of advantages of the non-unitary
parametrization of the similarity renormalization group.

### 2.7 The symplectic structure

Despite extensive progress in development of various RG techniques,
little is still known about the geometrical interpretation of the RG [
60 ] . Here, we introduce the geometrical structure emerging from our
approach. We define a low-energy action-like functional @xmath , having
integrated out fast modes and making use of the reparametrization Eq. (
2.82 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.96)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the final step we employed integration by parts. The operator
@xmath is the effective low-energy Hamiltonian defined in Eq. ( 2.67 )
and @xmath are defined,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.97)
  -- -- -- --------

The stationary of @xmath with respect to the complete set of variables
@xmath for a given truncation SUB @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations can be obtained for the set @xmath as well, without
invoking the canonical transformation Eq. ( 2.82 ). However, if one
wants to obtain the above equations in a straightforward manner from
time-dependent Schrödinger equation, then the canonical transformation
Eq. ( 2.82 ) is necessary.

We note that although our transformation is not unitary and the
parametrization of @xmath and @xmath have been introduced in a very
asymmetric fashion, their fundamental dynamics in the low-energy phase
space follows the canonical equation of motion. Therefore the induced
low-energy operators @xmath and @xmath are canonically conjugate in the
terminology of the classical Hamiltonian mechanics. This can be made
even more suggestive by defining a new set of variables, the generalized
field @xmath and their canonically conjugate generalized momentum
densities @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.99)
  -- -- -- --------

In terms of the new operators the equation of motion Eq. ( 2.98 ) can be
rewritten into the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where a generalized Poisson bracket @xmath for two arbitrary operators
is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the nonzero mutual Poisson brackets of canonical coordinates and
momentums we have @xmath . We can also look at the behaviour of the
low-energy effective operator for a product of operators. One can write
the product of operators after a double similarity transformation as a
product of transformed operators,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the closure identity in @xmath -space. The effective
operator @xmath and @xmath are defined by Eq. ( 2.89 ). Now we express
the last part of Eq. ( 2.7 ) in terms of a derivatives of the effective
operators @xmath with respect to low-energy phase space @xmath . In
fact, we have already shown such relations in Eqs. ( 2.86 , 2.87 ). The
same relationships are valid for any arbitrary operator for new
variables @xmath . Therefore with a replacement of @xmath and @xmath in
Eqs. ( 2.86 , 2.87 ) we have the desired equations. The same procedure
can be carried out for evaluating of @xmath . After some straightforward
algebra, one finds that,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Poisson bracket is as defined in Eq. ( 2.101 ).

Therefore our parametrization is clearly suggestive that the effective
low-energy phase space induced by integrating out the high-energy
particles can be described in terms of highly non-linear classical
dynamics with the canonical coordinates @xmath , without losing any
quantum-field-theoretical information. The canonical equation of motions
Eq. ( 2.100 ) are valid at any level of approximation SUB @xmath on the
renormalization group trajectory. In this way, we are led to a
manifestation of the correspondence principle in a more generalized
form, that is the induced low-energy Hamiltonian obtained by integrating
short-distance modes are governed by a hierarchy of non-linear classical
mechanical equations for quasi-local fields @xmath and @xmath . One may
hope to recover the full classical mechanics (with c-numbers variables
as coordinates) at the other extreme of the RG trajectory.

The general form for the action completely determines the symplectic
structure of our low-energy phase space @xmath . The phase space is the
cotangent bundle ⁵ ⁵ 5 In differential geometry, the cotangent bundle is
the union of all cotangent spaces of a manifold [ 23 ] . of the
configuration space @xmath , @xmath (the coordinates @xmath label the
points of configuration space @xmath ) [ 23 ] . The Poisson bracket
Eq. ( 2.101 ) induces a symplectic structure

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the coordinates on the symplectic manifold @xmath are denoted by
@xmath and @xmath is the inverse of the symplectic matrix

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, a symplectic form defines an isomorphism between the tangent
and cotangent spaces of @xmath . One may associate a vector field @xmath
to every function @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the interior product and the symplectic
gradient of @xmath , respectively. @xmath is the so-called the
Hamiltonian vector field of @xmath , and it generates a flow on @xmath
which leaves @xmath invariant, since the Lie derivative of @xmath along
@xmath is zero. In this way, one can rewrite the Poisson bracket in the
form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows the change of @xmath along @xmath . We require that @xmath
to be closed ( @xmath ) ⁶ ⁶ 6 A symplectic manifold ( @xmath ) is a
smooth real @xmath -dimensional manifold without boundary, equipped with
a closed non-degenerate two-form @xmath , i. e., @xmath where @xmath is
the exterior differential [ 23 ] . , which implies the Jacobi identities
@xmath . Therefore, the existence of Poisson bracket in our definition
of the coordinates of the phase-space introduces a symplectic manifold
for the phase-space.

### 2.8 The constrained induced phase space

In this section we closely follow Ref. [ 35 ] (one should pay some extra
care here, since the phase space here is operatorial rather than @xmath
-number). Let us assume that the renormalized form of an arbitrary
operator @xmath , Eq. ( 2.89 ) can be obtained by,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Generally the left-hand side does not agree with right-hand side (it is
by no means clear that this relation will be held after a truncation).
In order to ensure the unitarity of the similarity transformation we
require,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.109)
  -- -- -- ---------

Thereby, the ket-state and bra-state defined in Eq. ( 2.76 ) become
hermitian-adjoint of each another. We assume the induced low-energy
phase space to be a complex manifold @xmath . The hermiticity conditions
are introduced by constraint functions @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the physical submanifold shell is defined through:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 2.64 , 2.65 ). This implies that in the
physical submanifold where we have exact hermiticity, and there is an
isomorphic mapping between a cluster of high-energy creation @xmath
(annihilation @xmath ) operators and a low-energy operators @xmath .
This isomorphism is invariant under the renormalization group
transformation. We introduce a Poisson bracket for the complex
representation of the phase space,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The non-zero commutators of the canonical coordinates follow the
canonical symplectic structure @xmath . The nature of the constraint can
be revealed by considering the commutators between the constraints
functional @xmath and @xmath . After some tedious but straightforward
algebra, one obtains,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that the constraints are of second class and do not
correspond to any gauge symmetry degrees of freedom. However, these
superfluous degrees of freedom can be eliminated by Dirac bracket
technique [ 61 ] . Of course, since the constrained manifold @xmath has
dimension less than the full manifold @xmath , one may define a pullback
map @xmath to obtain the induced symplectic structure of the constraint
surface @xmath , @xmath . In analogy to ordinary CCM [ 35 ] , we define
a symplectic two-form in the full manifold,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The induced symplectic two-form on the physical shell can be found by
substituting the value of @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath by using on-shell condition @xmath , hence we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , consequently @xmath is closed and @xmath is positive
matrix. Therefore the induced physical low-energy phase space is a
Kähler manifold ⁷ ⁷ 7 A Kähler manifold is a Hermitian manifold (M,g)
whose Kähler form @xmath is closed: @xmath . The metric @xmath is called
the Kähler metric of @xmath [ 23 ] . [ 23 ] . This defines a positive
hermitian metric in the physical shell ⁸ ⁸ 8 Notice that it is well
known that the geometrical quantization can be applied on Kähler
manifold since it has a natural polarization. .

In the following next two sections, we apply our RG formalism to compute
the effective Hamiltonian for @xmath and extended Lee theory up to two-
and one-loop order, respectively.

### 2.9 Example I: @xmath theory

In this section, we obtain the effective Hamiltonian of @xmath theory up
to two-loop order in equal-time quantization. In following we will quote
from Ref. [ 33 ] . The bare @xmath theory Hamiltonian is [ 50 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

According to our logic the ultraviolet-finite Hamiltonian is obtained by
introducing counterterms, which depend on the UV cutoff @xmath and some
arbitrary renormalization scale. This redefines the parameters of the
theory and defines the effective low-energy Hamiltonian. The
renormalized Hamiltonian has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Each of the @xmath -factors has an expansion of the form.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a generic coupling constant of theory and has been
defined at a given renormalization scale @xmath . The functions @xmath
will be obtained order-by-order, by summing up contributions of the fast
modes between @xmath and @xmath , in the sense that @xmath and @xmath .
This means that the low-energy correlation functions are invariants of
the renormalization group flow. One can therefore assume that the @xmath
’s are initially @xmath and choose the corresponding @xmath ’s from the
condition that the cut-off dependence be cancelled out after computing
the effective Hamiltonian in the desired loop order. Even though the
newly generated interactions are sensitive to the regularization scheme
(as is well known [ 62 ] , a sharp cutoff may lead to new non-local
interaction terms), nevertheless one can ignore these if they are finite
and do not produce any divergence as the cutoff @xmath approaches to
infinity. We now split field operators into high- and low-momentum
modes; @xmath , where @xmath denotes modes of low-frequency with
momentum @xmath and @xmath denotes modes of high-frequency with momentum
constrained to a shell @xmath . The field @xmath can be conceived as a
background to which the @xmath -modes are coupled. Therefore, in the
standard diagrammatic language, integrating out the high-frequency modes
@xmath implies that only high-frequency modes appear in internal lines.
The field @xmath is represented in Fock space as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the operators @xmath and @xmath satisfy the standard
boson commutation rules. From now on all summations are implicitly over
the high-frequency modes @xmath . The Hamiltonian in terms of high- and
low-frequency modes can be written as, after normal ordering with
respect to high-frequency modes,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we define,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The high-energy configurations in the Fock space are specified by @xmath
and @xmath . Up to two-loop expansion, our renormalization scheme
requires to keep @xmath at least to order @xmath , which allows us to
eliminate the pure terms @xmath and @xmath at a lower level of
expansion. The @xmath operators consistent with a @xmath truncation
scheme are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We split the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix in an upper and
lower triangle part, by using the double similarity transformation. One
may notice that the “most non-diagonal” terms in the Hamiltonian are
@xmath and @xmath (in the light-front Hamiltonian such terms do not
exist because modes with longitudinal momentum identically zero are not
allowed). The potential @xmath is already partially diagonalized and
does not change the vacuum of the high-energy states. Therefore, here we
employ a minimal scheme, aiming at removal of @xmath and @xmath only.

We restrict ourselves to the elimination of the high-energy degrees of
freedom up to the first order in the coupling constant @xmath and second
order in the ratio of cutoffs @xmath . Therefore, our truncation scheme
is called @xmath . For @xmath one finds,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.122)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath are defined in Eq. ( 2.9 ). Here, one has @xmath . At
this stage the results for the one-loop renormalization can be computed.
We evaluate the effective Hamiltonian by substituting @xmath from Eqs. (
2.121 ) and ( 2.122 ) into Eq. ( 2.67 ). In order to achieve
renormalization, one should identify the potentially divergent terms (
when @xmath ) in the expansion of @xmath . Such a process generally can
be done by inventing a power-counting rule, using the property @xmath .
Here we take @xmath for @xmath and replace @xmath by @xmath . The
standard tadpole one-loop mass renormalization arises from @xmath due to
normal-ordering. We add this divergent term to @xmath and renormalize
the bare mass

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this order the contribution of the terms @xmath and @xmath are zero,
after projection on to the high-energy vacuum. The only divergent
contributions come from @xmath due to a double and third contraction of
the high-frequency fields respectively. There are two other divergent
terms, @xmath , however they are harmless and are cancelled out by the
divergence of @xmath . One thus obtains,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.124)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In general evaluation of integrals like Eq. ( 2.124 ) may produce
non-localities. This is due to the fact that the total momentum in
integrands of Eq. ( 2.124 ), namely @xmath and @xmath are in the
low-momentum space. To evaluate such integrations, one can firstly
reduce the potential divergent integrals by a change of variable, for
example for the first integrand we use @xmath , and then expand the
integrand in @xmath . Therefore, after expansion and evaluating the
momentum integrals, one may be faced with non-analytic terms in the
low-momentum space. However here these are non-divergent and will thus
be ignored. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

One can immediately deduce the renormalization factors @xmath and @xmath
from above expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.126)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The unknown coefficients in expression @xmath is computed by making use
of Eq. ( 2.122 ) and solving coupled equations ( 2.70 ), therefore one
may yield,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the above expression summation over dummy momentum indices is
assumed. One can find @xmath in the same manner by exploiting Eq. ( 2.72
) and using Eq. ( 2.128 ) as an input, which leads to

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.129)
  -- -- -- ---------

with the notations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The only divergent contribution up to order @xmath arises from,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After the evaluation of the leading divergent part, we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which contributes to the two-loop wave-function renormalization @xmath .
By comparing Eqs. ( 2.127 ) and ( 2.132 ), one may conclude that @xmath
, as it should be. To finish the renormalization up to two-loop order,
one should also take into account the contribution at order @xmath . The
divergent terms at this level originate from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After a straightforward but lengthy computation one can obtain the
leading divergent parts,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

this term should be added to Eq. ( 2.124 ), therefore one can
immediately deduce the correct total renormalization factor @xmath up to
two-loop order,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can now immediately obtain the well-known [ 50 ] two-loop @xmath
-function and anomalous dimension by making use of Eqs. ( 2.127 , 2.135
).

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.136)
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is important to point out that the diagonalization at first order in
the coupling constant defines a correct low-energy effective Hamiltonian
which is valid up to order @xmath . Having said that, from Eq. ( 2.129 )
one can observe that the non-hermiticity of the @xmath operator appears
at order @xmath and in a lower order of @xmath . As we have shown,
non-hermiticity is negligible up to two-loop order (asymmetric terms
appear in irrelevant contributions (which are non-divergent and vanish
as @xmath goes to infinity). We conjecture that, for the present model,
non-hermitian terms only appear in irrelevant contributions, whatever
the order of truncation.

### 2.10 Example II: Extended Lee Model

As another illustrative example, we will now apply coupled-cluster RG to
determine the effective Hamiltonian for an extended Lee model (ELM) up
to the one-loop order.

We define four kinds of particles, the @xmath -particle and @xmath
-particle as two different fermions and the @xmath and @xmath as a
scalar boson and anti-boson respectively. Here @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath are the annihilation and creation operators which
satisfy boson commutator rules. The @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
define the fermion sector and obey the usual anticommutator rules. The
bare ELM Hamiltonian then reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.138)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The kinetic energy generically is defined @xmath where the indice @xmath
can be either @xmath . The interaction term in @xmath describes the
processes;

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
     @xmath      (2.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The crossing symmetry become manifest if we take @xmath and equal masses
for boson and anti-boson. For sake of generality we will ignore crossing
symmetry at the moment. The Lee model [ 63 ] can be recovered if we
decouple the anti-boson @xmath , @xmath . In the Lee model the virtual
process Eq. ( 2.140 ) is not included and thus the @xmath -particle
state remains unrenormalized and the model become exactly solvable.

It is believed that the Lee model is asymptotically free for space-time
dimension @xmath less than four [ 64 ] . With on-shell renormalization
one can show that the Lee model for @xmath (odd @xmath ) is ultraviolet
stable and not asymptotically free [ 65 ] . It is well known that such a
model in four dimension exhibit a ghost state as the cutoff is removed.
The Hamiltonian Eq. ( 2.10 ) exhibits two symmetries; it is
straightforward to verify that following operators commute with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Clearly @xmath is a baryon number operator and @xmath is a charge
operator. We assign the charges @xmath and @xmath to the @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The sectors of the ELM are labeled by the
eigenvalue @xmath of the operators @xmath . According to our formulation
the ultraviolet-finite Hamiltonian is obtained by introducing @xmath
-factors, which depend on the UV cutoff @xmath and some arbitrary
renormalization scale @xmath in such way that effective Hamiltonian does
not depend on @xmath . The bare Hamiltonian can be rewritten

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.142)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We split the original Hamiltonian in the form of Eq. ( 2.69 );

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.143)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here @xmath and @xmath stand for low momenta ( @xmath ). If the
arguments of an operator are all low momenta ( @xmath or @xmath ), this
indicates low momentum operators. The arguments in @xmath and @xmath
means that all the momentum integrations involved in Eq. ( 2.10 ) are
running between @xmath for the former and @xmath for the latter,
respectively. The configuration space of the high momentum operators are
specified by @xmath with @xmath . Aiming at a one-loop expansion the
corresponding @xmath and @xmath operators which preserve the symmetry
property Eq. ( 2.10 ), can be chosen as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.144)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have ignored the @xmath configuration, since there are no tadpole
type diagrams.( The truncation of @xmath in configuration space should
be consistent with our loop expansion.) Here we confine our attention to
the elimination of the high-momentum degrees of freedom up to the first
order in coupling constant and second order in @xmath . The unknown
coefficients in Eq. ( 2.144 ) can be obtained by making use of Eq. (
2.73 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is easy to observe that Eq. ( 2.74 ) will be satisfied if we require
@xmath , since, up to the first in @xmath the similarity transformation
introduced in Eq. ( 2.67 ) remains unitary. Equally one could use Eq. (
2.75 ) to obtain @xmath , it is obtained that @xmath and @xmath , we
will show that the renormalization feature of our model up to this order
will remain unchanged, however the effective low-energy Hamiltonian will
be different. As was already pointed out, this is because Eq. ( 2.75 )
requires a different truncation scheme. The effective Hamiltonian is now
produced by plugging the @xmath and @xmath defined in Eq. ( 2.144 ) into
Eq. ( 2.67 ). With naive power-counting one can identify the potentially
divergent terms. At the lower order of expansion, the divergent term is
@xmath , the divergence in this term arises from a double contraction of
high-energy fields.

At this step the contributions of the terms @xmath and @xmath are zero,
after projection on to the high-frequency vacuum. There is one other
divergent term, @xmath , but this is harmless and will be cancelled out
by @xmath . We thus obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.146)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

From this expression one can immediately deduce the renormalization
factors @xmath and @xmath , we take @xmath for @xmath , therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

There is no mass renormalization for @xmath and @xmath and accordingly
there are no vacuum polarization type diagrams. Thus @xmath and @xmath
remain unrenormalized, @xmath . The other contribution of @xmath at
one-loop which are not zero after projecting on to vacuum come from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The divergent contribution emerges from the first terms, the leading
divergence of this expression is logarithmic which means that we can
neglect the difference between @xmath and @xmath (for the divergent
contribution only). After evaluating a momentum integral we finally get,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.149)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

From this expression we deduce the renormalization factor @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is obvious from the equations above that one can define renormalized
coupling constants in terms of the bare couplings and wave function
renormalization

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This definition corresponds for @xmath with the renormalization
introduced to compute the @xmath -matrix for the @xmath interaction [ 63
, 66 ] . The one-loop @xmath -function and anomalous dimension @xmath
are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the fixed points of the theory are the zero solutions of the
@xmath -function, one immediately identifies the trivial solution @xmath
(we ignore the nonphysical imaginary solution). It is now obvious from
Eq. ( 2.152 ) that @xmath only at trivial solutions of the @xmath
-functions. This result is in correspondence with property that for real
field theories the @xmath -function is not zero unless at trivial fixed
point of the theory [ 67 ] . Now to investigate the behaviour of the
theory at high momentum, we must compute the momentum-dependent
effective coupling constant @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless physical renormalized coupling
constants defined at the renormalization scale @xmath . The coupled
equations ( 2.153 ) can be solved by going to polar coordinates @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the value at the renormalization scale.
The behaviour of the ELM in the deep-Euclidean region is obtained by
allowing @xmath . From Eq. ( 2.154 ) one observes that @xmath and @xmath
in this region are imaginary. This means that the effective Hamiltonian
is non-hermitian and the theory generates ghost states when the cut-off
is removed. The ghost state appears as a pole in @xmath and @xmath
-propagators. Since a theory is said to exhibit asymptotic freedom if
(i) @xmath (ultraviolet stability at the fixed point @xmath and (ii)
@xmath , Eqs. ( 2.154 ) indicate that the ELM can not exhibit asymptotic
freedom at @xmath .

### 2.11 Conclusion

In this chapter we have reviewed the merits and shortcomings of several
approaches for the construction of the effective field theories in the
Hamiltonian framework.

We have outlined a new strategy to derive effective renormalized
operators. The formulation is not restricted to any quantization scheme
(e.g., equal time or light cone). The effective low-frequency operator
is obtained by the condition that it should exhibit decoupling between
the low- and high-frequency degrees of freedom. All other irrelevant
degrees of freedom like many-body states can be systematically
eliminated in the same way. We have shown that the similarity
transformation approach to renormalization can be systematically
classified. The non-hermitian formulation gives a very simple
description of decoupling, leading to a partial diagonalization of the
high-energy part.

The techniques proposed are known from the coupled cluster many-body
theory. We fully utilized Wilsonian Exact renormalization group within
the CCM formalism. Our approach invoke neither perturbation nor
unitarity transformation. It can be conceived as a topological expansion
in number of correlated excitation of the high-energy modes. We showed
that our formalism can be solved perturbatively. In this way, it was
revealed that diagonalization at first order in coupling constant
defines a correct low-energy effective Hamiltonian which is valid up to
the order @xmath .

We showed that non-unitarity representation inherent in our formulation
is in favour of economic computation and does not produce any
non-hermiticity in the relevant terms. One can show that the
non-hermiticity of the effective Hamiltonian is controllable and might
appear in higher order which is beyond our approximation or in
irrelevant terms which can be ignored in renormalization group sense. We
argued that our formulation is free of any small-energy denominator
plaguing old-fashion perturbation theory. We showed that the
non-hermiticity of the coupled-cluster parametrization leads to the
compatibility of the formulation with the Hellmann-Feynman theorem and
it also induces a symplectic structure. More importantly, it provides a
simple framework for the renormalization of an arbitrary operators.
Notice that all these features are connected with each other and one can
not give up any of them without spoiling the others. One may conceive
that the non-hermiticity adds a auxiliary (non-physical) sector to the
physical phase space, thereby, it makes the whole phase space
geometrically meaningful and moreover it gives enough room to keep the
formulation to be conformed with the cluster decomposition property and
Poincaré invariance regardless of a regularization method. There is a
long tradition behind such approaches, of course with different
motivation, e.g., in the BRST formulation, the phase space is enlarged
by anti-commuting canonical coordinates, another example is the
bosonization of spin algebraic or fermionic system, where one maps the
original Hilbert space of the system into a boson Hilbert space @xmath
which turns out to be larger than original Hilbert space, in the sense
that physically realizable states in the original space map into a
subspace of @xmath . Interestingly, in this approach as well, the boson
Hamiltonian can be either Hermitian or non-Hermitian [ 34 ] .

Notice that our RG method is non-perturbative although we have already
shown that perturbation expansion in coupling can be easily implemented
[ 32 , 33 ] . We successfully applied our RG formalism to compute
perturbatively the effective Hamiltonian for @xmath and extended Lee
theory up to two- and one-loop order, respectively. We have employed a
sharp cutoff, however this idealization should be removed since
generally it may lead to pathologies in renormalization, since it
induces non-locality and moreover potentially violates the gauge
symmetry.

One of the key features which has not yet been exploited is the
non-perturbative aspect of the method; it may well be able to obtain
effective degrees of freedom that are very different from the ones
occurs at the high-energy scale. This is a promising avenue for future
work. Another interesting question is that the connection between our
non-perturbative truncation scheme @xmath and other non-perturbative
scheme e. g., the large @xmath truncation. A systematic scheme which
relates the large @xmath limit with an approximate RG equation remains
yet to be discovered.

## Chapter 3 Renormalization problem in many-body system

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we shall concentrate on the renormalization problem in
many-body theory of nuclear matter. As we already pointed out,
renormalization of many-body system in a truncated (in number of
particles) space is problematic, the so-called Tamm-Dancoff problem. The
question is how can one renormalize the many-body problem equations
obtained by non-perturbative approaches (such as the CCM, Brueckner’s
reaction matrix (or @xmath -matrix) theory [ 68 ] and etc.,) in a
truncated Fock space.

In the last chapter we showed that a renormalized effective interaction
in small number of particles can be obtained by imposing certain
decoupling conditions between the model- and excluded-spaces. In this
sense, Feshbach formalism is in contrast with the effective interaction
theory since it is not derivable from such decoupling conditions. Notice
that the energy-dependence of the Feshbach formalism (and any Green
function type formulations, e.g., Schwinger-Dyson resummation, Faddeev
approach) emerges from the fact that the effects of the excluded Hilbert
space is taken into account by a “quasi-potential”, while in the
effective interaction approach the latter is taken into account by
imposing a certain decoupling conditions. Therefore a given truncated
Hilbert space becomes independent of the remaining sectors and
accordingly it can in principle be described by an energy-independent
prescription.

In order to clarify the differences between an energy-dependent and an
energy-independent formulation, here we investigate how can one resolve
the renormalization problem by fully utilizing the Feshbach projection
operator technique [ 56 ] in the framework of the CCM. Therefore, we
pursue an inverse of the EI approach. With a field theoretical
consideration, we show that the coupled-cluster formalism by means of
Feshbach projection technique leads to a renormalized generalized
Brueckner ( @xmath -dependent) theory.

The Feshbach projection technique was introduced to treat nuclear
reactions with many channels present. It was originally formulated under
the assumption that the number of elementary particles involved is
conserved, however clearly this is not that case for field theory. An
extension of the Feshbach formalism has been developed for the
pion-deuteron system [ 69 ] and general pion-nucleus reactions [ 70 ] .
This technique bears some resemblance to Okubo’s methods [ 71 ] , which
is consistent with meson field theory, but is developed in terms of an
effective Schrödinger equation so as to remain in close contact with
conventional nuclear physics. This approach was already pursued by
Schütte and Providencia [ 72 ] in the framework of the CCM for the Lee
model. However, in the Lee model, because of an inherent Tamm-Dancoff
approximation (which limits the number of mesons present at any
instant), and exact solvability of the model, the issue of
renormalizibility of the nuclear matter properties is unclear. Here, we
follow their approach in an extended version of Lee model which is not
exactly solvable and does not display these trivialities. The
renormalization of the extended Lee model in the few-body sector was
already investigated in section 2.10.

Notice that the CCM as introduced by Schütte and Providencia based on
Rayleigh-Ritz-Variational principle (e.g., see [ 72 ] ) is different
from the CCM introduced by Arponen and Bishop from the standpoint of
variational principle and the Hellman-Feynman theorem [ 3 , 4 ] . As we
have already illustrated in the first two chapters, we believe that the
latter has more advantages and is more suitable for a field theoretical
application since it is naturally embedded in the modern effective field
theoretical framework. Having said that our main goal in this chapter is
to introduce other quantum many-body theory techniques and challenge if
they are adoptable for a field theoretical application.

### 3.2 The extended Lee Model

The extended Lee model (ELM) is a simple model connecting elementary and
composite particles [ 63 ] . Although this model is not a chiral model
but it exhibits many field-theoretical features. We define four kinds of
particles. The @xmath - and @xmath - particles, two different types of
fermions, and the @xmath scalar boson and the @xmath anti-boson. We take
for the Hamiltonian the expression:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the annihilation and creation operators which
satisfy boson commutation rules. The @xmath and @xmath define the
fermion sector and obey the usual anticommutator rules. The @xmath and
@xmath are abbreviations for all quantum numbers (such as momentum, spin
and isospin, etc). Within our formal investigation, we leave open the
specification of @xmath and @xmath . It can be taken as either a
relativistic or non-relativistic expression. The bare kinetic energies
@xmath and @xmath are renormalized to @xmath and @xmath by the
interaction. The matrices @xmath and @xmath are the bare interaction
strength renormalizing to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
interaction strength is defined by the kind of bosons exchanged (the
scalar, pseudoscalar or vector bosons). The exchange of higher spin
@xmath bosons, such as the f(1260), @xmath (1310), @xmath (1514) and
g(1680) seems to have little influence on the low-energy @xmath data.
The reason is that their poles are located far away from the physical
region. In other words, they give rise to the contributions of the very
short range which are masked by the very strong repulsion coming from
vector meson-exchange. These contributions, however, are essentially
masked or parametrized by form factors necessary to regularize the
one-boson-exchange diagrams. The interaction term in @xmath describes
the process

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lee model can be recovered if we decouple the anti-boson @xmath ,
@xmath (i. e. to remove crossing symmetry) [ 73 , 64 , 65 ] . In the Lee
model the virtual process Eq. ( 3.3 ) is not included and thus the
@xmath -particle state remains unrenormalized and the model becomes
exactly solvable [ 73 ] . We have already shown that the ELM can not
exhibit asymptotic freedom at space-time dimension @xmath =4. It is well
known that such a model in four dimension exhibit a ghost state as the
cutoff is removed. It has been shown that the composite-particle theory,
the meson pair theory of Wentzel [ 74 ] , can be obtained as a
strong-coupling limit of the ELM, in which limit the wave function
renormalization constant of the @xmath -particle vanish [ 63 ] . One can
find two operators commuting with the Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Clearly @xmath is a baryon number operator and @xmath is a charge
operator. In setting up the charge operator, we have assigned the
charges 1,0,-1 and 1 to the particles @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
The sectors of the model are labeled by the eigenvalues @xmath of the
operators @xmath . The most trivial sectors are: @xmath , the physical
vacuum is thus the same as the free particle vacuum for this model,
@xmath and @xmath which define respectively anti-meson and meson states,
these states stay unrenormalized. The sectors @xmath and @xmath contain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the Lee model @xmath stays unrenormalized. This makes the model
exactly solvable, but this is not the case in ELM. The renormalization
of such a model was already studied in section 2.5. The one-loop
renormalization of the interaction strength is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In one-loop order, the physical neutron state @xmath is a bound state in
the @xmath sector with @xmath , where @xmath is renormalized @xmath
-particle energy. We note that in the limit that the coupling constant
vanishes, the @xmath -particle state @xmath goes over into @xmath .
Therefore, the simplest form of a bound state in the @xmath sector at
one-loop order can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the unknown coefficient @xmath is determined by requiring that
@xmath be an eigen-function of Hamiltonian with eigenvalue @xmath .
After straightforward calculations, one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The same argument can be applied for the sector @xmath and one can
obtain in lowest order, the physical proton state @xmath as a bound
state in this sector which can be shown to obey

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath and @xmath are the mass operators, and show the off-shell
contribution to the self-energy, see Fig. 3.1. The mass renormalization
in the model is now performed by adding corresponding terms as counter
terms to the Hamiltonian (these terms will not change the conservation
of @xmath and @xmath operators). We assume that the parameters of the
model are chosen in such a way that there exists one bound state for
each @xmath and @xmath . The form factors contained in @xmath are
assumed to make @xmath , @xmath and consequently the coupling constant
renormalization finite.

### 3.3 Nuclear matter equations

We now wish to consider the binding energy problem of @xmath for the
sector @xmath with @xmath so-called @xmath matter. We assume that the
non-interacting ground-state wave function of this system be the Slater
determinant built up by an equal number of @xmath - and @xmath -
particle up to a Fermi momentum @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We denote by @xmath occupied @xmath -particle ( @xmath -particle)
states, by @xmath the unoccupied states and by @xmath either states. We
write the exact correlated ket ground state, in a coupled cluster
formulation, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the cluster operator is separated into two parts, one, @xmath ,
without mesons which is obviously the same as in the CCM with a
phenomenological potential and @xmath with mesons contributions which
contains the additional parts originating from quantum field theory.
Here we define bra ground state as a hermitian conjugate of ket ground
state in every level of truncation. Using the symmetry properties Eq. (
3.4 ) and momentum conservation the general form of @xmath and @xmath
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The subscript @xmath of the @xmath - and @xmath -amplitudes stands for
antisymmetrization of the states. For obtaining the binding energy of
@xmath - @xmath matter one should solve the Schrödinger equation by
making use of the definitions in Eqs. ( 3.10 )-( 3.3 ), therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Projecting this equation onto the complete orthonormal set of states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains a system of coupled integral equations of which the first
determines the binding energy and others fix the corresponding
amplitudes @xmath and @xmath . These coupled integral equations from
effective interaction view point are the decoupling conditions and leads
to energy-independent prescription. In order to derive the standard
Brueckner theory we apply the Rayleigh-Ritz-Variational principle. This
type of the CCM formulation was originally proposed by Providencia and
Shakin [ 75 ] . This is of course different from coupled-cluster theory
introduced by Arponen and Bishop from the standpoint of variational
principle and the Hellman-Feynman theorem [ 3 , 4 ] (the so-called NCCM
scheme, see chapter 1.2).

One of our goals here is to show that in the consistent truncation
scheme the many-body problem does not require further renormalization
and all the bare parameters introduced in definition of the wave
function can be fixed in the nucleon-nucleon scattering. It is clear
that Eq. ( 3.3 ) needs to be truncated. Aiming at a two-hole line and
one-meson-exchange expansion of the ground-state energy, we choose the
following terms for @xmath and @xmath from Eq. ( 3.3 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

All other term vanish up to this order because of the symmetries of the
ELM Hamiltonian. Now we define cluster expansions of expectation value
of the Hamiltonian with respect to @xmath , which is a straightforward
generalization of the standard expansion [ 75 , 76 ] . We neglect
three-body and higher-order cluster. The one-body, two-body, etc.,
correlated wavefunction are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expectation value of the Hamiltonian is then obtained by and shown
in Fig. 3.2

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Hamiltonian cluster integrals have been introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath and @xmath are the norm of @xmath and @xmath respectively.
We disregard the other cluster integrals like @xmath because they would
only get contributions from two-mesons intermediate states. This makes
sense in consistent one-meson exchange approximation. According to the
selective summation made in the expression Eq. ( 3.17 ), the occupation
numbers @xmath and @xmath should satisfy the following algebraic
equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with notation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The basic idea for the treatment of @xmath is to expand it term by term
using the Wick-rule to keep track of all possible contribution. The
expansion of @xmath and @xmath can therefore be characterized by a set
of suitable diagrams and one can check that the division by @xmath
cancels out all contribution from disconnected diagrams (the
linked-cluster theorem). Now we minimize the quantity @xmath with
respect to the constrains given by Eq. ( 3.3 ) and denote it @xmath ,
thus we multiply Eq. ( 3.3 ) by the Lagrange multipliers @xmath and
@xmath and subtract them from Eq. ( 3.17 ), then by using the definition
Eq. ( 3.3 ) we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is convenient to treat the @xmath and @xmath as independent
variables, therefore we minimize @xmath respect to @xmath , @xmath which
respectively yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 3.22 )-( 3.3 ) represent a set of unrenormalized Variational
coupled integral equations for @xmath matter, consistent with
two-hole-line truncation.

### 3.4 The renormalized nuclear matter equations

The method that we will use to reformulate Eqs. ( 3.22 )-( 3.3 ) in
order to obtain renormalized equations for @xmath matter is based on the
Feshbach projection operator formalism [ 56 ] . Projection operator
techniques have also been used to analyze several sectors of the Lee
model [ 77 ] .

The total energy of @xmath matter can be obtained by making use of Eq. (
3.21 ) and Eqs. ( 3.24 )-( 3.3 ) and exploiting the constrains Eq. ( 3.3
);

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now directly add mass counter terms to the bare Hamiltonian in
Eqs. ( 3.22 ) and ( 3.23 ) to dress masses. We expand the last term in
the binding energy Eq. ( 3.28 ) in terms of the coupling constants and
@xmath . This form will be used later to achieve full renormalization
for the binding energy since there is a subtle relation between @xmath
and the renormalized coupling constant,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last two terms in Eq. ( 3.4 ) are a three-hole-line contribution
which we ignore, consistent with our aim for a two-hole-line expansion.
We introduce the projection operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Inspired by the projection technique of feshbach, one can use the above
definition to combine Eqs. ( 3.24 )-( 3.26 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We can show that the right hand side of Eq. ( 3.31 ) can
be reduced by using Eqs. ( 3.22 ) and ( 3.23 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.32)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term in Eqs. ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.4 ) are a three-hole-line
contribution which are again ignoreable in our approximation. Let us
introduce the unrenormalized effective interaction @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass renormalization terms has been taken into account by using
renormalized masses in the propagators. (Notice that @xmath and @xmath
). This definition correspondences to the quasi-potential in a
Lippmann-Schwinger type equation if one replaces @xmath . Having made
use of defined effective interaction @xmath one can show

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression is consistent with the two-hole-line approximation. Now
we decompose the “p-p” and “n-n” interaction involved in Eq. ( 3.31 )
after adding mass counter terms in bare Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operator @xmath and @xmath are defined via Eqs. ( 3.2 , 3.2 )
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

In diagrammatic language Eq. ( 3.36 ) contains self-energy diagrams
which contain unoccupied intermediate states because of the operators
@xmath , This is achieved by adding @xmath to @xmath . We now introduce
the operator @xmath to accomplish coupling constant renormalization. Its
structure emerges from renormalization of finite sectors of ELM,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with notations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath . The benefit of @xmath can be manifested by following
factorization property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may use @xmath to show that @xmath is related to renormalized
effective @xmath potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the renormalized effective two-body @xmath potential can be
readily found ( see Fig. 3.2)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced twice-subtracted “dressing factor” defining as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dressing factor appears independent of truncation made and describes off
shell correction of a self-energy of @xmath and @xmath particle. In Lee
model @xmath , since @xmath -particle stay unrenormalized.
Twice-subtracted dressing factors remain finite even without form
factor, due to the occurrence of a cubic energy denominator, this can be
verified by expanding Eq. ( 3.43 ) using relativistic expression for
@xmath and interaction strength. Now one can rewrite Eq. ( 3.31 ), by
making use of Eqs. ( 3.35 , 3.36 ) and exploiting the factorization
property Eq. ( 3.40 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is renormalized two-body operators obtained from Eq. ( 3.37
)

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (3.45)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

It is observed the operator @xmath , transfers unrenormalized
correlation function to renormalized one. This is due to the simple
structure of vertices renormalization in this model. We now turn to
Eq. ( 3.3 ) for @xmath and @xmath , one may use Eqs. ( 3.22 , 3.23 ) to
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last term in @xmath in Eq. ( 3.4 ) are a three-hole-line
contribution. From Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.2 ) it is obvious that the first
two terms in @xmath in Eq. ( 3.4 ) are the renormalized energy of @xmath
particles if we add the contribution of intermediate occupied @xmath
states in self-energy. The corresponded terms should be subtracted which
contribute to the definition of @xmath . Having introduced mass counter
terms, one can eliminate @xmath by using Eq. ( 3.44 ) and obtain the
renormalized equation for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (3.47)
     @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath      (3.51)
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by self-consistent equation of the
Brueckner type and @xmath is the solution of a Brueckner-Bethe-Goldstone
equation [ 68 , 78 ] .

### 3.5 Conclusion

The correction to the standard many-body scheme emerges in this model in
different steps which are connected with the following physical effects.
We have to replace the @xmath by @xmath , which accounts for the
renormalization effects of the boson propagating in the @xmath matter
system. This can be understood since fermions feel the average potential
given by @xmath and @xmath during the time when a boson is exchanged in
@xmath matter [ 78 ] . In scattering formalism ( @xmath -matrix) we have
@xmath , the total energy of @xmath system, whereas there is a medium
effect in @xmath matter bringing the @xmath -value to @xmath . The
energy denominator of the Brueckner Eq. ( 3.50 ) contains the correction
@xmath which is not present for standard @xmath scattering. This
correction is due to the effect of the Pauli principle on the
self-energy of the fermions. The comparison between many-body solution
in the Lee model [ 72 ] and the ELM reveals following distinctions:
The simplest correction in the ELM is due to the self-energy diagrams of
@xmath -particle and Pauli principle on this diagrams which are
manifested through the occurrence of the corresponding dressing factor
@xmath and @xmath respectively, whereas these corrections in the Lee
model do not appear because @xmath -particle remains unrenormalized . In
the Lee model the lowest order of @xmath would appear in a
three-hole-line expansion while in the ELM this term arises in
two-hole-line contribution on an equal footing with lowest order of
@xmath .

The @xmath renormalization correction of the Lee model (see Fig. 3.4)
goes to contribution of mass renormalization of @xmath -particle in the
ELM. Therefore the renormalization correction of occupation numbers gets
contribution from higher order which are not generated in our
approximation. It is notable that the ELM due to possessing the crossing
symmetry preserves the symmetry between @xmath and @xmath part of the
renormalization correction, whereas this is not the case for many-body
problem within Lee model.

This presentation is conclusive that coupled-cluster theory without the
decoupling property in systematic truncation scheme leads to derivation
of generalized Brueckner ( @xmath -dependent) theory which includes
renormalization correction originating from medium effect. We showed as
well that a combination of the coupled-cluster theory and Feshbach
projection technique provides a powerful method to renormalize quantum
many-body problem in a truncated Fock space.

### 3.6 Some final remarks

We have employed the coupled-cluster theory in various versions and
investigated the merits and short-comings of such techniques for field
theoretical applications. We showed that the CCM version introduced by
Arponen and Bishop can be easily adopted with Wilsonian renormalization
group and provides very strong tools for describing (non)-perturbative
phenomena (please see the conclusion of the last chapter 2.11). On the
other hand, the CCM version introduced by Schütte and Providencia can be
equipped with the Feshbach projection formalism and produces a
renormalized generalized Brueckner theory. One should bear in mind that
in the latter, the famous “small-energy denominator” problem is not
avoidable and is not at all clear how systematically high-energy modes
can be integrated out for a very complicated system.

In the rest of this work, we employ an effective QCD model as can be
constructed from the techniques of the first part of this thesis and
address with greater details, non-perturbative phenomenological
phenomena such as nucleon and diquark solutions, confinement and
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking.

## Chapter 4 QCD properties and effective quark chiral models

It is believed that the strong interactions are described by a quantum
field theory known as quantum chromodynamics (QCD) [ 50 , 79 ] . QCD
from many aspects is an unique theory. Quantum electrodynamics (QED),
and its expansion to the electroweak standard model of particle physics,
is also a quantum field theory. However, QED breaks down at short
distances and is not well-defined. QED is renormalizable theory but it
loses all his credibility as we approach to Landau pole. On the other
hand if the cutoff goes to infinity, QED becomes trivial. QED is not the
only theory with a Landau pole problem, every theory which is not
asymptotically free suffers from this problem. The quantum field theory
of gravity obtained from general relativity suffers from
nonrenormalizability. QCD is the only known theory which is free from
such problems. QCD only needs few parameters to be defined completely,
one universal coupling strength and one mass for each kind of quark.

In following chapter we introduce part of QCD which is relevant to
nuclear physics. We refrain from discussing all details since it can be
found in many quantum-field theory textbooks, see e.g., Refs. [ 50 , 79
] .

### 4.1 QCD Symmetries

In this section we will introduce the underlying symmetries of QCD. The
Lagrangian of QCD is given by [ 50 , 79 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the quark field which is defined in the fundamental
representation of the color and flavor group, and the conjugate Dirac
field is defined as @xmath . The gluon field matrix @xmath is defined in
the fundamental @xmath representation, @xmath being the generators of
the gauge group which satisfies @xmath . We define @xmath as strong
coupling constant. The field strength @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-Abelian nature of QCD is manifested by the quadratic term in the
gauge field strength. The color and flavour indices of the quark field
are suppressed. @xmath is the current quark mass which is not directly
observable if QCD confines quarks. The current quark mass is
color-independent and can be brought diagonal in flavour space. There
are six flavours of quarks, each of which has a different mass. The
three light quarks are called up (u), down (d) and strange (s), while
the three heavy quarks are called charm (c), bottom (b) and top (t). The
following values for the light current quark masses are found from the
Particle Data group [ 80 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that the quark masses are renormalization-scheme dependent. The
above values are obtained in a subtraction scheme at a renormalization
scale @xmath . In addition to flavour, quarks carry another quantum
number known as colour. Each quark comes in three colours, red, green
and blue.

The Lagrangian Eq. ( 4.1 ) has a large classical symmetry: we have the
local gauge symmetry @xmath by construction,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have also global flavour symmetry which does not affect the gluon
fields,

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.4)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the generators of the flavor group @xmath and
@xmath denotes the number of flavors. The above symmetry is referred to
as vector flavor symmetry @xmath . When the generator matrix is taken
unit matrix we have @xmath symmetry associated with conservation of
baryon number. There is another global symmetry which is exact at @xmath
, namely chiral symmetry. This symmetry is very similar to vector flavor
symmetry, apart from an extra factor of @xmath in the generator of the
transformation.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that due to the factor @xmath the quark field and its conjugate
partner are transformed by the same matrix in contrast to vector
transformation Eq. ( 4.4 ). This transformation is called the
axial-vector transformation and can be combined with the vector
transformation to define a bigger symmetry at chiral @xmath which is
then called chiral symmetry @xmath . One may alternatively define right-
and left-handed quark fields by following transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The right- and left-handed massless fermions are eigenvalues of the
helicity or chirality (with eigenvalue @xmath ) and are not mixed
together. The chiral symmetry can be equivalently written as @xmath .

It is believed that intermediate-energy hadronic physics, say over range
of energy MeV-GeV is adequately described by the dynamics of the
lowest-mass quarks, @xmath and @xmath . The overall classical symmetry
of the Lagrangian with @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Not all above-mentioned symmetries survive quantization. Particles with
opposite helicity are related by a parity transformation, therefore in a
chirally symmetric world the hadrons should come in parity doublets.
However, in a real life we do not observe such degeneracy. Therefore,
one can conclude that chiral symmetry is not realized in the ground
state and chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken. The Goldstone theorem
tell us that the spontaneous breaking of a continuous global symmetry
implies the existence of associated massless spinless particles. This
indeed confirmed due to the existence of the light pseudoscalar mesons
in nature (pions, kaons and etas) as the corresponding Goldstone bosons
[ 81 ] . Moreover, the existence of quark condensate @xmath implies that
the @xmath symmetry is spontaneously broken down to @xmath . Therefore
one may conceive QCD quark condensate as an order parameter for chiral
symmetry breaking. The concept of spontaneous broken chiral symmetry is
the cornerstone in the understanding of the low-energy hadronic
spectrum.

The @xmath symmetry implies that all hadrons should come with opposite
parity partners. However, this is not the case, therefore this symmetry
must be broken somehow. If the spontaneous symmetry breaking mechanism
works here, then one should observe Goldstone boson associated with
@xmath , namely an @xmath pseudoscalar meson having roughly the same
mass as the pion. Surprisingly there is no such Goldstone boson. This
problem is sometime called @xmath puzzle. It turned out that the @xmath
symmetry is explicitly broken by quantum effects. This effect is known
as the axial anomaly [ 82 ] . It was shown by ’t Hoof that due to
instanton effects, the @xmath symmetry is not manifested in nature [ 82
] .

Finally, at @xmath , the QCD Lagrangian is invariant under a scale
transformation which is called dilatational symmetry:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This symmetry is again broken at quantum level due to the trace anomaly
[ 83 ] .

### 4.2 Non-perturbative features of QCD

In this section we shall recapitulate the most important features of QCD
which are not accessible perturbatively. Let us firstly elaborate why
perturbation theory in terms of coupling @xmath can not be used in the
low-energy regime of the theory. Having introduced the gauge fixing term
and an associated ghost term by means of the Faddeev-Popv procedure [ 50
, 79 , 84 ] , one can carry out perturbation theory in terms of
coupling. Due to the renormalization process, a renormalization scale
@xmath enters the algebra [ 85 ] . Therefore the running coupling is
described by the RG equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where the coupling is small, the @xmath function can be computed
perturbatively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, one can readily calculate the effective running coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a scale parameter of QCD and depends on the subtraction
scheme and the number of active flavours,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath stands for minimal subtraction scheme [ 79 ] and
the superscripts indicate the number of active flavours. This value is
taken from an analysis of the various high energy processes, see Ref. [
86 ] . The most striking feature of the running coupling is that it
decreases logarithmically as @xmath increases. Therefore perturbation
theory works very well for large @xmath . This phenomenon is called
asymptotic freedom [ 87 ] . However, if @xmath is near @xmath ,
perturbation theory does not work anymore and non-perturbative phenomena
enter the stage. Admittedly, there is no unambiguous method available to
connect small and large distances in QCD.

One of the most important non-perturbative features of QCD is dynamical
chiral symmetry breaking which is responsible for generation of a quark
mass from nothing ¹ ¹ 1 There is another very different way to generate
mass from vacuum, the so-called Casimir effect [ 88 ] which originates
from the response of vacuum in the presence of non-perturbative boundary
condition. The existence of boundary conditions in quantum field theory
is not always free of problems (see e. g., [ 89 ] ). . In order to show
that this phenomenon is purely non-perturbative, we employ the QCD gap
equation [ 90 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the current-quark bare mass and the coupling
constant, respectively. @xmath is the dressed-gluon propagator and
@xmath is the dressed-quark-gluon vertex. The general solution of the
gap equation is a dressed-quark propagator of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may now use the gap equation to work out the fermion self-energy
perturbatively [ 91 ] . One obtains,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is observed that at all orders of loop expansion terms are
proportional to the current-quark mass and consequently vanish as @xmath
. Therefore, no mass (the quark mass is defined as a pole of the
dressed-quark propagator) is generated at current-quark mass equal to
zero, i.e. the dynamical chiral symmetry breaking is impossible in
perturbation theory and there is no mixing between left- and
right-handed quarks “perturbatively”. Notice that apart from the trivial
solution @xmath at @xmath , a non-trivial solution @xmath can indeed be
found at the chiral point, albeit accessible non-perturbatively. The
renormalization effect is not included in Eq. ( 4.14 ), but it does not
change the above argument [ 91 ] . As we already mentioned, there is a
close relationship between the generation of the quark mass, @xmath ,
and the fact that @xmath . The quark condensate in QCD is given by the
trace of the full quark propagator Eq. ( 4.15 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that since @xmath is a gauge invariant object, one may take any
gauge to obtain the dressed quark propagator which has a general form as
equation ( 4.15 ). It is obvious when we have @xmath , never does the
quark condensate take place, simply because of the identity @xmath . It
has been shown in Landau gauge that the dynamical quark mass, @xmath is
large in infrared, @xmath GeV, but is power-law suppressed in the
ultraviolet [ 92 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass anomalous dimension and @xmath is the
renormalization group invariant vacuum quark condensate. The
dressed-quark mass-function Eq. ( 4.18 ) is a longstanding prediction of
the Dyson-Schwinger equation [ 90 ] and has been recently confirmed by
quenched lattice QCD [ 93 ] . It has been shown in many non-perturbative
approaches that the emergence of a dynamical quark mass leads to the
non-vanishing of quark condensate and vice versa, e.g., see chapter 6.

Another important non-perturbative feature of QCD is color confinement [
94 ] . Loosely speaking, confinement is defined as the absence of any
colored object in nature. But it is possible that there exists a
composite colored particle which can form colorless bound states with
another colored particle like quarks. The color confinement is still not
properly understood, and a clear and indisputable mechanism responsible
for this effect yet remains to be discovered ² ² 2 The Clay Foundation
is offering @xmath million prize to anyone who can provide a
mathematical proof of confinement. . Confinement originates
non-perturbatively, since it is associated with a linear potential with
a string tension @xmath which is obviously non-perturbative in the
coupling ³ ³ 3 Note that the string picture of quark confinement is not
free of flaws, since string breaking will occur once the potential
energy approaches the quark pair creation threshold. .

One may wonder if there is a non-trivial solution for gap equation
@xmath which gives rise to a pole of the quark propagator, which would
contradict QCD confinement since the quark is colored ⁴ ⁴ 4 It is
well-known that for confinement it is sufficient that no colored
Schwinger function possesses a spectral representation. It is equivalent
to say that all colored Schwinger functions violate reflection
positivity [ 20 , 90 ] . This is one way of realization of QCD
confinement. There are in fact many different ways that the confinement
can be realized such as monopole condensation effect, infrared
enhancement of the ghost propagator etc. For a review of this subject
see Ref. [ 94 ] . . Indeed this is one of the subtle point in every QCD
model and can not be easily resolved. In principle, there will be a
long-range force between massive quarks to confine them and also a short
range spin-spin interaction between massive dressed quarks. The former
will modify the low momentum part of the propagator to remove the quark
from being on-shell. Actually, this describes a phenomenologically
motivated picture of a constituent quark model based on the dynamical
symmetry breaking. Having said that it is very hard to incorporate the
dynamical symmetry breaking and the confinement into a QCD model. In
fact, many models constructed to describe the low-energy properties of
hadrons are assumed to be only dominated by the quark flavor dynamics
and dynamical symmetry breaking and are indeed reliable only at
intermediate scales, between confinement scale few hundred MeV up to a
scale about 1 GeV.

### 4.3 Effective low-energy quark interaction

Physical hadrons are colorless objects and their properties seem to be
determined by the flavor dynamics which is induced by an effective QCD
interaction. The first step toward a construction of such effective
theory is to integrate out gluonic degrees of freedom, then by standard
bozonization and hadronization methods [ 95 ] derive the desired
effective low-energy theories based on relevant degrees of freedom.
There have been many attempts to attack this difficult problem. Two very
well established methods are the global color model approach introduced
by Cahill and Roberts [ 96 ] , and the so-called field strength approach
introduced by Reinhardt and collaborators [ 97 ] . Our main goal in this
section is to give a taste of such approaches and focus only on the main
themes rather than details. First we rewrite the quark-gluon interaction
term in QCD Lagrangian Eq ( 4.1 ) by rewriting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The full quantum theory of QCD is solved by computing the functional
integral describing the vacuum-to-vacuum transition amplitude,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to handle the gluonic part of the QCD functional integral, one
first has to define gauge inequivalent orbits by using a standard gauge
fixing procedure and the Faddeev-Popov method [ 50 , 79 ] (in what
follows we assume that this procedure has already been carried out). We
now split the above generating functional integral as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the gluon part of action is defined in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we could evaluate exactly the gluonic part of the functional integral
then we would be done. But unfortunately this integration can not be
handled unless we resort to some sort of systematic approximation (this
is due to the presence of cubic and quartic terms of @xmath in the
Lagrangian). One possibility to proceed is to expand the effective
action in powers of the quark current @xmath as suggested by Cahill and
Roberts [ 96 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

are defined as one-particle irreducible gluon correlation functions in
the absence of quarks,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the above expression, the brackets denotes the functional average
over the gluon field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The zeroth order term @xmath does not depend on the quark field and is
therefore an irrelevant constant. The first order term @xmath gives the
expectation value of the gluon field and is zero in the absence of
external fields. The leading non-trivial term is @xmath which is the
exact gluon propagator and includes all gluon self-interactions and
gluon-ghost interactions. Notice that the quark loops are incorporated
through the quark current attached as legs to the exact gluon
propagator. The main approximation in this approach is to ignore all
terms @xmath . Note that none of the gluon correlation functions is
gauge or Lorentz invariant. While each term in the expansion is
separately invariant under Lorentz and “global color symmetry”,
nevertheless the whole expansion in Eq. ( 4.23 ) is invariant under
local gauge symmetry. We truncate Eq. ( 4.23 ) up to @xmath , and with
this simplification the QCD generating functional is approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is the induced non-local QCD action which describes the
quark flavour dynamics,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exact form of @xmath is not available at the moment. Hence, the main
phenomenology task is to simulate the simplest form of gluon propagator
in order to reproduce the confinement and asymptotic freedom of quarks.
Although there is no a priori reason to believe that the effective
interaction of quarks propagating in the QCD vacuum should retain the
form of a one gluon exchange interaction, it has been proved that
already this simple approximation reproduces most phenomenological
models such as the instanton liquid model [ 99 ] , Nambu-Jona-Lasinio
(NJL) model [ 98 ] , various chiral bag or topological-soliton models [
96 ] and the Dyson-Schwinger equation approximation [ 90 ] , etc. As an
example, a useful starting point for low energy effective action is to
employ a gluon propagator which is reduced to its crudest form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant with dimension of @xmath . This choice leads
to a local NJL type model with interaction:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This interaction describes a system of quarks interacting via a
two-body-force. The local form of the interaction of course causes
ultraviolet divergences, which introduces an energy scale @xmath ,
breaking the scale invariance of the classical Yang-Mills Lagrangian (at
zero current quark mass), in an anomalous fashion. We have sketched how
an effective quark theory can be approximately obtained from QCD by
eliminating gluonic degrees of freedom. This is slightly different from
the RG approach discussed in the first part of the thesis in which our
main goal was to eliminate the high-energy degrees of freedom. Having
said that, both have the same foundation, namely eliminating the
irrelevant degrees of freedom and as we already discussed can be
implemented at the same time.

Unfortunately, there is no economic way to derive effective theories
from QCD for a given system. Therefore, one may write down the most
general Lagrangian based on relevant degrees of freedom, having imposed
some general constraints such as symmetry properties. This approach was
introduced by Weinberg [ 100 ] and later by Gasser and Leutwyler [ 101 ]
. For an example, an effective chiral quark theory can be presented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the local chiral-invariant operators consisting of
quark fields and @xmath are dimensionless coupling constants. The theory
is only valid below the scale @xmath , and the momenta of the loop
integrals are cut off at @xmath . One may now truncate the above series
and by first obtaining the coupling constant through experimental input,
calculate other quantities. This EFT approach has been discussed in
detail in Ref. [ 101 ] .

### 4.4 Fierz-transformation and the effective quark interaction

The NJL model Lagrangian Eq. ( 4.29 ) contains the color octet flavor
singlet currents of quark. Since hadrons are color singlets, it is
desirable to recast the Lagrangian in such to act in color singlet
channels. This can be accomplished by a Fierz transformation, see e.g.,
Ref. [ 98 , 102 ] , using the relation

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.31)
  -- -- -- --------

If we take the interaction in @xmath channel, then the first part of the
above expression creates color singlet mesons, while the second part is
color octet. However, the signs behind the color singlet and the color
octet are opposite, therefore if we choose the negative sign for color
singlet (in the Lagrangian level), i.e. an attractive interaction, then
the interaction for color octet will be repulsive and consequently no
bound state exist for this channel consistent with nature. Moreover, at
large @xmath the color octet @xmath can be neglected. In the same
fashion one can recast the interaction in the @xmath channel. In order
to make a color-singlet baryon out of three quarks, we first couple two
quarks in the fundamental triplet representation @xmath which leads to
either a sextet @xmath or an antitriplet @xmath . But only an
antitriplet can be combined with another quark in @xmath to make a color
singlet state. Notice as well that @xmath is antisymmetric and @xmath is
symmetric in color quantum numbers. We can now use the following Fierz
transformation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is obvious that the interaction in the @xmath @xmath channel becomes
attractive, therefore diquark formation in @xmath is in principle
possible. In the same way, one can “Fierz” the flavor and Dirac quantum
numbers. For the meson channel we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that in contrast to color group @xmath the flavor group is @xmath
, hence the flavor generators includes @xmath . One may immediately read
off from the above decomposition that for @xmath , mesons occur as
nonets under flavor transformation. For the diquark channel we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the symmetric generators of @xmath , i. e. @xmath ,
and @xmath . The antisymmetric part @xmath stands for @xmath . Finally
the Dirac indices can be rearranged for meson channels by making use of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the diquark channel we employ

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the charge conjugate matrix. Using all the above
transformations, one can now rewrite the gluon exchange Lagrangian Eq. (
4.29 ) (for @xmath ) in the following compact form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the charge conjugate spinor spinor is given by @xmath and the
other notations are defined as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We will study with full detail the mesons, diquarks and the baryons
structures within a non-local version of the above Lagrangian in the
chapter 6.

Here some remarks are in order. First of all, the Fierz transformation
does not spoil chiral symmetry. The meson channel @xmath and diquark
@xmath are separately chirally invariant. The main difference between
mesonic and diquark interaction stems from the Pauli principle. The
diquark @xmath vertices are antisymmetric in color indices, hence the
Pauli principle requires a certain combinations of Dirac and flavor
vertices. Notice that for @xmath , one has to replace the factor @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath for meson and diquark channels, respectively.
This indicates that in large @xmath limit, the colored diquark channels
are suppressed by a @xmath factor and only color singlet mesons and
baryons survive. This is in accordance with Witten’s conjecture that in
the large- @xmath limit, QCD transforms into a theory of weakly
interacting mesons and baryons emerging as solitons of this theory [ 103
] . We will elaborate on this conjecture in the next chapter.

## Chapter 5 QCD inspired pictures for baryons

### 5.1 Introduction

Despite all efforts to describe hadron physics in terms of its
underlying QCD theory, a unified and unambiguous description of hadrons
is still missing. This is due to the complexities and the
non-perturbative features of low-energy sector of QCD which prohibits a
straightforward computation of hadronic properties in this regime. One
well-established method toward understanding the hadronic physics is the
use of QCD sum rules [ 104 ] , which aim to interpolate between the
calculable high-energy behaviour of the QCD and low-energy
phenomenology. Although this approach has been reasonably successful
phenomenologically, there are many uncertainties induced by the choice
and formulation of the phenomenological part, and the result can exhibit
a significant dependence on the mass scale at which the matching is
performed. More importantly, the confinement phenomenon and instanton
effects are not incorporated in this formalism. Another method is to
simulate QCD on a lattice of spacetime points. Some appreciable progress
has been made in ab initio calculations of low-lying baryon resonances
using lattice QCD simulation on a computer. This is limited by
computational resources. This leads to pion masses of usually more than
@xmath MeV (thus, the chiral point is not accessible in lattice QCD) or
to simulations within the quenched approximation, where sea quark
effects are neglected. Moreover, there is yet incomplete understanding
of systematic errors, e.g., finite-size effects ¹ ¹ 1 For understanding
QCD phase structure, one should describe the important non-perturbative
nature of QCD and the hot/dense QCD in a unified way. Thus far, lattice
regularization have not be able to overcome the issue associated with
the fact that at non-zero chemical potential the fermionic determinant
is complex. On the other hand due to computational difficulties, a
single lattice of equally spaced points is forced to span all distance
scale which does not allow a sequence of descriptions intermediate
between the constituent quark model and QCD. Full consideration of QCD
phase structure is not possible. Nevertheless, the effective field
theories approach based on simple models embodied essential ingredients
of QCD at low-energy to give a qualitative (and even sometimes
quantitative) prescription. .

Therefore, any models which simplify the QCD dynamics and is capable of
describing part of the hadronic physics (which might not be accessible
to ab initio methods, like lattice QCD) is greatly appreciated.

Our main goal in the following is to study baryon pictures in a
relativistic framework by employing only quark degrees of freedom. There
are two distinct possibilities to build a model for baryons, one is in
the limit of a large number of colors based on the picture of baryons as
soliton, the second one is to describe baryons in term of bound state of
a finite number of colors. The key ingredient of the former will be
introduced in section 5.2, and the latter will be described in sections
5.3,4.

### 5.2 Baryons as chiral solitons; Skyrme model

The idea to describe baryons as solitons was first introduced by Skyrme
[ 105 ] before the advent of the quarks and gluons. However, this was
not fully appreciated until the conjecture of Witten [ 103 ] . It was ’t
Hooft’s proposal that the inverse of the number of colors @xmath , can
be treated as an effective expansion parameter [ 106 ] . Later, Witten
pursued this idea and showed that QCD is reduced to an effective theory
of weakly interacting mesons (with an effective four-meson vertex
scaling like @xmath ), and that baryons emerge as soliton solutions of
this meson field without any further reference to their quark content [
103 ] . Since then, this subject has been well studied. Here, we
intended to explore this approach in a selective way, following Ref. [
107 ] closely .

At low-energy one expects that the effective meson theory is a type of
non-linear @xmath model with pions as the lighter mesons. We shall focus
on the massless two flavor model. One can combine the four fields @xmath
into one unitary @xmath matrix @xmath (chiral field) with only one
isovector field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the isovector @xmath contains the pauli matrices. In terms of
@xmath the non-linear @xmath model is defined by the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant. The elements of chiral @xmath transform any
chiral field as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary @xmath matrices. The Lagrangian
@xmath is invariant under such transformations. The vacuum configuration
( @xmath i.e. @xmath ) is only invariant under the coset @xmath which
reflects the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry. One can readily
construct the Noether current associated with the symmetry
transformation Eq. ( 5.3 ). The vector and axial-vector current
correspond to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The matrix element of
the axial-vector current between the vacuum and a one pion state relates
the unknown coefficient @xmath in Eq. ( 5.2 ) to the pion decay
constant. It turns out that @xmath MeV [ 107 , 108 ] .

Now, we want to find a solitonic solution for our meson theory. A
fundamental requirement for a solitonic solution of the equation of
motion is finiteness of energy. The static soliton configuration @xmath
represents mappings @xmath . A necessary condition is to require the
boundary condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that spatial infinity is mapped to one point in flavor space,
i.e. @xmath is compactified to the hypersphere @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which induces a topological invariant, the winding numbers. The
associated topological current has been given by Skyrme [ 105 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with conservation law @xmath . The integral over the zero component
defines the topological charge

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which as we will show, introduces the winding number @xmath . A static
configuration of the soliton is given by the spherically symmetric
hedgehog Ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to understand the geometrical meaning of the above Ansatz, we
use this expression to compute the topological charge from Eq. ( 5.7 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we imposed the boundary conditions @xmath and @xmath . Solitons
with different winding numbers are topologically distinct, and there
thus exists no continuous deformation connecting solitons of different
winding number. It has been conjectured by Skyrme [ 105 ] that the
topological current @xmath can be related to the baryon current and the
winding number with the baryon number.

One may scale the spatial coordinate @xmath in @xmath by @xmath i.e.
@xmath , this leads to scaling the potential part of Lagrangian Eq. (
5.2 ): @xmath . Therefore the minimal energy is only obtained for @xmath
, e. i., no stable solitons can be found and the soliton collapse to
zero size. However, if the Lagrangian contains a term containing
products of four spatial derivatives (but only quadratic in time
derivative for sake of quantization), it will scale as @xmath which
stabilizes at @xmath . A possible form of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an extra parameter which determines the size of the
particle.

A natural question is how baryons get their half integer spin and
isospin within soliton picture since the pion field possesses spin zero
and isospin one. An immediate answer is quantization. We refrain to go
through details here and concentrate only on main points. The time
dependent soliton solution should be obtained as a first step toward
quantization. However, such solutions are hardly available and one needs
to resort to an approximation. A reasonable Ansatz for such a
time-dependent solution is given by [ 107 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is referred to as the collective rotation and contains
collective coordinates (it can be parametrized in terms of Euler
angles). This Ansatz does not change the potential energy of the
hedgehog. The time derivative in the Lagrangian, produces terms which
represent the rotational energy of a rotating skyrmions. Having used
hedgehog properties and a suitable definition of angular velocities as
canonical variables, one can show that the absolute values of spin and
isospin are equal, @xmath , and the energy eigenvalues of the system
forms a rotational spectrum @xmath , where @xmath is the static energy
of the soliton and @xmath denotes the moment of inertia. One can
immediately observe that the quantum numbers of the low energy baryons
(e.g. the nucleon with @xmath and delta @xmath ) are consistent with
this picture. One of the obvious shortcomings of this presentation is
that it does not give any reason in favor or against half-integer or
integer values of @xmath for the quantized skyrmions. We will argue
later that the fermionic character of the quantized baryon can be
revealed in a model with @xmath symmetry by inclusion of the
Wess-Zumino-Witten term.

An extension of the theory to three flavors with chiral @xmath symmetry
is essential if one wants to consider the baryon octet and decuplet, see
for details Ref. [ 107 , 108 ] . We assume the generic form of the
underlying Lagrangian remains unchanged @xmath . However, the chiral
field @xmath needs to be increased to a @xmath field with the mesons
fields @xmath , which in addition to the pions, contains the kaons and
the octet component of the @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Gell-Mann matrices. The decay constants @xmath
are defined through the gradient expansion of the axial-vector current,
analogous to the case with only two flavors. In a similar fashion to the
two flavor case, one can obtain solitonic solutions of the theory and
quantization can be done by introducing the collective rotations.

In order to link the effective meson theory to QCD, one should firstly
consider if all symmetries of the Lagrangian @xmath are in accordance
with QCD. Witten [ 109 ] observed that the Lagrangian Eq. ( 5.2 )
possesses an extra discrete symmetry that is not a symmetry of QCD.
Under parity transformation @xmath , the pseudoscalar meson fields as
described by QCD should obey @xmath . In our meson theory this means,

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.13)
  -- -- -- --------

But it is obvious that the Lagrangian Eq. ( 5.2 ) is invariant under
@xmath and @xmath , separately. In order to break this unwanted
symmetry, one needs to add some extra term to the meson action.
Unfortunately, there exists no local term in four spacetime dimension
which can be added to the Lagrangian, so as to get rid of this separate
symmetry. However, it is very easy to look for such extra term by
considering the equation of motion. Witten [ 109 ] suggested that the
simplest term (with lowest possible number of derivatives) which needs
to be added are as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The new term is odd under @xmath while the first and
similar higher-order terms are even. However, the new term is even under
transformation @xmath while the first term is odd. Therefore, Eq. ( 5.14
) is invariant only under the combined action of @xmath Eq. ( 5.13 ).
The problem now is that the four-dimensional action corresponding to the
new extra term can not be written in a chirally invariant form. However,
this action can be rewritten in such a form in five dimensions.
Therefore, we extend the coordinate space to five-dimensional manifold
@xmath in such a way that our conventional four-dimensional spacetime
@xmath is the boundary of a five-dimensional volume i.e. @xmath .
Therefore, one can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action indeed leads to the equations of motion Eq. ( 5.14 ) where
written in four-dimensional spacetime by means of Stokes’theorem. Witten
in his remarkable paper [ 109 ] , argued that the coefficient @xmath in
above equation must be integer multiple of a normalization factor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is comprehensible, since the path-integral formulation requires the
action to be changed by a multiple of @xmath when going from @xmath to
its complement, which has the identical boundary with opposite
orientation. This is indeed in the same spirit of Dirac’s quantization
of a magnetic monopole. The physical meaning of the integer @xmath is
fixed through a connection to the Wess-Zumino action ² ² 2 The
Wess-Zumino action was introduced to account for anomalies which occur
through the renormalization of fermion loops in quantum field theories
where pseudoscalar mesons are coupled to fermions [ 110 ] . Witten
included the photon fields in a gauge invariant way which generates a
vertex for the decay @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the field strength tensor of the photon. One can
immediately compare this result with the well-known triangle anomaly in
QCD and find that @xmath . In this way, the effects of anomalies in QCD
are correctly reproduced by the action Eq. ( 5.15 ) which is called
Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) term. Notice that if one considers an adiabatic
@xmath rotation of the soliton, the WZW term produces a contribution
@xmath to the action while other terms do not contribute. Therefore, the
soliton acquires a phase @xmath for such a rotation as required for
fermions with @xmath odd or bosons with @xmath even. It is interesting
that for two flavours, this conclusion can not be made since the WZW
term is zero. Therefore, for three flavors, the WZW term provides some
hint about the statistical difference between baryons and mesons
(fermions or bosons). The fact that the Skyrme Lagrangian needs to be
augmented by the WZW term indicates that the underlying physics of the
Skyrme is a model of quarks and gluons which possess QCD properties.

As we discused in the last chapter, one of the simplest but viable quark
model at the present is the NJL model. The solitonic solutions of NJL
models have been extensively investigated [ 108 ] . Notice that, in
contrast to Skyrme-like models with infinite energy barriers separating
sectors with different winding numbers, chiral quark models, such as the
NJL models have finite energy barriers separating the different sectors,
and they give rise to so-called non-topological solitons.

Despite all appealing features of soliton models, there are some
shortcomings: It is well-known that solitonic models are not very
accurate, e.g., in leading order of @xmath , the quasi-classical soliton
configuration with quantized collective variables can produce baryonic
observables with errors of about @xmath , and corrections due to mesonic
fluctuations seem to be very important. Another point of weakness is
that exotic states are very controversial in these models ³ ³ 3 As Cohen
[ 111 ] argued the main reason is that the rigid-rotor quantization is
not valid for such states. In other words, the assumption that the
collective motion is orthogonal to vibrational motion is only true for
non-exotic motion, but the Wess-Zumino term induces mixing at leading
order between collective and vibrational motion with exotic quantum
numbers. Recent discovery of Pentaquark @xmath which was already
predicted based on soliton model have brought a lot of activity on this
subject. .

### 5.3 Bag models

In 1974 MIT group [ 86 ] developed a new picture of hadrons based on the
simple assumption that the physical vacuum prohibits free quarks and
gluons, but instead creates bubbles of hadronic size in which quarks and
gluons may propagate ordinarily. This idea has been employed in various
models: a hybrid bag model where the nucleon consists of a quark bag
surrounded by a meson cloud, the little bag model where in contrast to
the hybrid bag, pions are not allowed to propagate inside the bag, a
cloudy bag model where the mesons are constrained to the chiral circle
and are allowed inside bag, and finally the chiral bag model where the
constrained mesons outside bag are described by the Skyrme Lagrangian.
In all these models, there is one extra parameter in the model, the bag
radius, which provides some hint about the quark and pion distributions.
A review of various bag models can be found in Ref. [ 113 ] .

Chiral bag models seem to interpolate between two different aspects of
QCD, the long range-low energy (non-perturbative) and the small distance
(perturbative) behaviours. This idea was proposed by Rho et al [ 114 ] .
The very small volume @xmath represents the perturbative domain of QCD
containing quarks and gluons only, as opposed to its complementary piece
containing the confined phase of QCD with color-singlet objects such as
mesons,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where inside the bag we have massless quark fields @xmath and outside we
have chiral meson fields @xmath which obeys the Skyrme Lagrangian (for
simplicity the hedgehog configurations @xmath with spherical bags of
radius @xmath are assumed ). The boundary term cause the full Lagrangian
to be invariant under a combined chiral symmetry;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We already identified the topological charge carried by the meson field
as baryon number. On the other hand, the quarks inside the bag each
carry one third amount of baryon charge, therefore, it seems puzzling
that the total baryon number is not integral. Goldstone and Jaffe [ 115
] proved that a conjecture of Rho et al [ 114 ] that baryon number in
the hybrid model remains one is indeed right. The crucial observation
they made is that the charge of the vacuum baryon number, inside the bag
is changed due to boundary effects. This shows that the baryon number
remains one regardless of the profile of the Skyrme fields and the size
of bag. It was later proved that the total energy from bag, chiral
fields and vacuum (Casimir energy) is insensitive to the bag size as
well [ 116 ] . Therefore, it is tantalising to assume that observables
should not depend on the details of the bag (e.g., its size) also. This
statement is called “The Cheshire Cat Principle (CCP)” [ 117 ] .
Topological quantities, like the baryon number satisfy an exact CCP in
(3+1) dimensions while non-topological observables such as masses,
static properties and also non-static properties satisfy it
approximately well [ 117 ] .

The main problem with various bag models is that they are not fully
covariant and possible large modification of observables due to quantum
fluctuations make model prediction less reliable.

### 5.4 Diquark-quark picture; Relativistic Faddeev approach

In the previous sections, we reviewed the basic foundations of two well
established picture of baryons, motivated from QCD properties. Two main
shortcomings within these approaches, namely the uncertainty of computed
quantities and lack of covariance, make these not viable for
phenomenological usage in the intermediate-energy regime where a fully
covariant formulation is required. A new generation of continuous beam
facilities such as CEBAF at TJNAF, ELSA, COSY, MAMI, etc, which are
designed to explore the intermediate energy between non-perturbative and
perturbative regime of QCD, needs accurate covariant formulation to
describe the forthcoming data. The diquark-quark picture of baryons
based on a relativistic Faddeev approach, is a framework for such a
fully covariant approach. This approach has been extensively employed
during the last decade, and is phenomenologically very successful [ 118
, 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 125 ] . In this picture, a bound
state of a baryon ⁴ ⁴ 4 There is another very old-fashioned approach to
obtain baryon bound state which was invented in the early sixties, the
constituent quark models or quark potential models. In these models one
starts with simple potential e.g, the hyperfine type interaction and
employs 3-particle Schrödinger (or Dirac ) equation to obtain the
spectrum. This approach is not covariant and does not incorporate the
minimal field theoretical aspect of QCD, like quarks degree of freedom.
We refrain from discussing this approach here. is obtained as a pole of
the three-quark correlation by summing over infinitely many interaction
graphs. This process is very similar to obtaining a two-body bound state
which leads to the Bethe-Salpeter equation.

In the context of local quantum field theory, the few-body problem seems
to be ill-defined, since any restriction on degrees of freedom (e.g.,
particle numbers) may spoil the Lorentz invariance (e.g., on the
equal-time quantization, the boosts generators involve interactions and
change the number of particles, therefore limiting the number of
particles is against the Lorentz invariance). Nevertheless, we know from
a phenomenological point of view that a fixed number of constituent
quarks might be enough to describe baryons. Therefore, we introduce the
notion of baryon wave functions as matrix elements of three quark
operators between the physical vacuum @xmath and a (nucleon) bound state
@xmath ; @xmath . Having said that, QCD vacuum is non-perturbative and
indeed possesses non-trivial condensates, and thus the wave function
contains sea quark and gluonic parts. However, it may be reasonable to
ignore all other operator matrix elements which involve an arbitrary
number of quarks and gluons as irrelevant in comparison to the dominant
amplitude @xmath . One can now solve the three-body problem by means of
the Green’s function formulation of quantum field theory. As we will
show, the non-perturbative feature of the vacuum can then be effectively
incorporated into the formalism in a systematic fashion.

In the following we introduce an approximation scheme based on the
relativistic Faddeev approach to simplify the three-quark problem in
form of a diquark and quark interacting via quark exchange. For
simplicity, we use a formal presentation; all color, flavor and Dirac
indices are implicit in the single particle labels. We use a Euclidean
metric in momentum space. We denote a dressed single quark propagator by
@xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our definition of Green’s functions and bound state matrix elements,
we always take out one @xmath -function corresponding to conservation of
energy-momentum. We define the full quark six-point function (or the
three-quark correlation function) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three-quark correlation function satisfies the Dyson equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the disconnected three dressed quark propagator and
@xmath stands for the three-quark scattering kernel containing all two
and three-body irreducible diagrams. The symbol ” @xmath ” denotes
summation and integration over all internal and dummy indices. A bound
state of mass @xmath with wave function @xmath emerges as a pole of the
three-quark correlation function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and we defined @xmath as a three-body wave function which
represents the transition matrix element between the vacuum and a bound
state with mass @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now substitute the bound state parametrization Eq. ( 5.22 ) into
Eq. ( 5.21 ) and compare the residues. This leads to the homogeneous
bound state equation,

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.24)
  -- -- -- --------

Solving this equation exactly is almost impossible since neither the
detail of all two- and three-particle irreducible graphs appearing in
@xmath , nor the full dressed quark propagator contained in @xmath are
known. It is well known that the problem becomes more tractable if one
employs the Faddeev approximation, by discarding all three-body
irreducible graphs from the interaction kernel @xmath . In this way one
can write the kernel as a sum of three two-body interaction kernels,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath refers to the interactions of quark pairs
@xmath with a spectator quark @xmath . The two-quark propagators @xmath
satisfy their own Dyson equation with kernel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in three-body space, since @xmath is
defined in three-body space. Hence, the former contains a factor @xmath
(the propagator of the spectator quark), and the latter contains a
factor @xmath i.e., @xmath . One may associate a disconnected scattering
amplitude to every spectator quark @xmath , i.e. @xmath , where @xmath
describes the scattering between the quarks @xmath and @xmath in
two-quark subspace. The matrix @xmath is obtained by amputating all
incoming and outgoing quark legs from the connected part of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

By combining the two previous equations, the Dyson equation for @xmath
can be found as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we define Faddeev components @xmath via Eqs. ( 5.24 , 5.25 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have @xmath . We rewrite the Eqs. ( 5.27 ) as @xmath and plug
this expression into Eq. ( 5.29 ) and make use of Eq. ( 5.26 ). We then
find the well-known Faddeev bound state equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have shown that the complicated three-quark problem can be
systematically simplified by employing the full two-quark correlation
function @xmath , instead of the kernel @xmath . In this way the eight
dimensional Eq. ( 5.24 ) is reduced to a set of coupled four-dimensional
equations ( 5.30 ). A further simplification of this equation can be
achieved by approximating the full two-quark correlation @xmath as a sum
of separable correlations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath is the vertex function of two-quark with a
diquark and @xmath denotes its complex conjugate. The index “ @xmath ”
denotes the different channels of the diquarks, and @xmath is the
corresponding diquark propagator. Note that separability implies that
@xmath does not depend on any of the scalar products @xmath . The
diquarks parametrization to some extend contains the unknown
non-perturbative physics within the baryon structure. A natural Ansatz
for the Faddeev component @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where summation over repeated indices is assumed. The Greek
multi-indices @xmath denote color, flavor and Dirac indices, and @xmath
indicate the type of quarks. The quark @xmath and diquark labels @xmath
are fixed. The quantity @xmath is the baryon-quark-diquark vertex
function and depends only on the relative momentum between the momentum
of the spectator quark, @xmath and the momentum of the diquark
quasi-particle, @xmath . In a relativistic formulation of a few-body
system there is no unique definition of the momentum transfered between
individual particles. Therefore, we introduce a new parameter @xmath
which parametrises this ambiguity and shows the distribution of the
total momentum within the system (diquark and quark). We define a
relative momentum between the quark @xmath and the diquark consisting of
the quarks @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The physical properties of the baryons will indeed not
depend on @xmath . One can employ the definition of ( 5.32 ) to rewrite
the Faddeev equation ( 5.30 ) in terms of a vertex function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above derivation we assumed that the quark-diquark vertex
function is antisymmetric under the exchange of the quark labels (
@xmath ) as a consequence of the Pauli exclusion principle. Eq. ( 5.34 )
resembles a Bethe-Salpeter equation; the first bracket can be conceived
as a quark-diquark interaction kernel since it contains the exchange of
a single quark between a quark and a diquark, the second term couples
the interaction kernel to baryon-quark-diquark vertex via diquarks and
quarks propagator.

For identical quarks the antisymmetrization of the vertex functions is
essential, we can now sum over the type of particle and drop the index
like @xmath . Therefore, equation ( 5.34 ) can be rewritten as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we define the spectator quark and diquark momenta as @xmath ,
@xmath , respectively. Momentum conservation fixes the momentum of
exchanged quark @xmath , see fig. 5.1. The factor of two in the above
presentation originates from the summation over the type of quarks and
can be absorbed into the definition of diquark propagator.

In conclusion, we managed to recast the three-body Faddeev equation in
the form of an effective two-body Bethe-Salpeter equation between the
diquarks and the quarks, having summed over the ladder-type quark
exchange diagrams between the quarks and the diquarks. The only
assumptions we have made are; 1) we neglect all three-particle
irreducible contributions 2) we model the connected two-body correlation
as a sum of separable terms which are identified by diquark channels,
see Eq. ( 5.31 ). In order to obtain an equation for physical baryons,
we have to project Eq. ( 5.34 ) onto the baryon quantum numbers. This
will be carried out for a model in the next section.

## Chapter 6 Baryons structure in a non-local quark confining NJL model

### 6.1 Introduction

The NJL model is a successful (low-energy) phenomenological field theory
inspired by QCD [ 98 ] . The model is constructed to obey the basic
symmetries of QCD in the quark sector, but unlike the case of low-energy
QCD, quarks are not confined. The basic ingredient of the model, apart
from the standard bilinear Lagrangian in the quark fields, is a
zero-range interaction containing four fermion fields. This means that
the model is not renormalizable. If we make the standard one over the
number of colours ( @xmath ) loop expansion, already at one-loop level
an ultraviolet subtraction (usually implemented by a cut-off)
supplemented with a regularisation method is required. The value of the
cut-off can be related to the scale of physical processes not included
in the model, and thus determines its range of validity. Consequently,
processes involving a large momentum transfer, such as anomalous decay,
can not be described by the model. At higher orders in the loop
expansion, which are necessary for calculating mesonic (baryonic)
fluctuations [ 126 , 127 ] , one needs extra cut-off parameters. It is
hard to determine these parameters from independent physics, and thus to
build a viable phenomenology. A similar problem appears in the
diquark-quark picture of baryons where an additional cut-off parameter
is required to regularise the diquark-quark loops [ 127 ] . It has been
shown that a renormalizable extension of the NJL model (at least to
one-loop level) [ 128 ] can be constructed by matching the NJL-contact
interaction at low energy with a one-gluon exchange type interaction
above the Landau pole. Another way to cope with the
non-renormalisability of the model is to embed this model into a
renormalizable theory such as the linear @xmath -model and apply a
renormalisation group approach [ 129 , 130 ] . However, all these
approaches add extra complexity which make them difficult to apply for
anything but very simple problems.

Another drawback of the model is the absence of confinement, which makes
it questionable for the description of few-quark states and for quark
matter. If energetically allowed, the mesons of the model can decay into
free quark-antiquark pairs, and the presence unphysical channel is
another limitation of the applicability of NJL model. At the same time,
it is also known that the NJL model exhibits a zero-temperature phase
transition at unrealistically low baryon density [ 102 ] . This problem
is caused by the formation of unphysical coloured diquark states. These
may be explicitly excluded at zero density by a projection onto the
physical channels, but dominate the behaviour at finite density. The
model is not able to describe nuclear matter, even in the low-density
regime [ 131 ] .

We do not know how to implement colour confinement in the model and,
anyway, the exact confining mechanism of QCD is still unknown. In the
context of an effective quark theory, a slightly different mechanism of
“quark confinement” can be described by a quark propagator which
vanishes due to infra-red singularities [ 132 ] or when it does not
produce any poles corresponding to asymptotic quark states [ 133 , 90 ]
. Another realisation of quark confinement can be found in Ref. [ 134 ]
. It has been shown that a non-local covariant extension of the NJL
model inspired by the instanton liquid model [ 99 ] can lead to quark
confinement for acceptable values of the parameters [ 135 ] . Here the
quark propagator has no real pole, and consequently quarks do not appear
as asymptotic states. The quark propagator has infinitely many pairs of
complex poles corresponding to quarks which have a finite lifetime. This
phenomenon was also noticed in Schwinger-Dyson equation studies in QED
and QCD [ 136 , 137 , 138 ] .

We can simply accept the appearance of these poles as an artifact of the
naive truncation scheme involved. However, it has been recently
suggested that it might be a genuine feature of the full theory, and be
connected with the underlying confinement mechanism [ 137 , 138 ] . For
example, it has been shown by Maris that if we remove the confining
potential in QED in 2+1D the mass singularities are located almost on
the time axis, and if there is a confining potential, the mass-like
singularities move from the time axis to complex momenta [ 138 ] . In
this chapter, we study this kind of confinement from another viewpoint.
We show that when we have quark confinement in the non-local NJL model,
the baryons become more compact, compared to a situation where we have
only real poles for quark propagator.

There are several other advantages of the non-local version of the model
over the local NJL model: the dynamical quark mass is momentum-dependent
and also found in lattice simulations of QCD [ 139 ] . More importantly,
the non-locality regularises the model preserving anomalies [ 135 ] ,
and the regulator makes the theory finite to all orders in the @xmath
expansion, and leads to small next-to-leading order corrections [ 140 ]
. As a result, the non-local version of the NJL model may have more
predictive power.

The instanton-liquid model is only one way to motivate such a model [ 99
] . Many effective field theories constructed by the Wilsonian
renormalisation group approach lead to a non-locality, at least as
irrelevant terms in the renormalisation group sense. Non-locality also
emerges naturally in the Schwinger-Dyson resummation [ 90 ] .
Considerable work has been done on these nonlocal NJL models including
applications to the mesonic sector [ 135 , 141 ] , phase transitions at
finite temperature and densities [ 142 ] , and the study of chiral
solitons [ 143 ] .

In this chapter we present our first results from a calculation of the
relativistic Faddeev equation for a non-local NJL model [ 144 ] , based
on the covariant diquark-quark picture of baryons [ 118 , 119 , 120 ,
121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 125 ] . Such an approach has been extensively
employed to study baryons in the local NJL model, see, e.g., Refs. [ 118
, 119 , 120 , 121 ] . We include both scalar and the axial-vector
diquark correlations. We do not assume a special form for the
interaction Lagrangian, but we rather treat the coupling in the diquark
channels as free parameters and consider the range of coupling strengths
which lead to a reasonable description of the nucleon. We construct
diquark and nucleon solutions and study the possible implications of the
quark confinement in the solutions. Due to the separability of the
non-local interaction, the Faddeev equations can be reduced to a set of
effective Bethe-Salpeter equations. This makes it possible to adopt the
numerical method developed for such problems in Refs. [ 122 , 123 , 124
, 125 ] .

### 6.2 A non-local NJL model

We consider a non-local NJL model Lagrangian with @xmath symmetry.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the current quark mass of the @xmath and @xmath quarks
and @xmath is a chirally invariant non-local interaction Lagrangian.
Here we restrict the interaction terms to four-quark interaction
vertices.

There exist several versions of such non-local NJL models. Regardless of
what version is chosen, by a Fierz transformation one can rewrite the
interaction in either the @xmath or @xmath channels, and we therefore
use the interaction strengths in those channels as independent
parameters. For simplicity we truncate the mesonic channels to the
scalar ( @xmath ) and pseudoscalar ( @xmath ) ones. The @xmath
interaction is truncated to the scalar ( @xmath ) and axial vector (
@xmath ) colour @xmath @xmath channels (the colour @xmath channels do
not contribute to the colourless three-quark state considered here). We
parametrise the relevant part of interaction Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (6.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The matrices @xmath project onto the colour @xmath
channel with normalisation @xmath and the @xmath ’s are flavour @xmath
matrices with @xmath . The object @xmath is the charge conjugation
matrix.

Since we do not restrict ourselves to specific choice of interaction, we
shall treat the couplings @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as independent
parameters. We assume @xmath , which leads to attraction in the given
channels (and repulsion in the @xmath colour octet and @xmath colour
antisextet channels). The coupling parameter @xmath is responsible for
the pions and their isoscalar partner @xmath . The coupling strengths
@xmath and @xmath specify the behaviour in the scalar and axial-vector
diquark channel, respectively.

For simplicity, we assume the form factor @xmath to be local in momentum
space, since it leads to a separable interaction

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is exactly this separability that is also present in the instanton
liquid model [ 145 ] . The dressed quark propagator @xmath is now
constructed by means of a Schwinger-Dyson equation (SDE) in the
rainbow-ladder approximation. Thus the dynamical constituent quark mass,
arising from spontaneously broken chiral symmetry, is obtained in
Hartree approximation ¹ ¹ 1 Notice that as we demonstrated in section
4.4, the exchange diagrams (for four-fermion interactions) can always be
cast in form of direct diagram via a Fierz transformation. This means,
the Hartree-Fock approximation is equivalent to the Hartree
approximation with properly redefining coupling constants. Therefore,
Hartree approximation is as good as Hartree-Fock one as long as the
interaction terms in Lagrangian are not fixed by some underlying theory.
(the symbol @xmath denotes a trace over flavour, colour and Dirac
indices and @xmath denotes a trace over Dirac indices only)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can simplify this equation by writing @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-linear equation can then be solved iteratively for @xmath .

Following Ref. [ 135 ] , we choose the form factor to be Gaussian in
Euclidean space, @xmath , where @xmath is a cutoff of the theory. If one
assumes that @xmath is related to the average inverse size of instantons
@xmath , then its value parametrises aspects of the non-perturbative
properties of the QCD vacuum [ 99 ] . This choice respects Poincaré
invariance and for certain values of the parameters it leads to quark,
but not colour, confinement. For values of @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

the dressed quark propagator has no poles at real @xmath in Minkowski
space ( @xmath ). The propagator has infinitely many pairs of complex
poles, both for confining and non-confining parameter sets. This is a
feature of these models and due care should be taken in handling such
poles, which can not be associated with asymptotic states if the theory
is to satisfy unitarity. One should note that the positions of these
poles depend on the details of the chosen form factor and the cut-off,
hence one may regard them as a pathology of the regularisation scheme.
Since the choice of the cut-off is closely related to the truncation of
the mesonic channels, (for example, if one allows mixing of channels,
the cut-off and the positions of poles will change. In Fig.  6.5 we have
shown the positions of the first poles of the quark propagator for
various cutoff. We have examined that in the presence of @xmath mixing,
these positions will change, but it follows very similar trend). Even
though the confinement in this model has no direct connection to the
special properties of the pion, there is an indirect connection through
the determination of the parameters from the pionic properties.

From the gap equation Eq. ( 6.4 ) one can show that dynamical symmetry
breaking occurs for @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the
number of colours and flavours, respectively. For @xmath fermions become
massive and the vacuum accommodates a non-vanishing condensate @xmath ,
and consequently there exists a massless Nambu-Goldstone boson, see
Fig 6.1.

### 6.3 Meson channel

The quark-antiquark @xmath -matrix in the pseudoscalar channel can be
solved by using the Bethe-Salpeter equation in the random phase
approximation (RPA), as shown in Fig. 6.2 , see Ref. [ 135 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath denotes the total momentum of the @xmath pair. The pion
mass @xmath corresponds to the pole of @xmath -matrix. One immediately
finds that @xmath if the current quark mass @xmath is zero, in
accordance with Goldstone’s theorem. The residue of the @xmath -matrix
at this pole has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the pion-quark-antiquark coupling constant and is
related to the corresponding loop integral @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath can be regarded as a pion wavefunction
renormalisation constant. For space-time dimension @xmath , one can show
@xmath (for the local NJL model we have @xmath ), therefore in the
continuum limit @xmath we have @xmath which is precisely the
compositeness condition [ 146 ] . In this extreme limit pions become
pointlike. The cutoff for spacetime @xmath can be removed only at the
expense of making the theory trivial in the continuum limit. It has been
shown that for four-fermion theories the renormalisability,
nontriviality and compositeness are intimately related [ 130 , 147 ] .

The pion decay constant @xmath is obtained from the coupling of the pion
to the axial-vector current. Notice that due to the non-locality the
axial-vector current is modified [ 135 , 148 ] and consequently the
one-pion-to-vacuum matrix element gets the additional contribution shown
in Fig. 6.3 . This new term is essential in order to maintain
Gell-Mann-Oakes-Renner relation [ 135 ] and makes a significant
contribution. The pion decay constant is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 6.10 ), with notation @xmath .

Our model contains five parameters: the current quark mass @xmath , the
cutoff ( @xmath ), the coupling constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
We first fix @xmath and the current quark mass @xmath for arbitrary
values of @xmath by fitting @xmath and @xmath to their empirical values.
In this way, we can consider the entire parameter space of the model.
The corresponding solution of gap equation are shown in Fig. 6.4. In the
left panel the constituent mass @xmath at zero momentum is shown as a
function of the cutoff. It is obvious that for very small cutoff, there
is no solution for the gap equation. On the right panel of Fig. 6.4, we
show the corresponding values of the quark condensate. The quark
condensate @xmath is closely related to the gap equation Eq ( 6.4 ). In
the latter there appears an extra form factor inside the loop integral.
The quark condensate with non-zero current-quark mass is quadratically
divergent and is regulated by a subtraction of its perturbative value.
These values can fall within the limits extracted from QCD sum rules
@xmath at a renormalisation scale of @xmath GeV [ 149 ] and lattice
calculation [ 150 ] , having in mind that QCD condensate is a
renormalised and scale-dependent quantity. In right-hand side of
Fig. 6.1 we show the quark condensate with respect to current quark mass
for various parameter sets, it is seen that for large coupling (or large
@xmath ), the magnitude of quark condensate decreases as the current
quark mass increases. This feature is consistent with the behaviours of
lattice and sum rule results.

We analyse two sets of parameters, see Table 6.1 . The set @xmath is a
non-confining parameter set, while set @xmath leads to quark confinement
(i.e., it satisfies the condition Eq. ( 6.7 ). The quark condensate in
the chiral limit is @xmath and @xmath for sets A and B, respectively. At
non-zero current quark mass one obtains @xmath and @xmath for sets A and
B respectively. The position of the quark poles are given in Table 6.2
for two sets of parameters. In Fig. 6.5 we show the position of the
first pole of quark propagator with respect to various cutoff, which
indicates that for large cutoff, we have only real poles and we have
indeed complex poles for reasonable range of cutoff. The real part of
the first pole of dressed quark propagator can be considered in much the
same as the quark mass in the ordinary NJL model. Since we do not
believe in on-shell quarks or quark resonances, this is also a measure
for a limit on the validity of the theory. The real part of the first
quark propagator pole @xmath is larger than the constituent quark mass
at zero momentum @xmath , as can be seen in Table 6.1 .

As we will see the mass @xmath appears as an important parameter in
diquark and nucleon solution rather than the constituent quark mass. The
same feature has been seen in the studies of the soliton in this model,
where @xmath determines the stability of the soliton [ 143 ] . In
contrast to the local NJL model, here the dynamical quark mass Eq. ( 6.6
) is momentum dependent and follows a trend similar to that estimated
from lattice simulations [ 139 ] . Although this is less fundamental
since one is free to choose the form factor, nevertheless the quark mass
is a gauge dependent object and is not directly observable.

The parameters @xmath and @xmath are yet to be determined, we shall
treat them as free parameters, which allows us to analyse baryon
solutions in terms of a complete set of couplings. The coupling-constant
dependence appears through the ratios @xmath and @xmath .

### 6.4 Diquark channels

In the rainbow-ladder approximation the scalar @xmath @xmath -matrix can
be calculated from a very similar diagram to that shown in Fig. 6.2 (the
only change is that the anti-quark must be replaced by a quark with
opposite momentum). It can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total momentum of the @xmath pair, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (6.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the above equation the quark propagators @xmath are the solution of
the rainbow SDE Eq. ( 6.5 ). The denominator of Eq. ( 6.14 ) is the same
as in the expression for the pion channel, Eq. ( 6.8 ), if @xmath . One
may thus conclude that at @xmath the diquark and pion are degenerate.
This puts an upper limit to the choice of @xmath , since diquarks should
not condense in vacuum.

One can approximate @xmath by an effective diquark exchange between the
external quarks, and parametrise @xmath around the pole as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scalar diquark mass, defined as the position of the
pole of @xmath . The strength of the on-shell coupling of scalar diquark
to quarks, @xmath is related to the polarisation operator @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the ratio between the exact @xmath -matrix and on-shell
approximation. It is obvious that we should have @xmath .

Here, there is no mixing between the axial-vector diquark channel with
others, therefore in the same way one can write the axial-vector diquark
@xmath -matrix in a similar form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (6.18)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we prefer to decompose the axial polarisation tensor into
longitudinal and transverse channels as well,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We find that the longitudinal channel does not produce a pole (see Fig.
6.6 ), and thus the bound axial-vector diquark solution corresponds to a
pole of the transverse @xmath -matrix. The transverse component of
@xmath matrix is now approximated by @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath includes the off-shell contribution to the @xmath -matrix.
The coupling constant @xmath is related to the residue at the pole of
the @xmath -matrix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.4.1 Diquark Solution

The loop integrations in Eq. ( 6.15 , 6.20 ) are evaluated in Euclidean
space ² ² 2 We work in Euclidean space with metric @xmath and a
hermitian basis of Dirac matrices @xmath , with a standard transcription
rules from Minkowski to Euclidean momentum space: @xmath , @xmath . For
the current model, the usual analytic continuation of amplitudes from
Euclidean to Minkowski space can not be used. This is due to the fact
that quark propagators of the model contain many poles at complex
energies leading to opening of a threshold for decay of a diquark (or
meson) into other unphysical states. Any theory of this type need to be
equipped with an alternative continuation prescription consistent with
unitarity and macrocausality. Let us define a fictitious two-body
threshold as twice @xmath . For a confining parameter set, each quark
propagator has a pair of complex-conjugate poles. Above the two-body
pseudo-threshold @xmath , where @xmath is meson (diquark) momentum, the
first pair of complex poles of the quark propagator has a chance to
cross the real axis. According to the Cutkosky prescription [ 151 ] , if
one is to preserve the unitarity and the microcausality, the integration
contour should be pinched at that point. In this way, one can ensure
that there is no spurious @xmath (or @xmath ) production threshold, for
energies below the next pseudo-threshold, i.e. twice the real part of
the second pole of the quark propagator. Note that it has been shown [
152 ] that the removal of the @xmath pseudo-threshold is closely related
to the existence of complex poles in the form of complex-conjugate
pairs. Since there is no unique analytical continuation method available
for such problems, any method must be regarded as a part of the model
assumptions [ 135 , 141 , 152 ] . Here, we follow the method used in
Ref. [ 135 ] .

We use the parameter sets determined in the mesonic sector shown in
table 6.1 . Our numerical computation is valid below the first @xmath
pseudo-threshold. Note that the longitudinal polarisability @xmath
defined in Eq. ( 6.20 ) does not vanish here. However this term can
probably be ignored since it does produce any poles in the @xmath
-matrix, and moreover there is no conserved current associated to this
channel. We find that for a wide range of @xmath and @xmath , for all
parameter sets, a bound scalar and axial-vector diquark exist (the
results for additional sets can be found in [ 32 ] ). This is in
contrast to the normal NJL model where a bound axial-vector diquark
exists only for very strong interaction [ 120 ] . The diquark masses for
various values of @xmath and @xmath are plotted in Fig. 6.7 . As already
pointed out, the scalar diquark mass is equal to the pion mass at @xmath
. It is obvious from Fig. 6.7 that for @xmath the axial-vector diquark
is heavier than the scalar diquark, and consequently is rather loosely
bound. For very small @xmath and @xmath one finds no bound state of
either diquark. This kind of diquark confinement is due to the screening
effect of the ultraviolet cutoff and can not be associated with
confinement in QCD which originates from the infrared divergence of the
gluon and ghost propagators. Having said that, it is possible that real
diquark confinement may arise beyond the ladder approximation [ 154 ] .
There, in order to preserve Goldstone’s theorem at every order, we must
include additional terms in the interaction. Although these new terms
should have minimal impact on the solutions for the colour-singlet meson
channels, they can provide a repulsive contribution to the
colour-antitriplet diquark channels which removes the asymptotic-diquark
solutions from the spectrum. This would indicate that diquark
confinement is an independent phenomenon and is not related to the
particular realisation of quark confinement.

One should note that the nucleon bound state in the diquark-quark
picture does not require asymptotic-diquark states since the diquark
state is merely an intermediate device which simplifies the three-body
problem. Nevertheless, evidence for correlated diquark states in baryons
is found in deep-inelastic lepton scatterings and in hyperon weak decays
[ 157 ] . At the same time, diquarks appear as bound states in many
phenomenological models. It is puzzling that diquarks are even seen in
lattice calculations [ 155 , 156 ] . In contrast to our perception of
QCD colour confinement, the corresponding spectral functions for these
supposedly confined objects in the colour anti-triplet channel are very
similar to mesonic ones [ 156 ] .

In Fig. 6.8 , we show the scalar diquark-quark-quark coupling defined in
Eq. ( 6.17 ) with respect to various scalar diquark couplings. A
pronounced change in behaviour around the quark-quark pseudo-threshold
is observed in the confining set @xmath , and this seems to justify our
emphasis on the pseudo-threshold defined by twice the real part of the
quark pole.

Next we study the off-shell behaviour of the diquark @xmath -matrix. In
Fig. 6.9 we show the discrepancy between the exact @xmath -matrix and
the on-shell approximation @xmath . At the pole we have by definition
that @xmath . We see that elsewhere the off-shell contribution is very
important due to the non-locality of our model. We find that the bigger
the diquark mass is, the bigger the off-shell contribution. The
off-shell behaviour of the scalar and the axial-vector channel for both
parameter sets @xmath and @xmath are rather similar.

### 6.5 Three-body sector

In order to make three-body problem tractable, we discard any
three-particle irreducible graphs (this is sometimes called the Faddeev
approximation). The relativistic Faddeev equation can be then written as
an effective two-body BS equation for a quark and a diquark due to the
locality of the form factor in momentum space (see Eq. ( 6.3 )) and
accordingly the separability of the two-body interaction in
momentum-space. We adopt the formulation developed by the Tübingen group
[ 122 , 123 , 124 ] to solve the resulting BS equation. In the following
we work in momentum space with Euclidean metric. The BS wave function
for the octet baryons can be presented in terms of scalar and
axialvector diquarks correlations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a basis of positive-energy Dirac spinors of spin @xmath
in the rest frame. The parameters @xmath and @xmath are the relative and
total momenta in the quark-diquark pair, respectively. The Mandelstam
parameter @xmath describes how the total momentum of the nucleon @xmath
is distributed between quark and diquark.

One may alternatively define the vertex function associated with @xmath
by amputating the external quark and diquark propagators (the legs) from
the wave function;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Euclidean versions of the diquark and quark
propagators which are obtained by the standard transcription rules from
the expressions in Minkowski space, Eqs. ( 6.16 , 6.21 ) and Eq. ( 6.5
), respectively. The spectator quark momentum @xmath and the diquark
momentum @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with similar expressions for @xmath , where we replace @xmath by @xmath
on the right-hand side. In the ladder approximation, the coupled system
of BS equations for octet baryon wave functions and their vertex
functions takes the compact form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the kernel of the nucleon BS equation representing
the exchange quark within the diquark with the spectator quark (see
Fig. 5.1), and in the colour singlet and isospin @xmath channel we find
(see Ref. [ 120 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath (and their adjoint @xmath and @xmath ) stand for
the Dirac structures of the scalar and the axial-vector
diquark-quark-quark vertices and can be read off immediately from Eqs. (
6.13 , 6.16 ) and Eqs. ( 6.18 , 6.21 ), respectively. Therefore we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We have used an improved on-shell approximation for the contribution of
diquark @xmath -matrix occurring in the Faddeev equations. Instead of
the exact diquark @xmath -matrices we use the on-shell approximation
with a correction of their off-shell contribution through @xmath . What
is neglected is then the contribution to the @xmath -matrix beyond the
pseudo-threshold. As we will see this approximation is sufficient to
obtain a three-body bound state. In order to evaluate the structure of
the diquark @xmath -matrix completely, one normally employs the
dispersion relation, however, this is not applicable here, due to
non-analyticity of the diquark @xmath matrix. Notice, as we already
pointed out for the confining set B, we do not have @xmath continuum,
however, there exists many complex poles beyond the pseudo-threshold
which might be ignored, provided that they lie well above the energies
of interest.

The relative momentum of quarks in the diquark vertices @xmath and
@xmath are defined as @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The momentum
@xmath of the incoming diquark and the momentum @xmath of the outgoing
diquark are defined in Eq. ( 6.27 ) (see Fig. 5.1). The momentum of the
exchanged quark is fixed by momentum conservation at @xmath .

It is interesting to note the non-locality of the diquark-quark-quark
vertices naturally provides a sufficient regularisation of the
ultraviolet divergence in the diquark-quark loop. In the expressions for
the momenta we have introduced two independent Mandelstam parameters
@xmath , which can take any value in @xmath . They parametrise different
definitions of the relative momentum within the quark-diquark ( @xmath )
or the quark-quark system ( @xmath ). Observables should not depend on
these parameters if the formulation is Lorentz covariant. This means
that for every BS solution @xmath there exists a equivalent family of
solutions. This provides a stringent check on calculations, see the next
section for details.

We now constrain the Faddeev amplitude to describe a state of positive
energy, positive parity and spin @xmath . The parity condition can be
immediately reduced to a condition for the BS wave function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . In order to ensure the
positive energy condition, we project the BS wave function with the
positive-energy projector @xmath , where the hat denotes a unit four
vector (in rest frame we have @xmath ). Now we expand the BS wave
function @xmath in Dirac space @xmath . The above-mentioned conditions
reduce the number of independent component from sixteen to eight, two
for the scalar diquark channel, @xmath and six for the axial-diquark
channel, @xmath . The most general form of the BS wave function is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.32)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here we write @xmath . The subscript @xmath denotes the component of a
four-vector transverse to the nucleon momentum, @xmath . In the same
way, one can expand the vertex function @xmath in Dirac space, and since
the same constraints apply to the vertex function, we obtain an
expansion quite similar to Eq. ( 6.32 ), with new unknown coefficients
@xmath and @xmath which are substituted the coefficients @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The unknown scalar function @xmath and @xmath
depend on the two scalars which can be built from the nucleon momentum
@xmath and relative momentum @xmath , @xmath (the cosine of the
four-dimensional azimuthal angle of @xmath ) and @xmath .

In the nucleon rest frame, one can rewrite the Faddeev amplitude in
terms of tri-spinors each possessing definite orbital angular momentum
and spin [ 122 ] . It turns out that these tri-spinors can be written as
linear combinations of the eight components defined in Eq. ( 6.32 ).
Thus from knowledge of @xmath and @xmath , a full partial wave
decomposition can be immediately obtained [ 122 ] . Notice that although
the diquarks are not pointlike objects here, they do not carry orbital
angular momentum i. e. @xmath . This is due to the fact that the
off-shell contribution @xmath is a function of scalar @xmath . Moreover,
the form factor in our model Lagrangian is also scalar, hence the total
momentum dependent part of the diquark-quark-quark vertices are scalar
functions and carry no orbital angular momentum. Therefore, the partial
wave decomposition obtained in Ref. [ 122 ] for pointlike diquarks can
be used here. Note that no such partial wave decomposition can be found
if one uses the BS vertex function @xmath since the axial-vector diquark
propagator mixes the space component of the vertex function and time
component of the axial-vector diquark.

#### 6.5.1 Numerical method for the coupled BS equations

For solving the BS equations we use the algorithm introduced by Oettel
et al [ 125 ] . The efficiency of this algorithm has already been
reported in several publications, see for example Refs. [ 122 , 123 ,
124 ] . We will focus here only on the key ingredients of this method.
The momentum dependence of quark mass in our model increases the
complexity of the computation significantly.

As usual, we work in the rest frame of the nucleon @xmath . In this
frame we are free to chose the spatial part of the relative momentum
@xmath parallel to the third axis. Thus the momenta @xmath and @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we write @xmath and @xmath . The wave function Eq. ( 6.32 )
consists of @xmath -blocks in Dirac space can be simplified to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The great advantage of this representation is that the scalar and the
axial-vector components are decoupled. Therefore the BS equation
decomposes into two sets of coupled equations, two for the scalar
diquark channel and six for the axial diquark channel. We expand the
vertex (wave) functions in terms of Chebyshev polynomials of the first
kind, which are closely related to the expansion into hyperspherical
harmonics. This decomposition turns out to be very efficient for such
problems [ 122 , 123 , 124 , 125 ] . Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Chebyshev polynomial of the first kind. We use a
generic notation, the functions @xmath ( and @xmath ) substituting the
function @xmath (and @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We truncate the Chebyshev expansions involved in @xmath and @xmath at
different orders @xmath and @xmath , respectively. We also expand the
quark and diquark propagators into Chebyshev polynomials. In this way
one can separate the @xmath and @xmath dependence in Eqs. ( 6.28 – 6.24
). Using the orthogonality relation between the Chebyshev polynomials,
one can reduce the four dimensional integral equation into a system of
coupled one-dimensional equations. Therefore one can rewrite Eqs. ( 6.24
, 6.28 ) in the matrix form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the matrix elements of the propagator and the
quark exchange matrices, respectively. The indices @xmath give the
Chebyshev moments and @xmath denote the individual channels. To solve
Eq. ( 6.37 ), we first rewrite it in the form of linear eigenvalue
problem. Schematically

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the constraint that @xmath at @xmath . This can be used to
determine the nucleon mass @xmath iteratively.

As already pointed out the BS solution should be independent of the
Mandelstam parameters @xmath . As can be seen in Fig. 6.10 , there is
indeed a large plateau for the @xmath dependence if we use a high
cut-off on the Chebyshev moments. The limitations on the size of this
area of stability can be understood by considering where the calculation
contains singularities due to quark and diquark poles,

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

A similar plateau has been found in other applications [ 122 , 123 , 124
] . [Other complex poles lies out side the minimal region given in Eq. (
6.39 ).] The singularities in the quark-exchange propagator put another
constraint on the acceptable range of @xmath ; @xmath . No such
constraint exists for @xmath , which relates to the relative momentum
between two quarks. To simplify the algebra we take @xmath .

In what follows we use a momentum mesh of @xmath for @xmath , mapped in
a non-linear way to a finite interval. In the non-singular regime of
Mandelstam parameter @xmath Eq. ( 6.39 ), the Faddeev solution is almost
independent of the upper limit on the Chebyshev expansion, and for
@xmath , see the Fig. 6.10 , this seems to be satisfied. This limit is
some higher than the reported values for simple models [ 122 , 123 , 124
, 125 ] .

#### 6.5.2 Nucleon Solution

In order to understand the role of the axial diquark in nucleon
solution, we first consider the choice @xmath . For this case we find
that the non-confining set A can not generate a three-body bound state
in this model without the inclusion of the off-shell contribution. For
the confining set B one also has to enhance the diquark-quark-quark
coupling @xmath by a factor of about @xmath over the value defined in
Eq. ( 6.17 ) (as we will show, this extra factor is not necessary when
the axial-vector is included). The situation is even more severe in the
on-shell treatment of the local NJL model, since one needs to include
the full @xmath continuum contribution in order to find a three-body
bound state when the axial-vector diquark channel is not taken into
account [ 118 ] .

As can be seen from Fig. 6.7 a decrease in @xmath leads to a larger
diquark mass, and an increase in the off-shell contribution to the
@xmath @xmath -matrix (see Fig. 6.9 ). It is this off-shell correction
is need for a bound nucleon.

The nucleon result is shown in Fig. 6.11 . We also show a fictitious
diquark-quark threshold defined as @xmath . The nucleon mass can be seen
to depend roughly linearly on the scalar diquark mass. A similar
behaviour is also seen in the local NJL model [ 119 ] . Increasing the
diquark mass (or decreasing @xmath ) increases the nucleon mass, i.e.
the scalar diquark channel is attractive. In order to obtain a nucleon
mass of @xmath MeV, we need diquark mases of @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV
for set A and B, respectively. The corresponding nucleon binding energy
measured from the diquark-quark threshold are @xmath MeV and @xmath MeV
for set A and B, respectively, compared to the binding of the diquarks
(relative to the @xmath pseudo threshold) of about @xmath and @xmath MeV
for set A and B, respectively. Such diquark clustering within the
nucleon is also observed in the local NJL model [ 119 ] , and is
qualitatively in agreement with a instanton model [ 158 ] and lattice
simulations [ 159 ] . The nucleon solutions for sets A and B behave
rather differently with respect to the diquark-quark threshold, see Fig.
6.12 . This indicates that for non-confining set A, the nucleon solution
is rather sensitive to the diquark-quark threshold and tends not avoid
it. However, for confining set, since there is no well-defined
threshold, this tendency is absent and as we approach to the
diquark-quark threshold, the nucleon binding energy decreases and can
approach to zero.

Next we investigate the effect of the axial-vector diquark channel on
nucleon solution. We find that the axial-vector diquark channel
contributes considerably to the nucleon mass ³ ³ 3 Note however that
neglecting @xmath -loops may lead to a quantitative overestimate of the
axial-vector diquark role in the nucleon [ 160 ] . and takes away the
need for the artificial enhancement of the coupling strength for set B.
In Figs. 6.13 , 6.14 we show the nucleon mass as a function of the
scalar and axial-vector diquark mass. Similar to the scalar diquark
channel, we define the axial-vector diquark-quark threshold as @xmath .
We see that as one increase the axial-vector diquark (and scalar
diquark) masses, the @xmath interaction is weakened and consequently the
nucleon mass is increases. Therefore the contribution of the
axial-vector channel to the nucleon mass is also attractive.

In Fig. 6.15 we plot the parameter space of the interaction Lagrangian
with variable @xmath and @xmath which leads to the nucleon mass @xmath
GeV. The trend of this plot for the non-confining set A is very similar
to the one obtained in the local NJL model [ 120 ] (although we use a
different parameter set) and roughly depends linearly on the ratios
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, any interaction Lagrangian with @xmath and @xmath which
satisfies the relation @xmath gives a nucleon mass at about the
experimental value. This relation shows how interaction is shared
between scalar and axial-vector channels. If the scalar diquark
interaction @xmath is less than @xmath , we need the axial-vector
interaction to be stronger than the scalar diquark channel @xmath in
order to get the experimental value of nucleon mass. For set B, as we
approach to @xmath , the curve bends upward, reflecting the fact that we
have no bound state with only scalar diquark channel. In Fig. 6.15 we
see for the confining set B that the interaction is again shared between
the scalar and the axial-vector diquark and for small @xmath one needs a
dominant axial-vector diquark channel @xmath . It is obvious that the
axial-vector diquark channel is much more important in the confining
than the non-confining phase of model.

In order to study the implications of the quark confinement for the
description of the nucleon, we compare in Table 6.3 three representative
cases for both the non-confining and confining parameter sets, which all
give nucleon mass about @xmath MeV. The first three columns contain
results for set @xmath , and the last three columns for the confining
set @xmath .

Given the definition of diquark-quark thresholds, in the presence of
both scalar and axial-vector diquark channels, the diquarks in the
nucleon can be found much more loosely bound, although one obtains a
very strongly bound nucleon solution near its experimental value, see
table 6.3 . Next we study the nucleon BS wave function for the various
sets given in Table 6.3 . The nucleon wave and vertex function are not
physical observables, but rather they suggest how observables in this
model will behave. In Figs. 6.16-21 we show the leading Chebyshev
moments of the scalar functions of the nucleon BS wave function for
various sets (A1-3 and B1-3) which describes the strengths of the
quark-diquark partial waves with @xmath as a total quark-diquark spin
and @xmath as a total orbital angular momentum. They are normalised to
@xmath , where @xmath is the first point of the momentum mesh. It is
seen that the contribution of higher moments are considerably small,
indicating a rapid convergence of the wave function amplitudes in terms
of Chebyshev polynomials. In the confining case Figs. 6.19-21 there is a
clear interference which is not present in the non-confining
Figs. 6.16-19. Therefore in the confining case, all wave function
amplitudes are somehow shifted to higher relative four-momenta between
diquark and quark. In order to understand the role of this interference
we obtain a mass density for the various channels. This density is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for space component of relative momentum @xmath and
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 6.25 ). This definition corresponds to a diagram
occurring for the calculation of the isoscalar quark condensate in the
impulse approximation [ 121 ] . In the above definition of the density
function, we have integrated over the time component of the relative
momentum. In this way the density function becomes very similar to its
counterpart in Minkowski space. Although the above definition of density
is not unique, it does provide a useful measure of the spatial extent of
the wave function (we have examined the possibility of taking matrix
elements of other operators between the BS wave function, since this
does not lead to any significant effect, the results are not presented
here). The results are plotted in Figs. 6.22 and 6.23 .

It is noticeable that in various sets, the @xmath -wave is the dominant
contribution to the ground state. The relative importance of the scalar
and the axial diquark amplitude in the nucleon changes with the strength
of the diquark-quark couplings @xmath and accordingly with @xmath . We
see that in the confining sets, the nucleon density extends to higher
relative momentum between the diquark and the quark. This indicates a
more compact nucleon in the confining case. In order to find a
qualitative estimation of the confinement effect in our model, we
calculate @xmath , the results can be found in table 6.3 . This can be
related to the mean-square radius of the nucleon, if we assume minimal
uncertainty. We see in the both confining and non-confining cases a
decrease in @xmath with weakening axial-vector diquark interaction (and
consequently increasing the scalar diquark interaction strength). If we
compare @xmath for the two sets @xmath , which have very similar
interaction parameters @xmath , an increase about @xmath is found. This
effect can not only be associated with the non-locality of our
interaction, since that is present in both confining and non-confining
cases.

### 6.6 Summary and Outlook

In this chapter we investigated the two- and three-quark problems in a
non-local NJL model. We have truncated the diquark sector to the bound
scalar and the axial-vector channels. We have solved the relativistic
Faddeev equation for this model and have studied the behaviour of the
nucleon solutions with respect to various scalar and the axial-vector
interactions. We have also investigated a possible implication of the
quark confinement of our model in the diquark and the baryon sector.

Although the model is quark confining, it is not diquark confining (at
least in the rainbow-ladder approximation). A bound diquark can be found
in both scalar and the axial-vector channel for a wide range of
couplings. We have found that the off-shell contribution to the diquark
@xmath -matrix is crucial for the calculation of the structure of the
nucleon: without its inclusion the attraction in the diquark channels is
too weak to form a three-body bound state. We have also found that both
the scalar and the axial-vector contribute attractively to the nucleon
mass. The role of axial-vector channel is much more important in the
confining phase of model. The nucleon in this model is strongly bound
although the diquarks within nucleon are loosely bound. The confining
aspects of the model are more obvious in three-body, rather than the
two-body sector. By investigating the nucleon wave function we showed
that quark confinement leads to a more compact nucleon. The size of
nucleon is reduced by about @xmath in confining phase.

For both confining and non-confining phases, an increase in the scalar
diquark channel interaction @xmath leads to a lower nucleon mass, see
Figs. 6.13 and 6.14 , but the mass of the @xmath remains unchanged since
it does not contain scalar diquarks. In the standard NJL model where the
axial-vector diquark does not contribute significantly to the nucleon
binding [ 127 , 161 , 162 ] , the difference between the @xmath and
nucleon mass is directly related to the scalar diquark interaction. In
the current model where the axial-vector diquark makes a larger
contribution to the nucleon mass, therefore a detailed calculation for
the delta states is needed to understand the mechanism behind the @xmath
- @xmath mass difference. In the standard NJL model this leads to a
contradiction, since for an axial-vector interaction which gives a
reasonable description of nucleon properties, both the axial-vector
diquark and more importantly the @xmath are unbound [ 162 ] . The
crucial role of the axial-vector diquark correlation in the non-local
NJL model, especially in the confining phase of the model, indicate that
this model might do better.

In order to understand the implications of this model in baryonic sector
fully one should investigate properties of the nucleon such as the axial
vector coupling constant, the magnetic moment, etc. On the other hand,
the role of quark confinement in this model can be better clarified by
investigating quark and nuclear matter in this model. One of the long
standing problem in four-Fermi chiral quark models is the fact that
quark/nuclear matter does not saturate [ 163 ] , mainly due to the
strongly attractive quark interactions responsible for the spontaneous
chiral symmetry breaking. Recently, Bentz and Thomas [ 164 ] have shown
that a sufficient strong repulsive contribution can arise if confinement
effects are incorporated, albeit in the cost of introducing a new
parameter into model. It was shown that such repulsive contribution can
lead to saturation of nuclear matter equation of state. It is indeed of
interest to investigate the stability of nuclear matter within this
quark confining model. Such problems can be studied based on the Faddeev
approach, see e. g., Ref. [ 131 ] .
