## Acknowledgements

I am deeply indebted to my supervisor Anton Rebhan, who introduced me to
quantum field theory at finite temperature and density, and who guided
my research activities during the last two and a half years. I greatly
benefited from innumerable discussions with him.

Furthermore I would like to thank Andreas Ipp for a very fruitful and
enjoyable collaboration on non-Fermi-liquid physics. I would also like
to thank Jean-Paul Blaizot, Urko Reinosa and Paul Romatschke for
extensive discussions on quantum field theory at finite temperature and
density. I also gratefully acknowledge very helpful comments from M.
Alford, C. Manuel, K. Rajagopal, D. Rischke, T. Schäfer and K.
Schwenzer.

I want to express my gratitude to all the members of the Institute for
Theoretical Physics at the Vienna University of Technology, in
particular to Sebastian Guttenberg, Robert Schöfbeck and Robert Wimmer,
for providing a very pleasant working atmosphere.

I also want to thank my family, in particular my parents who made my
studies possible with continuous moral and financial support. Finally I
want to thank Veronika for her love and her patience, and for trying to
teach me Ukrainian grammar. []

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Symmetries in quantum field theory
    -    2.1 General gauge dependence identities
    -    2.2 Implications of global symmetries
    -    2.3 Abelian Higgs model
        -    2.3.1 Definition of the model
        -    2.3.2 Free propagators
        -    2.3.3 Gauge independence of propagator singularities
    -    2.4 A non-Abelian Higgs model
-    3 Quark self energy in ultradegenerate QCD
    -    3.1 General remarks
    -    3.2 Gluon self energy
    -    3.3 Fermion self energy on the light cone
    -    3.4 Expansion for small @xmath and small @xmath
        -    3.4.1 The first few terms in the series
        -    3.4.2 Evaluation of the @xmath -coefficient
    -    3.5 Numerical results
    -    3.6 Fermi surface properties
-    4 Anomalous specific heat at low temperature
    -    4.1 General remarks
    -    4.2 Landau Fermi liquid theory
    -    4.3 Specific heat from the entropy
        -    4.3.1 Quark part
        -    4.3.2 Gluon part
        -    4.3.3 Result
        -    4.3.4 A note on the Sommerfeld expansion
    -    4.4 Specific heat from the energy density
        -    4.4.1 Quark part
        -    4.4.2 Gluon part
        -    4.4.3 Interaction part
        -    4.4.4 Result
    -    4.5 Higher orders in the specific heat
        -    4.5.1 Transverse contribution, region II
        -    4.5.2 Longitudinal contribution, region II
        -    4.5.3 Contributions from the upper integration limit
        -    4.5.4 Cut contributions from regions I and III
        -    4.5.5 Pole part
        -    4.5.6 Non- @xmath contribution
        -    4.5.7 Evaluation of the coefficient of @xmath
        -    4.5.8 How to compute higher order coefficients
        -    4.5.9 Specific heat
        -    4.5.10 HDL resummation
    -    4.6 Some remarks on neutrino emission from ungapped quark
        matter
-    5 Color superconductivity
    -    5.1 Basics of superconductivity
    -    5.2 Basics of color superconductivity
    -    5.3 The color superconductivity gap equation
    -    5.4 Gauge independence of fermionic dispersion laws
    -    5.5 Computation of @xmath
    -    5.6 Gluon tadpoles
        -    5.6.1 Leading order tadpole diagram (2SC)
        -    5.6.2 Gluon tadpoles for CFL with @xmath
        -    5.6.3 Color neutrality
        -    5.6.4 Gluon self energy and gluon loop tadpole (2SC)
        -    5.6.5 Gluon vertex correction (2SC)
        -    5.6.6 Mixing with Nambu-Goldstone bosons (2SC)
        -    5.6.7 Tadpoles with bosonic loops in the CFL phase
    -    5.7 Some remarks on the specific heat (outlook)
-    6 Conclusions and outlook
-    A Matsubara sums
-    B HDL/HTL gluon spectral densities
-    C Matrix identities

“Die Astronomen müssen aus dem Strahlen den Stern erkennen - (und tappen
doch im Dunkeln herum, denn sie können durch ihr Verfahren, man nennt es
Spectralanalyse, doch nur die erdverwandten Stoffe auffinden - das dem
Stern Ureigene bleibt ewig unerforschlich) …”

–  Gustav Mahler in a letter to Alma Schindler

## Chapter 1 Introduction

We know four fundamental interactions in nature, namely gravitational,
electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions. Since this thesis is
devoted to properties of quark matter, we shall mainly be concerned with
the strong interactions. Today the accepted theory of strong
interactions is Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). It is a gauge theory with
gauge group @xmath , where the index @xmath stands for color . The
quarks belong to the fundamental representation of this group, and the
gauge bosons (gluons) belong to the adjoint representation. Denoting the
quark field with @xmath and the gluon field with @xmath , one writes the
Lagrangian of QCD as [ 1 , 2 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath In Eq. ( 1.1 ) we have written
explicitly the sum over quark flavors. Apart from the invariance under
@xmath gauge transformations, the Lagrangian ( 1.1 ) is also invariant
under global unitary transformations in flavor space as long as the
differences of the quark masses can be neglected. In the chiral limit (
@xmath ) the Lagrangian is even invariant under separate flavor space
transformations of left and right handed quarks, with the corresponding
symmetry groups @xmath and @xmath . Moreover the Lagrangian ( 1.1 ) is
invariant under global @xmath phase transformations of the quark fields,
which is related to quark number conservation ¹ ¹ 1 At the classical
level the Lagrangian is also invariant under axial phase transformations
of the quark fields, which constitute the group @xmath . In the quantum
theory, however, this symmetry is broken by an anomaly, see e.g. [ 3 ] .
.

The quantum theory based on the Lagrangian ( 1.1 ) is renormalizable [ 4
, 5 , 6 ] . Neglecting the quark masses for the moment, one finds for
the one-loop beta function ² ² 2 By now the beta function is known to
four-loop order [ 7 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Nature chooses @xmath . (For many physical situations the number of
“active” flavors is smaller than six. E.g. for the astrophysical
systems, on which we eventually focus, we need to take into account only
the three lightest flavors.) Therefore the beta function is negative,
which shows that QCD possesses the all-important property of asymptotic
freedom [ 8 , 9 ] .

Experimental confirmations of QCD come from deep inelastic scattering
experiments, and other high energy processes (see [ 10 ] and references
therein). These experiments give a current world average of [ 10 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and @xmath is the mass of the @xmath boson.

At small energies quarks and gluons are confined into hadrons. In the
confined phase chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken by a
non-vanishing quark condensate @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
playing the role of (pseudo-)Nambu-Goldstone bosons. The low-energy
dynamics of the hadrons can be described with chiral perturbation theory
[ 11 , 12 ] .

From asymptotic freedom one expects at sufficiently high temperatures a
phase transition to a deconfined phase [ 13 ] . The resulting “soup” of
quarks and gluons is called quark gluon plasma (QGP). This idea is
corroborated by lattice simulations, which predict a phase transition at
@xmath for @xmath [ 14 , 15 ] , and at @xmath for @xmath [ 15 ] . It is
assumed that the QGP existed in the early universe. Experimentalists try
to reproduce the QGP in heavy ion collisions at SPS (CERN), at RHIC
(Brookhaven), and from 2007 onwards at LHC (CERN).

The equation of state (the pressure as a function of the temperature) of
the high temperature QGP has been computed perturbatively up to order
@xmath (see [ 16 ] and references therein ³ ³ 3 The coefficient of the
@xmath -term cannot be computed within perturbation theory, since
Feynman diagrams of arbitrarily high order contribute to this
coefficient [ 17 , 18 ] , and there is no known way of how to resum
them. ). The expansion in the coupling constant turns out to be only
poorly convergent for non-asymptotic temperatures. It is however
possible to improve the situation by performing systematic resummations
of the perturbative series, such as resummations within dimensional
reduction [ 16 , 19 ] , HTL-screened perturbation theory [ 20 , 21 ] ,
or approximately selfconsistent resummations based on the 2PI effective
action, [ 22 , 23 , 24 ] which show good agreement with the lattice data
for @xmath . For reviews on the high temperature QGP see e. g. [ 25 , 26
, 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] .

It is of great importance to understand the properties of the quark
gluon plasma also at finite chemical potential ⁴ ⁴ 4 The chemical
potential can be viewed as a measure for the density at a given
temperature. E.g. for an ideal relativistic gas of free fermions the
particle number density is proportional to @xmath for @xmath . Thus a
high chemical potential is equivalent to high particle number density in
this case. . This region of the QCD phase diagram is relevant for the
interior of compact stars [ 31 , 32 , 33 ] ⁵ ⁵ 5 As far as the
macroscopic structure of compact stars is concerned, the curvature of
spacetime is in general not negligible. However, the change in the
metric is tiny for the typical length scales of particle physics [ 31 ]
. Therefore it is sufficient to consider the field equations of matter
in flat spacetime. . From asymptotic freedom one expects a phase
transition to a deconfined phase to occur not only at high temperature,
but also at high density. Unfortunately one does not know an efficient
algorithm for lattice simulations at finite @xmath . The reason is that
the fermion determinant in the path integral is complex at finite @xmath
, which precludes Monte Carlo importance sampling. So far this “sign
problem” can only be circumvented for @xmath (see [ 28 ] and references
therein). But for the region @xmath , which is relevant for compact
stars, no method of implementing lattice simulations is known to date.
Therefore simplified models, such as Nambu-Jona-Lasinio models [ 34 , 35
, 36 ] , and (semi-)perturbative methods are the only viable approaches
at the moment. In compact stars the chemical potential might be as large
as @xmath . At this energy scale @xmath is of the order one, therefore
the applicability of (semi-)perturbative methods is rather questionable.
Nevertheless one can try to extrapolate results which have been obtained
for small values of the coupling constant to larger values of the
coupling constant, hoping that the qualitative features remain valid.

Compared to the chemical potential, the temperature in the interior of a
compact star will be rather small (of the order of tens of @xmath [ 32 ]
). In this region of the QCD phase diagram quark matter is expected to
be in a color superconducting phase, which is characterized by a
non-vanishing diquark condensate. Such diquark condensates can arise
from the fact that one gluon exchange is attractive in the color
antitriplet channel, leading to the formation of Cooper pairs at
sufficiently small temperatures. Color superconductivity has been
discussed already in the late 1970’s [ 37 , 38 ] , but at that time it
was believed that the color superconductivity gap would be of the order
@xmath , and thus almost negligible. Only some years ago [ 39 , 40 ] it
was realized that the gap may be as large as @xmath , with corresponding
critical temperatures of the order @xmath . This discovery stimulated
extensive research in this field during the last few years, see e.g. [
41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 ] for reviews.

Due to the interplay of finite quark masses and the constraints from
color and electric neutrality, there may be various color
superconducting phases in the QCD phase diagram, which are distinguished
mainly by the particular form of the diquark condensate. These matters
will be reviewed in more detail in chapter 5 of this thesis.

In nature color superconducting phases could in principle be discovered
from analyses of neutron star data. There exist indeed some proposals
for signatures that could indicate the presence of color
superconductivity. For instance, the cooling behavior of a neutron star
depends on the specific heat and the neutrino emissivity, which are both
sensitive to the phase structure (see e.g. [ 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] ).
Other possible signatures include @xmath -mode instabilities [ 54 , 55 ]
, and pulsar glitches due to crystalline structures in inhomogeneous
color superconducting phases [ 56 ] .

This thesis is organized as follows. In chapter 2 we discuss some formal
properties of gauge theories, which will be used in chapter 5 . In
chapters 3 and 4 we compute the quark self energy and the specific heat
of normal degenerate quark matter. These results may be relevant for the
cooling properties of (proto-) neutron stars [ 57 ] . Chapter 5 is
devoted to color superconductivity. We give a general proof that the
fermionic quasiparticle dispersion relations in a color superconductor
are gauge independent. Furthermore we compute gluon tadpole diagrams,
which are related to color neutrality. Chapter 6 finally contains our
conclusions.

Throughout this thesis we shall use the following conventions. We use
natural units, @xmath . The Minkowski metric is @xmath . Four momenta
are denoted as @xmath . The absolute value of the three momentum is
denoted as @xmath . A unit three vector is denoted as @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Symmetries in quantum field theory

### 2.1 General gauge dependence identities

In this section we will recapitulate the derivation of a general gauge
dependence identity, following [ 58 , 59 , 60 ] .

Let us consider an arbitrary gauge theory which is defined by an action
functional @xmath that is invariant under some gauge transformations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we use the DeWitt notation [ 61 ] , where an index @xmath comprises
all discrete and continuous field labels, and a Greek index ( @xmath )
comprises group and space-time indices. E.g. for QCD, as defined by the
Lagrangian ( 1.1 ), one has explicitly [with @xmath ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In general we assume that the gauge generators form an off-shell closed
algebra, which means that the commutator of two gauge transformations is
again a gauge transformation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the “structure constants” @xmath can in principle be field
dependent.

In order to quantize the theory we have to fix the gauge freedom, e.g.
with a quadratic gauge fixing term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantum theory is defined via the path integral representation of
the generating functional of connected Green’s functions ¹ ¹ 1 We assume
for the moment that @xmath are bosonic fields in order to keep the
notation simple. It is easy to check, however, that the final identity
Eq. ( 2.12 ) is also valid for the fermions in QCD, provided one chooses
suitable conventions for the fermionic derivatives. ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

With the help of a Legendre transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

one obtains the effective action,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

If a change @xmath in the gauge fixing condition is accompanied by the
following (non-local) gauge transformation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

the gauge fixed action @xmath will remain invariant. Here @xmath is the
ghost propagator in a background field @xmath , which is defined via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us examine in which way the measure and the Faddeev Popov
determinant change under the gauge transformation ( 2.8 ) and @xmath .
From the measure we get a Jacobian, which can be evaluated for small
@xmath using the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is valid if @xmath . The variation of the Faddeev Popov
determinant can be calculated using Eq. ( C.1 ). In this way we find

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term between the brackets in the second line vanishes if
@xmath . Using Eqs. ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.9 ) one finds that the remaining
part vanishes provided that @xmath . These two conditions are fulfilled
for QCD ² ² 2 In order to prove this one uses the fact that the
structure constants are totally antisymmetric and that the Gell-Mann
matrices are traceless. , and also for the Higgs models which we will
discuss in this chapter.

The only term in Eq. ( 2.7 ) which is not invariant is the source term
@xmath . Therefore we find the following gauge dependence identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath .

As an application let us consider the effective potential @xmath for a
translationally invariant system,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general @xmath will be a gauge dependent quantity. However, the
identity ( 2.12 ) ensures that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the Nielsen identity for the effective potential [ 59 , 62 ] ,
which states that a change in the gauge fixing function (the first term
on the left hand side) can be compensated by a change in @xmath (the
second term on the left hand side). This identity implies that the value
of the effective potential at its minimum (where @xmath ) is gauge
independent.

A further consequence of the identity ( 2.12 ) is the gauge independence
of the position of the propagator singularities [ 60 , 62 , 63 , 64 ] ,
which we will discuss in more detail in the sections 2.3 and 2.4 and in
chapter 5 .

### 2.2 Implications of global symmetries

The aim of this section is to examine the consequences of global
symmetries for the one-point and two-point functions in quantum field
theory.

Let us consider an arbitrary quantum field theory with field content
@xmath , @xmath . We assume that the theory is invariant with respect to
a group @xmath of continuous global symmetry transformations, which act
on the fields as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath form some representation of @xmath . The effective
action up to second order can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume that the symmetry is not (spontaneously) broken. Then we have
@xmath which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
     @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . First let us consider Eqs. ( 2.18 ) and ( 2.19 ). With
the additional assumption that the representation formed by the set of
all @xmath ’s is non-trivial and irreducible, these equations imply that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the tadpole diagrams vanish (in other words, the
expectation values of the field operators are zero).

If we assume that the representation is unitary, we can write Eq. ( 2.20
) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we assume furthermore that the representation is irreducible, we can
now invoke Schur’s lemma, which gives the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the (inverse) propagator is proportional to the unit matrix with
respect to the group indices.

Next we would like to examine in which way parity ( @xmath ) and time
reversal symmetry ( @xmath ) constrain the propagator. For simplicity we
work in Euclidean space and assume that our fields @xmath transform
under @xmath as ³ ³ 3 No summation over the index in parentheses.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . [This comprises for instance vector fields and
(pseudo-)scalar fields.] Assuming translational invariance, the bilinear
part of the effective action can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the full inverse propagator. Invariance under @xmath
implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing the substitution @xmath in the last equation and comparing it
with Eq. ( 2.25 ) we find @xmath The mere definition of the inverse
propagator implies @xmath , and therefore we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Dyson’s equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

we arrive at the following identity for the full propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the propagator is therefore symmetric in @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.3 Abelian Higgs model

This and the next section serve as an illustration of the application of
the gauge dependence identities for systems with spontaneous symmetry
breaking at finite temperature. We will discuss the gauge independence
of the locations of propagator singularities, both for the Abelian and a
non-Abelian Higgs model. This is actually more than a simple exercise,
since the methods that we develop here will be useful also in the more
complicated context of color superconductivity, which will be the
subject of the last chapter of this thesis.

Let us also mention that the static limit of the gauged Higgs model
yields the Landau-Ginzburg Lagrangian, which can be used for instance
for the description of superconducting systems in the vicinity of the
transition temperature [ 38 ] . In this thesis, however, we shall not go
into the details of the Landau-Ginzburg description of superconducting
systems.

There exists a vast literature on various aspects of Higgs models, let
us just mention Refs. [ 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 ] , in
which the finite temperature behavior of Higgs models is discussed.

#### 2.3.1 Definition of the model

The Abelian Higgs is defined by the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lagrangian ( 2.30 ) is invariant under the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume @xmath so that the gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken. The
expectation value of @xmath is taken to be real so that @xmath is the
Higgs boson and @xmath is the would-be Nambu-Goldstone boson. @xmath is
invariant with respect to a @xmath symmetry [ 59 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following [ 59 ] we choose a gauge fixing which does not break the
@xmath symmetry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with some constant @xmath and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath .
In momentum space we write @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath we will assume
@xmath because otherwise time reversal symmetry would be violated. The
corresponding ghost Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

is still invariant under ( 2.33 ), which implies that Green functions
(derivatives of the effective action, @xmath ) with an odd total number
of external @xmath - and @xmath -legs will vanish. Using Dyson’s
equation ( 2.28 ) is is easy to see that this is also true for general
Green functions.

#### 2.3.2 Free propagators

The free propagators can be obtained easily by evaluating the path
integral for the free theory. One finds that the free propagators are
simply given by inverting the “coefficients” of the kinetic (bilinear)
terms in the Lagrangian. If @xmath is the solution of the free field
equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

one finds for the free propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way one obtains the following tree level propagators for the
Abelian Higgs model (with the notation “5”= @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.39)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
     @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the position of the minimum of the tree level potential,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We notice that all the structure functions are gauge dependent at tree
level apart from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The (full) propagators have the following symmetries: the definition of
propagators implies @xmath , and therefore in the non-condensed notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Invariance with respect to parity and time reversal implies (see Sec.
2.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.48 ) yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one used the gauge condition ( 2.34 ) with @xmath and @xmath , ( 2.48
) and ( 2.49 ) would not be valid, and an explicit calculation shows
that a term which is antisymmetric in @xmath would indeed appear already
in the tree level propagator @xmath .
We may parametrize the full propagators as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We perform an analogous decomposition for the two-point functions @xmath
and @xmath which are obtained from the effective action. These are
one-particle irreducible apart from possible tadpole insertions. We also
define self energies in the usual manner as @xmath .

With the help of Dyson’s equation ( 2.28 ) one can express the structure
functions of the full propagators in terms of the self energies in the
following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.3 Gauge independence of propagator singularities

Taking the second derivative of the gauge dependence identity ( 2.12 )
one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We evaluate ( 2.66 ) at @xmath . Then the last term vanishes. For the
inverse Higgs propagator we obtain in configuration space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using translation invariance the first term on the right hand side can
be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

In momentum space we obtain therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . In a similar way one obtains for the gauge field
propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.72)
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.73)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eqs. ( 2.70 ), ( 2.73 ) and ( 2.72 ) imply that the locations of the
poles of the Higgs propagator and of the transverse and longitudinal
components of the gauge field propagator are gauge independent [ 62 ] ,
provided that the singularities of the @xmath ’s do not coincide with
those of @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , respectively. In the case of @xmath
one also has to take into account the various @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s on
the right hand side of ( 2.73 ) [ 64 , 60 ] . As in [ 64 , 60 ] one may
argue that @xmath is 1PI up to a full ghost propagator and tadpole
insertions. The singularities of the ghost propagator will be different
from the physical dispersion laws since there is no HTL ghost self
energy. The tadpoles are 1PI up to a full Higgs propagator evaluated at
zero momentum, and at this point the Higgs propagator is non-singular.
In general, the 1PI parts of @xmath are expected to have no
singularities, apart from possible mass-shell singularities which can be
avoided by introducing an infrared cut-off to be lifted only at the very
end of the calculation [ 73 , 74 ] .

On the right hand side of ( 2.73 ) additional singularities arise from
the factor @xmath contained in the @xmath ’s and from @xmath . These
kinematical singularities have to be excluded from the gauge
independence proof. The expression @xmath is obviously gauge dependent
already at tree level, and in general according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.4 A non-Abelian Higgs model

Let us consider a non-Abelian Higgs model with the gauge field and the
scalar field both belonging to the adjoint representation of @xmath .
The Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . We assume that the expectation value of @xmath is
proportional to @xmath . Using the discrete symmetries of the Lagrangian
[ 59 ] , it is easy to see that the gauge field propagator is diagonal
in color space. It should be noted, however, that the gauge field
propagator in the Higgs phase is not proportional to the unit matrix,
which can be expected from the discussion in Sec. 2.2 .

It turns out that the Higgs propagator @xmath fulfills the same gauge
dependence identity as in the Abelian case [Eq. ( 2.70 )]. For the gauge
field propagator one finds that @xmath and @xmath both fulfill Eqs. (
2.71 )-( 2.73 ), and that @xmath obeys the same gauge dependence
identity as in QED [ 60 ] . The fact that the gauge dependence
identities are identical with those of Abelian models is of course only
due to the particular simplicity of the @xmath model.

The @xmath Higgs model is an interesting toy model, since we will see in
chapter 5 that also in the case of color superconductivity the gluon
propagator is in general not proportional to the unit matrix in color
space.

## Chapter 3 Quark self energy in ultradegenerate QCD

### 3.1 General remarks

In this chapter we will compute the quark self energy in normal
ultradegenerate QCD, both at zero and (small) finite temperature. As
discussed in the introduction, and in more detail in chapter 5 , quark
matter at high density and sufficiently small temperature is actually in
a color superconducting phase. Nevertheless, it is interesting to study
also the properties of normal, i.e. non-superconducting quark matter.
First, a good understanding of normal quark matter is certainly helpful
before tackling the more complicated case of color superconductivity.
Moreover, it is conceivable that quark matter in young (proto-)neutron
stars is already dense enough for deconfinement, but still not cold
enough for color superconductivity. If this is the case, the results of
our computations will be relevant in particular for the cooling behavior
of proto-neutron stars.

The quark self energy will be used in the next chapter to compute the
specific heat of normal cold dense quark matter. We will evaluate the
quark self energy only on the light cone, since this is the quantity
which enters the formula for the specific heat at leading order [see Eq.
( 4.15 ) below]. Furthermore it is sufficient for the computation of the
specific heat to consider the fermionic quasiparticles in the vicinity
of the Fermi surface. Thus the quark momentum is hard, while the
momentum of the gluon in the one-loop self energy (see Fig. 3.2 ) may be
arbitrarily soft. Therefore [ 75 ] we have to use a resummed gluon
propagator in order to avoid an IR divergence in the quark self energy.
For this reason we will review the computation of the HDL resummed gluon
propagator in the next section.

### 3.2 Gluon self energy

The gluon self energy at the one-loop level is given by the diagrams of
Fig. 3.1 . The second one of the four diagrams depends on the chemical
potential and the temperature, while the three remaining ones give only
finite temperature corrections to the gluon self energy. Below we will
only need the gluon self energy at zero temperature, therefore we
evaluate here only the diagram with a quark loop in Fig. 3.1 . For QCD
the diagram contains an additional factor of @xmath compared to the
photon self energy in QED. In the following we shall drop the Kronecker
delta, and define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then our final results will be applicable both for QCD and QED.

In the imaginary time formalism [ 76 ] we get for the second diagram of
Fig. 3.1

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , and the free quark propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the methods outlined in appendix A it is straightforward to
evaluate the Matsubara sum in Eq. ( 3.2 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fermi-Dirac distribution defined in Eq. ( A.13 ).
After performing the Dirac trace in Eq. ( 3.2 ) we get [ 77 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Now we can perform the analytic continuation @xmath to
get the retarded self energy. Using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can separate the real and imaginary parts of the self energy. It is
convenient to define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . These two structure functions are related to the
transverse and longitudinal self energies via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

After subtraction of the vacuum contribution one finds for the real
parts [ 78 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the imaginary parts one finds [ 77 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the notation @xmath and @xmath .

In general the remaining integrations over @xmath can be performed
analytically only for the imaginary parts [ 77 ] . In the zero
temperature limit, however, a closed result can be obtained also for the
real parts. In this limit one finds for for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
[ 77 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the abbreviations [ 77 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.25)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If @xmath the leading contribution to the self energy is quadratic in
@xmath . This contribution comes from hard momenta in the quark loop (
@xmath ), therefore the corresponding self energy ist called Hard Dense
Loop (HDL) self energy [ 75 , 79 , 80 , 81 ] . In the following we shall
denote the HDL approximation with a tilde ( @xmath ). The explicit
expressions are considerably simpler than the general ones given above [
76 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The leading finite temperature corrections have the same
functional dependence on @xmath and @xmath , one only has to include a
finite temperature correction into @xmath . For QCD one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contribution proportional to @xmath comes from the gluon and
ghost loops in Fig. 3.1 . The part of the gluon self energy which is
quadratic in the temperature is called Hard Thermal Loop (HTL) self
energy.

Using Dyson’s equation @xmath one can obtain the one-loop resummed gluon
propagator. In the HDL approximation one finds in covariant gauge [ 76 ]
, using the tensors defined in Eqs. ( 2.43 ) and ( 2.44 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in Coulomb gauge (see e.g. [ 82 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The HDL spectral density for the transverse part is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In covariant gauge the longitudinal propagator contains an unphysical
factor of @xmath [ 60 , 64 ] , therefore one defines the longitudinal
spectral density as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both @xmath and @xmath contain a pole and a cut contribution. The
explicit expressions can be found in [ 76 ] , and are also given in
appendix B for convenience. In terms of the spectral densities, the
structure functions of the propagator can be written as [ 76 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 3.3 Fermion self energy on the light cone

The fermion self energy is defined through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the free fermion propagator, and @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath in the imaginary time formalism, and @xmath after analytic
continuation to Minkowski space.

With the energy projection operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

we decompose @xmath in the quasiparticle and antiquasiparticle self
energy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath .

The one-loop fermion self energy is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge boson propagator.

Following [ 83 ] we introduce an intermediate scale @xmath , such that
@xmath , and we divide the @xmath -integration into a soft part ( @xmath
) and a hard part ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the hard part we can use the free gluon propagator, whereas for the
soft part we shall use the HDL resummed gluon propagator.

The hard part of the fermion self energy on the light cone in a general
Coulomb gauge is given by the gauge independent expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The distribution functions @xmath and @xmath
are given by Eqs. ( A.5 ) and ( A.13 ). In Eq. ( 3.47 ) we have
subtracted the vacuum parts of the distribution functions, since we know
anyway that the vacuum part of the fermion self energy on the light cone
vanishes because of gauge and Lorentz invariance. This subtraction is in
fact necessary, because otherwise we would get a spurious vacuum
contribution coming from the fact the we do not use an @xmath invariant
cutoff for the energy-momentum integration. The finite- @xmath and
finite- @xmath parts, however, are not affected by these subtleties in
the UV region.

After performing the angular integration we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral is finite in the limit @xmath , with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Here @xmath enters as a correction proportional to @xmath
, so that we can send @xmath to zero. Conversely we expect that in the
soft contribution we should be able to send @xmath to infinity without
encountering divergences, as will indeed be the case, but only after all
soft contributions are added together.

For the soft part one finds on the light cone in a general Coulomb gauge
the gauge independent expression [ 82 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the spectral densities of
transverse and longitudinal gauge bosons, as given in Eqs. ( 3.37 ) and
( 3.38 ). We may use @xmath because of @xmath and @xmath . Depending on
the sign of @xmath , we can drop the term @xmath or the term @xmath in
Eq. ( 3.50 ), since its contribution is suppressed with @xmath compared
to the remaining contribution. Then we find for the soft contribution to
the real part of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity vanishes for @xmath by symmetric integration. After
performing the @xmath -integration we therefore have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given in Eqs. ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ),
respectively. For @xmath (which receives no hard contribution) we find
in an analogous way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The antiquasiparticle self energy @xmath is obtained by inserting
negative values of @xmath in the above expressions for @xmath and
including an overall factor @xmath . With @xmath we can then replace
@xmath by 1.

### 3.4 Expansion for small @xmath and small @xmath

In this section we will perform an expansion of @xmath in the region

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This region is relevant for the computation of the low temperature
specific heat, see chapter 4 . We will use the expansion parameter
@xmath , and we define @xmath . From ( 3.54 ) we have @xmath and @xmath
.

#### 3.4.1 The first few terms in the series

In the part with the transverse gluon propagator we substitute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

After expanding the integrand with respect to @xmath we find for the
transverse contribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -integrations are straightforward. In the @xmath -integrals
we may send the integration limits to @xmath . Using the formulae ¹ ¹ 1
@xmath is the Euler Gamma function, defined as @xmath The Gamma function
satisfies @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is Euler’s
constant, @xmath Furthermore, @xmath is the polylogarithm, defined as
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.57)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find, neglecting terms which are suppressed at least with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the longitudinal part we substitute @xmath and @xmath . In a similar
way as for the transverse part we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Turning now to @xmath we notice that it vanishes at @xmath only in the
case of @xmath . For finite temperature, however small, there is an IR
divergent contribution in the transverse sector [ 76 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the infrared cutoff may be provided at finite temperature by the
nonperturbative magnetic screening mass of QCD. In QED, where no
magnetostatic screening is possible, a resummation of these
singularities leads to nonexponential damping behavior [ 84 ] .

After subtraction of the energy independent part we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the steps which led to Eq. ( LABEL:si7 ), we find for the
transverse contribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the formula ² ² 2 @xmath is the Riemann zeta function, which is
defined as @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we find in a similar way as above

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the longitudinal part we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting the pieces together, and using the abbreviation @xmath , we
obtain for the real part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.70)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The determination of the function @xmath requires resummation of IR
enhanced contributions, which will be discussed in the next subsection.
We note furthermore that the dependence on @xmath indeed drops out in
the sum of the transverse and longitudinal parts.

The functions @xmath show a simple asymptotic behavior. In the zero
temperature limit ( @xmath ) ³ ³ 3 This limit can be taken by replacing
the distribution functions in Eq. ( 3.52 ) with their zero temperature
counterparts, or by using in Eqs. ( 3.68 )-( 3.71 ) the asymptotic
expansion of the polylogarithm given e.g. in [ 85 ] . we have @xmath .
If the temperature is much higher than @xmath (i.e. @xmath ) we have
@xmath and @xmath . For @xmath or @xmath we may approximate @xmath with
@xmath , which is qualitatively the result quoted in [ 86 ] . It should
be noted, however, that the calculation of Ref. [ 86 ] only took into
account transverse gauge bosons, and therefore the scale under the
logarithm and its parametric dependence on the coupling was not
correctly rendered.

For the imaginary part we find

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.75)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the zero temperature limit we have @xmath . If the temperature is
much higher than @xmath we have @xmath . Again the determination of the
function @xmath requires resummation of IR enhanced contributions, which
will be discussed in the next subsection.

Explicitly, our @xmath result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.77)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have included the zero temperature limits of @xmath and @xmath
, which will be derived in the next subsection. We observe that the self
energy at @xmath is at leading order proportional to @xmath , which is
nonanalytic at @xmath . This behavior is a consequence of quasistatic
chromomagnetic fields, which are only dynamically screened. On the other
hand chromoelectric fields, which are screened by the Debye mass, give
an analytic term ( @xmath ) in the self energy at leading order, and
nonanalytic contributions ( @xmath ) only at higher orders.

Apart from the first logarithmic term, the leading imaginary parts
contributed by the transverse and longitudinal gauge bosons were known
previously [ 82 , 87 , 88 ] . As our results show, the damping rate
obtained by adding these two leading terms [ 82 , 87 ] is actually
incomplete beyond the leading term, because the subleading transverse
term of order @xmath is larger than the leading contribution from @xmath
.

#### 3.4.2 Evaluation of the @xmath-coefficient

We write the function @xmath in Eq. ( 3.67 ) as the sum of the
transverse and the longitudinal contribution, @xmath . The terms through
order @xmath in the integrand of Eq. ( LABEL:si7 ) give the following
contribution to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating explicitly the next few terms in the expansion of the
integrand, one finds additional contributions of order @xmath . They
arise from the fact that the @xmath -integrations would be IR divergent,
being screened only by @xmath . Therefore also terms which are formally
of higher order in the integrand contribute to the order @xmath in the
self energy. In the following we will perform a systematic summation of
all these terms.

With the substitution ( 3.55 ) the transverse gluon self energy in the
HDL approximation can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

with some function @xmath . We may neglect the term @xmath from the free
propagator, because this term does not become singular for small @xmath
. ⁴ ⁴ 4 However, @xmath and @xmath would have to be taken into account
when summing up the IR contributions to the coefficient of @xmath ,
since for this coefficient also less IR singular contributions are
important. After expansion of the integrand with respect to @xmath as in
Eq. ( LABEL:si7 ) we get then integrals of the following type
contributing to the self energy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

[In the last step we have used the fact that @xmath is an even function
of @xmath .] Now we see clearly that from arbitrary powers of @xmath in
the integrand we get contributions to the order @xmath in @xmath . The
case @xmath corresponds to the term of order @xmath , which we have
evaluated already in the previous section. As we are interested only in
contributions from the IR region, we may take @xmath as upper
integration limit in Eq. ( 3.80 ), since for @xmath we get then no
contribution from the upper integration limit. [The cases @xmath have
been evaluated explicitly in Eq. ( 3.78 ).] Furthermore we see from Eq.
( 3.80 ) that from the @xmath -integration we always get a factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can write the function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and the prime denotes the omission of the tree level
propagator. Eq. ( 3.82 ) is in fact independent of @xmath , therefore we
may simply set @xmath . Summing up the (Taylor) series we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

This integral can probably not be done analytically. Numerically one
finds readily @xmath .

For the longitudinal part a completely analogous calculation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Numerically one has @xmath

The constant under the logarithm in the fourth line of Eq. ( 3.77 ) can
be determined from the zero temperature limit of @xmath , with the
result

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us turn now to the imaginary part. The function @xmath in Eq. ( 3.72
) can be determined by summing up IR enhanced contributions in a similar
way as in the computation of @xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the prime denotes the omission of the tree level propagators in
the spectral densities. In contrast to the real part of @xmath , these
integrals can be evaluated analytically rather easily, as we will
demonstrate in the following. After the substitution @xmath we can write
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.92)
     @xmath      (3.93)
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In @xmath we have used the fact the the imaginary part in
the integrand vanishes for @xmath , which allows us to extend the outer
limits of the integration domain from @xmath to @xmath without changing
the value of the integral. It is easy to check that @xmath vanishes for
@xmath . For @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contour @xmath consists of the four straight lines pinching
the real axis in Fig. 3.3 . The radius of the two small arcs in Fig. 3.3
is equal to @xmath , whereas the radius of the two large arcs will be
sent to infinity eventually. Since the integral along a closed contour
vanishes if the integrand is analytic in the domain enclosed by the
contour, we may replace the integral along the straight lines with minus
the integral along the arcs. After the substitution @xmath we expand the
integrand for small @xmath to obtain the contribution from the small
arcs, and for large @xmath to obtain the contribution from the large
arcs.

From the small arcs we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from the large arcs we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adding up the @xmath ’s we find for @xmath after taking the limit @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a completely analogous way we find for the longitudinal contribution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting these results for @xmath and @xmath into Eq. ( 3.88 ), and
taking the zero temperature limit, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as stated in the Eq. ( 3.77 ).

### 3.5 Numerical results

For intermediate energies @xmath the integrals in Eqs. ( 3.52 ) and (
3.62 ) have to be evaluated numerically. Figs. 3.4 and 3.5 show the real
and imaginary parts of the self energy as a function of the energy at
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In the imaginary part we have subtracted
the quantity @xmath which is divergent at finite @xmath [see the
discussion before Eq. ( 3.62 )]. The resulting function @xmath is even
in @xmath , which leads to a cusp for @xmath at @xmath , while at finite
@xmath it vanishes quadratically for @xmath . The real part is an odd
function with respect to @xmath . Again, the function is nonanalytic at
@xmath for @xmath , but at finite @xmath it is analytic at this point.
At @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In Figs. 3.6 and 3.7 we show a comparison of the exact (numerical)
results at @xmath with perturbative results as obtained from Eq. ( 3.77
). We observe that the leading terms ( @xmath for the real part and
@xmath for the imaginary part) are already quite good approximations for
@xmath . The higher orders in the perturbative expansion do not lead to
a considerable improvement of the approximation, which indicates that
the series converges well only for @xmath .

Fig. 3.8 shows a plot for the inverse group velocity [ 89 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again one can see that the leading logarithmic approximation is already
quite close to the exact result for small @xmath , while the hard
contribution @xmath [ @xmath for @xmath ] dominates for larger values of
@xmath .

### 3.6 Fermi surface properties

The quasiparticle distribution function at zero temperature is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are interested in the behavior of the distribution function for
@xmath . A possible non-regular behavior is expected from the
singularity of the integrand. Thus we consider the quantity [ 90 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . We will neglect the imaginary part of the self energy in
the following, since the imaginary part does not show a logarithmic
enhancement in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. Thus we may write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the solution of the approximate dispersion law @xmath .
We obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second factor on the right hand side is the group velocity. In
contrast to a normal Fermi liquid it vanishes (like @xmath ) for @xmath
. Therefore also the discontinuity at the Fermi surface vanishes. We
remark that a similar behavior can also be found in condensed matter
physics, in the context of high- @xmath superconductors. These systems
have been termed “marginal Fermi liquids” [ 91 ] .

## Chapter 4 Anomalous specific heat at low temperature

### 4.1 General remarks

In this chapter we will continue our analysis of normal degenerate quark
matter. We will compute the specific heat, which may be relevant for
cooling of (proto-)neutron stars at temperatures above the color
superconductivity phase transition. For a normal Fermi liquid (see Sec.
4.2 ) the specific heat is linear in the temperature for small
temperatures. We will see, however, that the specific heat of cold dense
quark matter contains an anomalous leading term of the order @xmath . As
for the quark self energy, this logarithmic enhancement comes from
long-range chromomagnetic fields. In this chapter we will also correct
an error in a recent computation of the specific heat [ 92 ] , which
would have resulted in a @xmath behavior of the specific heat at leading
order.

### 4.2 Landau Fermi liquid theory

In this section we will give a brief account of Landau’s theory of Fermi
liquids [ 93 , 94 ] , with particular emphasis on the specific heat. Our
presentation follows closely Refs. [ 95 , 96 ] , to which we refer for
further details.

To begin with, let us consider a uniform, non-relativistic ¹ ¹ 1 The
generalization of Landau’s theory to relativistic systems is discussed
in [ 97 ] . gas of free spin- @xmath fermions. The ground state consists
of a Fermi sea, corresponding to the occupation number

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fermi momentum. The total energy is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now let us turn on interactions between the particles adiabatically. We
assume that the quantum mechanical states of the free system are
gradually transformed into states of the interacting system. If this is
the case, the interacting system is called a (Landau) Fermi liquid.

Next let us add an additional particle with momentum @xmath ( @xmath )
to the free system, and then switch on the interactions. The eigenstate
of the interacting system, which is obtained in this way, is called a
quasiparticle. Denoting the energy of a quasiparticle with @xmath and
the chemical potential with @xmath , one finds that the lifetime of
quasiparticles is proportional to @xmath [ 96 , 98 ] [see also Eq. (
3.66 ) above]. Therefore the concept of a quasiparticle is well-defined
in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. Since quasiparticles are
adiabatically evolved from fermions, their distribution function at
finite temperature is given by the usual Fermi-Dirac distribution,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

A weak perturbation of the interacting system will induce a change
@xmath in the occupation number. Landau postulated that the change in
the total energy of the system is then given by ² ² 2 For simplicity we
suppress spin labels.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy of a quasiparticle, and @xmath is the
quasiparticle interaction. For isotropic systems the effective mass
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The specific heat at constant volume and per unit volume is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eqs. ( 4.3 )-( 4.6 ) one finds that the specific heat of a Fermi
liquid is linear in the temperature at low temperature (as for a free
Fermi gas), @xmath , where the coefficient @xmath is given by [ 96 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Landau’s theory is corroborated by results of the microscopic theory,
i.e. quantum field theory. For instance one finds also in quantum field
theory that the specific heat of a cold fermionic system is linear in
the temperature at leading order in many cases. The coefficient @xmath
can be computed e.g. from the 2PI effective action. For a theory with
instantaneous four fermion interaction one finds [ 90 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fermion self energy. Evaluating the derivative with
respect to @xmath , one finds that the coefficient is proportional to
the inverse group velocity,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is clear, however, that Eq. ( 4.8 ) becomes meaningless if the group
velocity vanishes at @xmath . In the previous chapter we did indeed
encounter a situation where this happens, namely for a system with
long-range interactions. In that case Landau’s theory is not applicable,
and the leading term of the specific heat will not be linear in the
temperature.

### 4.3 Specific heat from the entropy

The specific heat @xmath at constant volume and per unit volume can be
defined as the logarithmic derivative of the entropy density with
respect to temperature at constant number density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be rewritten in terms of derivatives at constant @xmath or
@xmath in the following way [ 99 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

At low temperatures only the term with the entropy contributes [ 100 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The thermodynamic potential for QCD is given by the following functional
of the full propagators and self energies (assuming a ghost-free gauge)
[ 101 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quark propagator, @xmath is the quark self energy,
@xmath is the gluon propagator, @xmath is the gluon self energy, and
@xmath is a series of 2-particle-irreducible (skeleton) diagrams.

Using the fact that @xmath is stationary with respect to variations of
@xmath and @xmath , one can derive an expression for the entropy which
to two-loop order in the skeleton expansion is entirely given by
propagators and self energies [ 24 , 102 ] . We may neglect the
contribution from longitudinal gluons, since they are subject to Debye
screening and give therefore only a contribution to the normal Fermi
liquid part of the entropy. Furthermore we may neglect antiparticle
contributions in the fermionic sector since they would only lead to
exponentially suppressed terms, @xmath . Thus we find for the entropy
density (with @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath as in chapter 3 . For the evaluation of the
imaginary parts we always assume that @xmath and @xmath are replaced by
@xmath and @xmath , respectively [see Eqs. ( A.9 ) and ( A.12 )].

In the original derivation of the anomalous specific heat in QED by
Holstein et al. [ 103 ] , only the term involving @xmath had been taken
into account in the formula for the entropy density. While such a
formula for the entropy density is known to be correct for standard
Fermi liquid systems [ 90 ] , it is not clear a priori how to justify it
for more complicated systems, which possibly exhibit deviations from the
Fermi liquid behavior. Therefore we will use the full expression ( 4.14
) to calculate the entropy density at the order @xmath in the following.
We will only neglect @xmath , since it vanishes at two-loop order [ 102
, 24 ] , and could therefore only give contributions which are
suppressed by an additional factor of @xmath .

#### 4.3.1 Quark part

In Eq. ( 4.14 ) we have the following contribution from the quarks,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have performed an expansion with respect to @xmath , keeping
only the free term and the term corresponding to a single quark self
energy insertion. Diagrammatically, the latter part corresponds to the
sum of the gluon ring diagrams, see Fig. 4.1 . The free term gives the
particle contribution to the free fermionic entropy density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the last term in Eq. ( 4.15 ) the factor @xmath forces the self
energy to be on the light cone. From Eq. ( 3.67 ) we obtain the
following approximation of @xmath at leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and @xmath is some function. From the Fermi-Dirac
distribution in Eq. ( 4.15 ) we see that @xmath is of the order @xmath .
At leading logarithmic order we may therefore drop @xmath in Eq. ( 4.17
), since it gives only a @xmath contribution to the result. This
contribution would fix the scale under the logarithm, but this scale
will be determined anyway in Sec. 4.5 using a slightly different
approach. Thus we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We make the substitution @xmath . The integral is dominated by small
values of @xmath , therefore we may send the lower integration limit to
@xmath . Then we obtain at order @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result agrees with the one of Holstein et al. [ 103 ] after
correcting a factor of @xmath therein, as done previously in [ 104 ] .

#### 4.3.2 Gluon part

The gluon part @xmath is given by the first line of Eq. ( 4.14 ). It can
again be interpreted in terms of ring diagrams, Fig. 4.1 . Using the
relation [ 24 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

we write @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the cut term we use the approximation @xmath , because it can be
checked that including terms of higher order in @xmath would only
produce terms of higher order than @xmath (see Sec. 4.5 ). In this
region we have from Eqs. ( 3.29 ) and ( 3.31 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing an UV-cutoff @xmath for the moment, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to evaluate this integral we make the substitution @xmath ,
@xmath . Keeping only the term of order @xmath , we get the (finite)
result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determination of the constant @xmath would require a more accurate
calculation including the longitudinal mode (see Sec. 4.5 ), which would
show that @xmath .

Next let us evaluate @xmath . Following similar steps as in the
computation of @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that at order @xmath this expression just cancels the
contribution from Eq. ( 4.26 ).

Finally let us consider the pole part. In the HDL approximation we have
at low temperature @xmath , and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have discarded contributions @xmath which are negligible in the
low-temperature limit. Using [ 76 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We would like to give an estimate for this integral. With the plasma
frequency @xmath we have the inequalities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Fig. 4.2 ), and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Fig. B.2 ). Since we assume @xmath , we can therefore estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from terms @xmath which are dropped in the derivative with respect
to @xmath , this crude estimate (which we shall refine in Sec. 4.5.5 )
shows that the pole contribution is exponentially suppressed
(essentially because of @xmath ).

#### 4.3.3 Result

From the previous subsections we find the following result for the
entropy density at low temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 4.26 ) we see that the @xmath term can also be obtained by
starting only with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula corresponds to integrating out the fermions, as has indeed
been done in the approach of [ 100 , 105 ] . On the other hand, we see
from Eqs. ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.19 ) that one also gets the correct result by
using the purely fermionic expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which justifies the starting point of [ 103 ] .

#### 4.3.4 A note on the Sommerfeld expansion

Since the inverse group velocity diverges on the Fermi surface, one
might wonder whether the coefficient of the linear power of temperature
in the specific heat should also diverge. Of course we have seen from
explicit calculations that this is not the case. In order to see in
which way a straightforward application of Fermi liquid techniques goes
wrong in our case, let us consider again the entropy density. From Eq. (
4.15 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

A naive Sommerfeld expansion, assuming (erroneously) that @xmath is
analytic at @xmath , would lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we would have for the part of the entropy density which is linear
in temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course this equation is wrong , since the assumption that @xmath is
analytic at @xmath is incorrect. The explicit calculation (see above)
shows that instead of a linear term with a singular coefficient, one
obtains a @xmath term with a finite coefficient.

### 4.4 Specific heat from the energy density

The energy density can be obtained from the expectation value of the
energy momentum tensor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the specific heat is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the temperature derivative has to be taken at constant particle
number density, in contrast to the calculation of the low temperature
specific heat in the previous section, where all temperature derivatives
had to be taken at constant chemical potential, see Eqs. ( 4.12 ), (
4.14 ). Of course, both methods will ultimately yield the same result.

In [ 92 ] the specific heat is computed using the following formula for
the total energy density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spectral density of the positive energy component of
the quark propagator (see below). It should be noted that this formula
is incorrect even for a theory with only instantaneous interactions of
the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which case the correct formula reads [ 106 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anomalous behavior of the specific heat comes from dynamically
screened interactions, whose non-instantaneous character cannot be
neglected. It would be rather difficult to generalize Eq. ( 4.45 )
directly for non-instantaneous interactions, because one would have to
use an effective Hamiltonian which is nonlocal in time. If one naively
tries to compute the anomalous specific heat from Eq. ( 4.45 ), the
coefficient of the logarithmic term turns out to be wrong by a factor
@xmath . Therefore, we will follow a slightly different approach, using
the energy momentum tensor of QCD without integrating out the gluons.

The energy momentum tensor can be written as a sum of three pieces,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the quark part, the gluon part, and the interaction
part. The contributions of these parts will be evaluated in the
following subsections. We will neglect gluon self interactions and ghost
contributions, since they give only higher order corrections at low
temperature.

#### 4.4.1 Quark part

The quark part is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have written explicitly the sum over flavor space. This is the
(only) contribution which is taken into account by Boyanovsky and de
Vega [ 92 ] . Let us repeat their calculation, but for simplicity
without the renormalization group improvement of the quark propagator
proposed in [ 107 ] . As for the entropy density is is sufficient to
take into account only the positive energy component of the quark
propagator. Thus we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spectral density is defined as @xmath .

In order to obtain the specific heat from Eq. ( 4.42 ), we have to
determine first the temperature dependence of the chemical potential
from the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the particle number density @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

(up to anti-particle contributions). We expand @xmath with respect to
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The free contribution @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

In @xmath we are only interested in contributions which contain @xmath .
Such terms arise from infrared singularities from the gluon propagator,
which are dynamically screened. This corresponds to scattering processes
of quarks which are close to the Fermi surface. Therefore the anomalous
terms come from the region @xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 4.17 ) at
leading order. At leading logarithmic order we may again neglect the
function @xmath in Eq. ( 4.17 ). Subtracting the temperature independent
part, we find then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have approximated the spectral density with a delta function,
since the imaginary part of @xmath is negligible compared to its real
part. The integration can be performed easily, with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We notice that this result is consistent with the result for the entropy
density, Eq. ( 4.35 ). Now we can solve Eq. ( 4.49 ) at low temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The approximate solution to this differential equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 4.55 ) and ( 4.56 ) correctly reproduce the beginning of the
perturbative expansions of Eqs. (2.37) and (2.38) in Ref. [ 92 ] .

For the specific heat we obtain from Eq. ( 4.48 ), following the same
steps as in the calculation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 4.55 ) and ( 4.56 ) we find that the @xmath -terms cancel,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

as stated in [ 92 ] . We should emphasize that this cancellation has
nothing to do with the nonperturbative renormalization group method
which is employed in [ 92 ] . It should also be noted that this
renormalization group method has been criticized recently [ 108 ] ,
because the neglect of the @xmath -function in the renormalization group
equation used in [ 92 , 107 ] does not seem to be justified.

#### 4.4.2 Gluon part

We now turn to the gluon part of the energy density, which has been
explicitly neglected in Ref. [ 92 ] . This is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neglecting gluon self interactions, and keeping only the transverse part
of the gluon propagator, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pole contribution to this integral is again exponentially
suppressed, therefore we only have to consider the cut contribution. At
low temperature we may neglect the temperature dependence of the gluon
self energy. Subtracting a less infrared sensitive contribution not
involving the Bose distribution (corresponding to the non- @xmath -part
in Sec. 4.5 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

After the substitution @xmath , @xmath the integral can be readily done,
with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives the following contribution to the specific heat at order
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again the determination of the constant @xmath would require a more
accurate calculation, similar to the one in Sec. 4.5 .

#### 4.4.3 Interaction part

The interaction part is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expectation value of this term is essentially given by the resummed
gluon ring diagram as in Fig. 4.1 . However, here only the longitudinal
component of the gluon propagator appears in the loop. This mode is
subject to Debye screening, so it can contribute only to the normal
Fermi liquid part of the specific heat.

#### 4.4.4 Result

From the previous subsections we see that the only contribution to the
specific heat at order @xmath when calculated along the lines of Ref. [
92 ] comes from the gluon part, Eq. ( 4.63 ). While this confirms the
observation of Ref. [ 92 ] that the quark contribution of order @xmath
cancels against a similar term from the temperature dependence of the
chemical potential at fixed number density, it shows that the neglect of
the gluon contribution to the energy density in [ 92 ] is not justified.

Our result for the specific heat from the energy density is consistent
with the result for the entropy density in Sec. 4.4 . For the entropy
density we found at leading logarithmic order that it was sufficient to
take into account only the contribution of fermionic quasiparticles. For
the energy density, on the other hand, the purely fermionic formula (
4.48 ) is not sufficient to give the correct result.

### 4.5 Higher orders in the specific heat

In this section we will evaluate higher terms in the low temperature
specific heat which go beyond the leading logarithmic approximation. A
convenient starting point is the following expression for the pressure,
which becomes exact in the limit of large flavor number @xmath [ 109 ,
110 , 111 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the inverse gauge boson propagators are given by @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . The first line of Eq. ( 4.65 ) is simply the pressure of a
free fermionic quantum gas, and the remaining part is essentially given
by the sum of gluon ring diagrams in Fig. 4.1 . At finite @xmath , Eq. (
4.65 ) with @xmath including also the leading contributions from gluon
loops still collects all infrared-sensitive contributions up to and
including three-loop order [ 112 , 113 ] . We shall however find that
all contributions from gluon loops to @xmath are suppressed with @xmath
in the specific heat, and will thus be negligible for @xmath compared to
the terms we shall keep.

In the following we will always drop temperature independent terms in
the pressure, since they do not contribute to the specific heat at low
temperature. We will refer to terms involving the bosonic distribution
function @xmath as “ @xmath -parts”, and to the remaining ones as “non-
@xmath -parts”.

From the explicit form of the self energy (see Sec. 3.2 and [ 77 ] ) we
see that the @xmath -integration naturally splits into three regions:
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We will consider these regions separately
in the following.

#### 4.5.1 Transverse contribution, region II

The @xmath -part of the contribution of the transverse gluons to the
pressure is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The cut contribution from region II is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as @xmath it is sufficient to take the self energy at zero
temperature.

The Bose-Einstein factor and the leading term in the gluon self energy
set the characteristic scales,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to perform an expansion with respect to a parameter @xmath
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

It turns out that the following approximation of the gluon self energy
is sufficient through order @xmath in the entropy density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
                 (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first two terms in both lines are the leading terms of an expansion
of the HDL self energy in powers of @xmath . Naively counting powers of
@xmath in the integrand one would conclude that only these terms are
responsible for the coefficients of the expansion in @xmath , while the
other terms in the self energy should give only terms which are
suppressed with additional powers of @xmath in the pressure. In
principle this is correct, but it turns out that it is necessary to keep
also the last term in Eq. ( 4.71 ), which is beyond the HDL
approximation. As we well see in Sec. 4.5.3 this term gives a
contribution in the hard region, where the approximation @xmath is not
justified.

Introducing dimensionless integration variables @xmath and @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find after expanding the integrand with respect to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . In the coefficients of this expansion we have
written down only those terms which do not ultimately lead to terms that
are suppressed by explicit positive powers of @xmath . The integrations
are now straightforward, and we find ³ ³ 3 For the @xmath -integration
one needs the following formulae valid for @xmath :

@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The evaluation of the constant @xmath is a bit more involved because one
has to sum up an infinite series of contributions from the infrared
region. This will be done in Sec. 4.5.7 .

#### 4.5.2 Longitudinal contribution, region II

The @xmath -part of the contribution of the longitudinal gluons to the
pressure is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

As in the previous section the @xmath -integration decomposes into three
parts. In the second region ( @xmath ) the characteristic scales are now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way as in the previous section, the gluon self energy can
be approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
                 (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

We introduce dimensionless integration variables @xmath and @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we find after expanding the integrand with respect to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . In the coefficients of this expansion we have
written down only those terms which do not ultimately lead to terms that
are suppressed by explicit positive powers of @xmath . The integrations
are now straightforward, and we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

As in the transverse sector, the determination of the constant @xmath
requires summation of contributions from the infrared region, which will
be done in Sec. 4.5.7 .

#### 4.5.3 Contributions from the upper integration limit

In this subsection we will show that the HDL approximation for the gluon
self energy is sufficient to produce the series in @xmath , apart from
the order @xmath , where precisely two additional terms in the gluon the
self energy are necessary, one in the transverse part and one in the
longitudinal part.

First let us focus on the transverse part. It is convenient to multiply
the denominator and the numerator of the argument of the arctangent in
Eq. ( 4.67 ) with a factor @xmath . Dropping numerical factors, and also
powers of @xmath , we have then the following effective power counting
rules:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Here the third line corresponds to a HDL contribution,
and the last line corresponds to terms beyond the HDL approximation. At
first sight, we would expect that contributions from the last line (when
@xmath ) could only produce terms which are suppressed with powers of
@xmath in the pressure. A more careful analysis is required, however,
since the upper integration limit is proportional to @xmath , which
might invalidate the naive power counting in the integrand.

After the Taylor expansion with respect to @xmath , the term of order
@xmath in the integrand will have the following general structure for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is of the order @xmath . We note that @xmath is a
polynomial of degree @xmath in the expressions on the right hand sides
of Eqs. ( 4.82 )-( 4.85 ). This can be seen from expanding first @xmath
and @xmath , and then the arctangent, with respect to @xmath . Each term
in this polynomial contains at least one factor which comes from @xmath
, and at least one factor which comes from @xmath . Explicitly, we find
contributions to the pressure of the following type from the region of
large @xmath in ( 4.86 ), ⁴ ⁴ 4 The upper integration limit in Eq. (
4.87 ) corresponds to @xmath . Actually there exists no sharp upper
cutoff if one takes the gluon self energy at finite temperature. There
is only a “fuzzy” cutoff which is smeared over a region of size @xmath .
However, this effect gives only corrections of order @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath comes from the free gluon propagator, the first product
comes from @xmath , and the second one from @xmath . The parameters
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath are natural numbers (including zero). The properties of @xmath
listed above lead to the following set of restrictions for these
parameters,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.88)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.90)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can eliminate @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 4.87 ) with the help of Eqs.
( 4.88 ) and ( 4.89 ). After performing the integration we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the exponents are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are interested in contributions with @xmath . Therefore we obtain
from ( 4.91 ) and ( 4.94 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore we get from @xmath using Eq. ( 4.88 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining the inequalities ( 4.95 ) and ( 4.96 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing ( 4.85 ) and ( 4.87 ) we find @xmath , and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to proceed we have to take a closer look at the structure of
@xmath . In the explicit zero temperature expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have @xmath for the first term, @xmath for the second one, and @xmath
for the three remaining ones. Finite temperature corrections to @xmath
also have @xmath . Because of ( 4.98 ) and @xmath we conclude that the
inequality ( 4.97 ) can only be satisfied for @xmath and for
contributions which come from the first two terms of @xmath in Eq. (
4.99 ). We write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the numbers of factors in Eq. ( 4.87 )
which come from the first and the second term of @xmath , respectively.
We note that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the inequalities ( 4.95 ) and ( 4.96 ) are reduced to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition @xmath gives with the help of Eqs. ( 4.88 ), ( 4.89 ) and
( 4.101 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last inequality to be satisfied is ( 4.90 ), which gives (using Eq.
( 4.89 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The only solution of the system ( 4.102 )-( 4.104 ) with non-negative
@xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We conclude that the only contribution from the upper integration limit
that is not suppressed with powers of @xmath arises from the following
set of parameters in Eq. ( 4.87 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which gives @xmath and @xmath for the exponents in Eq. ( 4.92 ).
Explicitly, we have the following contribution to the pressure in this
case,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have thus shown that this is the only contribution in the whole
series in @xmath (for @xmath ) which comes from the upper integration
limit and which is not suppressed with powers of @xmath . We conclude
that the naive power counting, as inferred from ( 4.82 )-( 4.85 ), is
almost correct, which means that HDL self energy is sufficient to
produce the series in @xmath , with the sole exception of the term of
order @xmath . At this order we get a contribution from a term in @xmath
which is beyond the HDL approximation [the second term in Eq. ( 4.99 )],
as shown in Eq. ( 4.107 ).

The conclusions of this section can also be understood in a more direct
way. With the definition @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expression in the first line is precisely the second term in Eq. (
4.99 ). It gives the following hard (two-loop) contribution to the
pressure,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is precisely the contribution which comes from the term
proportional to @xmath in Eq. ( 4.73 ). Since this two-loop expression
is sensitive to hard scales, it is not surprising that the HDL
approximation is not sufficient in this case. On the other hand, we see
from the power counting rules ( 4.82 )-( 4.85 ) that the HDL
approximation is certainly good enough to produce all the terms in the
series in @xmath that come from soft scales. Of course one has to resum
diagrams at soft scales, as we have done it in Sec. 4.5.1 .

The arguments of the preceding paragraph can also be applied to the
longitudinal case. As in the transverse case the only contribution that
is sensitive to hard momenta appears at the two-loop level. Again we
define @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
     @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have the following two-loop contribution from hard momenta,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

All the other terms in the series in @xmath are generated by the HDL
approximation.

#### 4.5.4 Cut contributions from regions I and III

In the first region the imaginary parts of the complete self energies (
@xmath and @xmath ) vanish, therefore there is no cut contribution to
the specific heat.

In the third region we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we take the
gluon self energy at zero temperature we can therefore make the
following estimates for the transverse part,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for the longitudinal part,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These are contributions which are suppressed by explicit powers of
@xmath . If one takes the gluon self energy at finite temperature, the
sharp boundaries of region III will be smeared by an amount of order
@xmath , but this does not modify the above estimates.

#### 4.5.5 Pole part

The pole contribution comes from region I, i.e. @xmath . In this region
the HDL propagator has single poles for @xmath at real @xmath , which
allows us to carry out the @xmath -integration. For the @xmath -part we
find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting this expression into the Bose factor, we find the
characteristic scale @xmath , which is indeed consistent with @xmath for
small temperatures. The logarithm in Eq. ( 4.116 ) can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After the substitution @xmath we obtain for the leading contribution of
the transverse part

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

an analogous calculation for the longitudinal part gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that all pole contributions are exponentially suppressed for
@xmath , with the only exception of a @xmath contribution from the term
@xmath in the longitudinal sector, which contributes the equivalent of
an ideal-gas pressure of one bosonic degree of freedom, but with
negative sign.

#### 4.5.6 Non-@xmath contribution

Integrals without @xmath are less IR singular than the corresponding
integrals with @xmath , since the Bose distribution behaves like @xmath
for small @xmath . This means that within our perturbative accuracy no
resummation is necessary for the non- @xmath terms, and it is sufficient
to consider the strictly perturbative two-loop expression for @xmath .
We can determine this contribution by the observation that at two-loop
order also the @xmath part is IR safe and given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . In order to evaluate Eq. ( 4.122 ) we need @xmath on the
light cone. From Eq. ( 3.10 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore we get the following contribution from the real part of the
gluon self energy,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next we want to evaluate the contribution with @xmath in Eq. ( 4.122 ).
First we approximate the gluon self energy with its zero zero
temperature version. (We will check the validity of this approximation
below.) The main contribution comes from region II, where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting this expression into Eq. ( 4.122 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At this point we are able to check explicitly that at this order
including finite temperature corrections into the gluon self energy does
not change the result. From the integral representation of @xmath [Eqs.
( 3.13 )-( 3.16 )] we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(Here we have dropped the vacuum contribution in @xmath , since it would
give no contribution in the following.) After doing the @xmath
-integration we find for the second order susceptibility

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We substitute @xmath and @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing Eqs. ( 4.126 ) and ( 4.129 ) we see that at this order the
gluon self energy at zero temperature is sufficient to give the correct
result. This could have been expected, of course, since finite
temperature corrections to the gluon self energy are suppressed with
@xmath .

Adding up the two contributions ( 4.124 ) and ( 4.126 ), we find that
they cancel precisely at the order @xmath , which means that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the two-loop non- @xmath contribution is equal to the standard
perturbative result at order @xmath [ 114 , 115 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 4.5.7 Evaluation of the coefficient of @xmath

In this section we want to compute the complete coefficient of @xmath in
the pressure. To this end we will perform a systematic summation of IR
enhanced contributions, in a similar way as in Sec. 3.4.2 .

First let us consider the transverse part. From the terms which are
explicitly shown in Eq. ( 4.73 ) we find the following contribution to
the coefficient of @xmath in the pressure,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Evaluating explicitly the next few terms in the expansion of the
integrand, one finds additional contributions of order @xmath . They
arise from the fact that the @xmath -integrations would be IR divergent,
were it not for the cutoff @xmath . Therefore also terms which are
formally of higher order in the integrand contribute to the order @xmath
in the pressure.

Since @xmath depends on @xmath only through @xmath , and since we are
not interested in terms in @xmath which contain @xmath explicitly, it is
sufficient to take the HDL self energy in the following. With the
substitution ( 4.72 ) the transverse gluon self energy can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with some function @xmath . In this section we may neglect the term
@xmath from the free propagator in Eq. ( 4.67 ), because this term does
not become singular for small @xmath . After expansion of the integrand
with respect to @xmath we get then integrals of the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we see clearly that from arbitrary powers of @xmath in the integrand
we get contributions to the order @xmath in @xmath . The case @xmath
corresponds to the term of order @xmath , which we have evaluated
already above. As we are interested only in contributions from the IR
region, we may take @xmath as upper integration limit in Eq. ( 4.134 ),
since for @xmath we get then no contribution from the upper integration
limit. [The cases @xmath have been evaluated explicitly in Eq. ( 4.132
).] Furthermore we see from Eq. ( 4.134 ) that from the @xmath
-integration we always get a factor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The complete coefficient can thus be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This expression is in fact independent of @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.134 )).
Therefore we may set simply @xmath . Summing up the (Taylor) series, we
find after the substitution @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this expression we see that the complete HDL self energy is
necessary for this coefficient (and not only the expansion for small
@xmath , which is sufficient for the fractional powers and the
logarithmic terms). The remaining integral over the parameter @xmath can
probably not be done analytically. Numerically one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The computation of the longitudinal part proceeds in a similar way. With
the substitution ( 4.79 ) the longitudinal gluon self energy can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with some function @xmath . In a similar way as in Eq. ( 4.134 ) we can
make the estimate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In a similar way as above we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have to be careful when summing up the Taylor series in Eq. ( 4.141 )
for the following reason. The function @xmath has a zero at @xmath , and
therefore @xmath is not an analytic function of @xmath . We have to
replace @xmath with @xmath . @xmath and @xmath have the same Taylor
expansion around @xmath , but only @xmath is an analytic function of
@xmath . In this way we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the complete @xmath coefficient we also have to take into account
the @xmath contribution from Eq. ( 4.121 ). Thus we get finally

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 4.5.8 How to compute higher order coefficients

Using the methods described above one can compute the coefficients of
higher terms in the expansion of @xmath with respect to @xmath . This is
straightforward for the coefficients of the fractional powers and the
logarithmic terms, where one only has to include higher orders in the
expansion of the HDL gluon self energy with respect to @xmath , see Eqs.
( 4.70 ), ( 4.71 ), ( 4.77 ) and ( 4.78 ). In this way one finds for the
coefficients of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the pressure

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.145)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.146)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.147)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We note in passing that the origin of the @xmath term is quite different
from the origin of the @xmath terms with @xmath : the former arises from
dynamical screening, while all the remaining logarithmic terms come from
integrals of the type @xmath .

For the terms of the order @xmath , with @xmath one has to sum up again
IR enhanced contributions, in a manner similar to the evaluation of the
@xmath -coefficient described above. In order to see how these IR
enhanced terms come about, let us make again an estimate of the type (
4.134 ), but now taking into account also the explicit @xmath and @xmath
from the inverse free propagator in Eq. ( 4.67 ). Using the fact that
@xmath and @xmath , we find in the transverse sector contributions of
the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When the denominator on the right hand side vanishes, the integrand on
the left hand side is equal to @xmath , which gives logarithmic terms
upon integration with respect to @xmath (which are not IR enhanced). The
important point is, however, that arbitrarily high powers of @xmath in
the integrand produce terms of the order @xmath , where @xmath is the
total number of @xmath and @xmath insertions in the integrand.

For the longitudinal part, the situation is completely analogous, as can
be seen from the estimate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As an illustration let us compute the coefficient of @xmath . From Eq. (
4.148 ) we see that we get contributions from @xmath and @xmath .
Instead of simply setting the explicit @xmath and @xmath to zero as in
Eq. ( 4.136 ), we have to consider now the object

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore we obtain in place of Eq. ( 4.136 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 (4.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In a similar way as in Eq. ( 4.137 ), we can write Eq. ( 4.151 )
explicitly as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Numerically, one finds readily

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the longitudinal part, we find in a similar way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To summarize, the temperature dependent part of the pressure at small
temperature can be expanded in a series with coefficients of the orders
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . In this and the previous subsections
we have described in detail how to compute the coefficients of this
series. On the other hand, the computation of terms which are suppressed
by explicit powers of @xmath would be much more involved. In particular
one would have to include also diagrams beyond the large- @xmath formula
( 4.65 ).

#### 4.5.9 Specific heat

Neglecting terms which are explicitly suppressed with powers of @xmath ,
the pressure can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with some function @xmath . The specific heat ( 4.11 ) can be written as
a sum of two terms, @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the expression ( 4.158 ) for the pressure, and setting @xmath , we
find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that beyond the free contribution @xmath only contains
contributions which are suppressed with explicit powers of @xmath .
Within our accuracy we may therefore neglect @xmath in the interaction
part of the specific heat.

Adding the transverse cut contribution [Eq.( 4.74 )], the longitudinal
cut contribution [Eq. ( 4.81 )], the part of the pole contribution [Eq.
( 4.121 )] which is not exponentially suppressed, and the non- @xmath
contribution [Eq. ( 4.131 )], we arrive at our final result the the
specific heat at low temperature ⁵ ⁵ 5 The terms in the first two lines
of Eq. ( 4.163 ) beyond the leading logarithm have been calculated for
the first time by A. Ipp [ 77 ] . ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the constant @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.144 ). We note that for sufficiently small
temperatures there is a significant excess of the specific heat over its
ideal-gas value, whereas ordinary perturbation theory [ 114 , 115 ]
would have resulted in a low-temperature limit of @xmath .

#### 4.5.10 HDL resummation

As we have seen in the previous subsections, the nonanalytic terms in
the low-temperature expansion of the entropy density are determined by
HDL contributions to the gluon self energy. Terms beyond the HDL
approximation are relevant for contributions from hard momenta @xmath ,
yielding a term of order @xmath in the temperature-dependent part of the
pressure, as shown in Eqs. ( 4.110 ) and ( 4.113 ). In order to retain
all contributions that are nonanalytic in @xmath at @xmath , the HDL
self energies need to be kept unexpanded in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The sum of the transverse and longitudinal contribution decays like
@xmath for large @xmath , therefore we may send the upper integration
limit of the @xmath -integration to infinity. This just amounts to
dropping terms that are suppressed by explicit powers of @xmath .

In Eq. ( 4.165 ) we have neglected terms like @xmath in @xmath ,
therefore we have to assume @xmath . This is however a weaker condition
for the temperature than the condition @xmath which we had in the
previous subsections. The weaker condition is sufficient now, because we
do not perform an expansion in @xmath in this subsection. Adding the
soft contribution from Eq. ( 4.165 ), the hard contribution from Eqs. (
4.110 ) and ( 4.113 ), and the non- @xmath contribution from Eq. ( 4.131
), we arrive at the following result for the entropy density [ 113 ] ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the ideal-gas entropy density. The right hand side of
Eq. ( LABEL:hdlr2 ) is essentially given by one universal function of
the dimensionless variable @xmath , which we define through [ 113 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and which we have normalized such that the ordinary perturbative
two-loop result [ 114 , 115 ] for the low-temperature entropy density
corresponds to @xmath . The function @xmath can be evaluated
numerically. Fig 4.3 shows a comparison of the first few orders of the
low-temperature series with the full HDL result taken from [ 113 ] .
Further numerical results, in particular a comparison with
non-perturbative large- @xmath results, can be found in [ 100 , 113 ] .

### 4.6 Some remarks on neutrino emission from ungapped quark matter

A young neutron star loses energy mainly via neutrino emission from the
bulk [ 33 , 57 ] . One generally distinguishes fast processes, which
lead to neutrino emissivities proportional to @xmath , and slow
processes which lead to neutrino emissivities proportional to @xmath ,
see e.g. [ 33 ] and references therein. The dominant process for
neutrino emission from ungapped quark matter is the quark analogon of
the direct Urca process [ 57 , 116 , 117 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.168)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.169)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The cooling behavior is governed by the cooling equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the neutrino emissivity, which is given by [ 57 , 116 ,
117 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.171)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the fermion helicities, @xmath are the energies of the
fermionic quasiparticles as determined from the poles of the propagators
(neglecting the imaginary parts of the self energies), @xmath is the
matrix element for the reaction ( 4.168 ), and @xmath is the matrix
element for the reaction ( 4.169 ).

In [ 57 ] it is shown that the emissivity through leading logarithmic
order can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 (4.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Fermi coupling, @xmath is the Cabibbo angle, and
@xmath . The inverse group velocity @xmath , as defined in Eq. ( 3.103
), contains non-Fermi-liquid contributions, which we have discussed in
chapter 3 . As shown in [ 57 ] the non-Fermi-liquid corrections to the
specific heat and the emissivity lead to a (modest) reduction of the
temperature at late times.

If one wants to go beyond the leading logarithmic accuracy of Ref. [ 57
] , at least the following ingredients will be required. First, there
will be corrections to the emissivity from gluonic corrections to the
weak interaction vertex [ 57 ] . It might also be necessary to
generalize the formula ( 4.171 ) for the emissivity in a way that takes
into account the finite lifetime of the fermionic quasiparticles, since
the imaginary part of the quark self energy is of the same order as the
term which fixes the scale under the logarithm in the real part.

As a first step towards a more complete computation of the emissivity,
let us take the scale under the leading logarithm of the group velocity
as given by Eqs. ( 3.67 ) and ( 3.68 ), and simply insert the resulting
expression for the group velocity into Eq. ( 4.172 ). Using the integral

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we would then find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

While the constant under the logarithm will certainly be modified in a
more complete computation as discussed above, it is already interesting
to note that this constant is about an order of magnitude larger than
the corresponding constant in the specific heat, which we find to be
approximately equal to @xmath from Eq. ( 4.163 ).

## Chapter 5 Color superconductivity

### 5.1 Basics of superconductivity

Since its experimental discovery in 1911, superconductivity has been
extensively studied both in experimental and theoretical condensed
matter physics. The first microscopic theory of superconductivity was
developed by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) in 1957 [ 118 ] , see
e.g. [ 106 , 119 , 120 ] for pedagogical reviews. The key observation is
that the electron-phonon interaction induces an effective
electron-electron interaction which is attractive ¹ ¹ 1 Using Wilsonian
renormalization group methods [ 121 ] , it can be shown that the four
fermion operator corresponding to the scattering of two electrons with
opposite momenta is the only marginal operator in the vicinity of the
Fermi surface, all other fermionic interactions being irrelevant [ 122 ]
. . This leads to the formation of Cooper pairs. The ground state, which
is different from the ground state of a normal Fermi liquid, is then
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are creation operators for electrons with spin
up and spin down, respectively. The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are
determined by minimization of the free energy. The state ( 5.1 ) can be
characterized by a non-vanishing “di-electron” condensate,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which leads to a gap in the fermionic quasiparticle spectrum. A
condensate like ( 5.2 ) breaks spontaneously the @xmath invariance of
electrodynamics. Therefore the photon will acquire a mass via the Higgs
mechanism. This leads to the Meissner effect, namely the screening of
magnetic fields inside a superconductor.

### 5.2 Basics of color superconductivity

Let us begin with an ensemble of free quarks. At finite density the
ground state of this system is simply given by a Fermi sphere. Now let
us turn on interactions. At asymptotic densities at first sight a purely
perturbative treatment might seem appropriate because the interactions
are ‘‘weak’’ due to asymptotic freedom. However, it is important to note
that single gluon exchange is attractive in the color antitriplet
channel ² ² 2 This can be seen as follows. The tree level scattering
amplitude of two quarks is equal to the tree level scattering amplitude
of two electrons in QED, times the QCD factor

@xmath (5.3)

Since the electron-electron interaction is repulsive, the negative sign
of the first term in Eq. ( 5.3 ) implies that the quark-quark
interaction is attractive in the antitriplet channel. . This has
dramatic consequences, since an arbitrarily weak attractive interaction
leads to the Cooper instability of the Fermi surface, and the ground
state will contain diquark condensates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are fundamental color indices, @xmath , @xmath are
flavor indices, @xmath , @xmath are spinor indices, and @xmath denotes
the charge conjugated spinor, @xmath . By virtue of its similarity to
superconductivity in ordinary condensed matter physics, this phenomenon
was termed color superconductivity .

In the usual notation for the irreducible SU(3) representations one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore one cannot construct a color singlet from the expectation
value ( 5.4 ). This means that global color symmetry is spontaneously
broken by the diquark condensate.

Quarks have color, flavor and spin as internal degrees of freedom.
Therefore quite many different color superconducting phases could be
possible, depending on the color, flavor and spin structure of the
expectation value ( 5.4 ). At very high densities the phase with the
lowest free energy is the so-called color flavor locked (CFL) phase [
123 , 124 , 125 , 126 ] , where up, down and strange quarks contribute
to the pairing on an equal footing,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The symmetry breaking pattern of the CFL phase is (neglecting
electromagnetism and quark masses for the moment)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath corresponds to global color symmetry, @xmath correspond to
right and left handed flavor symmetry, and @xmath corresponds to baryon
number conservation. These symmetries are broken down to the diagonal
subgroup @xmath times a @xmath group that corresponds to @xmath . In the
CFL phase all eight gluons acquire a mass through the Higgs mechanism [
127 , 128 , 129 ] . The electromagnetic @xmath symmetry is also broken,
but there remains an unbroken @xmath [ 123 , 130 ] , whose generator is
given by @xmath , with @xmath in flavor space, and @xmath in color
space.

As in every field theoretical model with spontaneous symmetry breaking,
Nambu-Goldstone bosons appear in the CFL phase [ 127 , 131 , 132 , 133 ,
134 , 135 ] . Because of the symmetry breaking pattern ( 5.7 ) there are
17 broken generators, which would lead to 17 Nambu-Goldstone bosons.
Eight of these, corresponding to the breaking of @xmath , are “eaten” by
the gluons. The “surviving” Nambu-Goldstone bosons are an octet
corresponding to flavor symmetry breaking and a singlet corresponding to
baryon number breaking. While this singlet boson is strictly massless,
the octet bosons become massive if finite quark masses are taken into
account. Furthermore there is a light singlet from @xmath breaking.

At lower densities, the strange quark will eventually decouple, which
should lead to a two-flavor color superconducting (2SC) phase [ 38 , 39
, 40 ] , where only up and down quarks participate in the pairing,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the 2SC phase the global color symmetry group @xmath is broken down
to @xmath , but flavor symmetry remains unbroken. Therefore there are
five would-be Nambu-Goldstone bosons [ 136 , 137 , 138 ] , which are
“eaten” by the gluons. The gluons with adjoint colors @xmath - @xmath
are massless, while the gluons with adjoint colors @xmath - @xmath
acquire a mass through the Higgs mechanism [ 139 , 140 ] . As in the CFL
phase the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry is broken, but again an
unbroken @xmath survives [ 136 , 141 ] , whose generator is now given by
@xmath .

In Ref. [ 142 ] it was argued that the 2SC phase will be disfavored if
one takes into account the constraints from color and electric charge
neutrality at finite strange quark mass @xmath . To date a completely
reliable description of the phase structure of QCD at densities below
the CFL regime is still lacking. In the following we will list some of
the phases that have been proposed in the literature.

Computing the meson masses from the low energy effective Lagrangian in
the CFL phase, one finds that the masses of the @xmath and @xmath become
imaginary if @xmath exceeds a certain value. This indicates the
formation of a kaon condensate [ 44 , 143 , 144 , 145 ] .

The charge neutrality condition and the finite strange quark mass lead
to a mismatch of the Fermi momenta of the different quark flavors. This
might give rise to so-called gapless superconducting phases (g2SC [ 47 ,
48 , 146 , 147 ] and gCFL [ 148 , 149 , 150 , 151 ] ), where the
fermionic quasiparticle dispersion laws are modified, some of them
corresponding to gapless excitations. In Refs. [ 152 , 153 , 154 ]
however, it was found that the Meissner masses are imaginary in these
phases. This would indicate that the gapless phases are unstable, if no
mechanism can be found which makes the Meissner masses real quantities.

So far we have assumed only spin zero diquark condensates. The gaps
resulting from spin one condensates are much smaller than in the spin
zero case. Nevertheless spin one condensates might play a certain role
at intermediate densities, since they may be formed from quarks of the
same flavor, see Refs. [ 38 , 155 , 156 , 157 , 158 , 159 ] .

The mismatch of the Fermi momenta might also induce a so-called LOFF
(Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell) pairing [ 56 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 163
] . The LOFF state is characterized by Cooper pairs with non-zero total
momentum, and therefore translational and rotational symmetry are
spontaneously broken. This leads to crystalline structures that might
have relevant consequences for astrophysics [ 41 ] .

### 5.3 The color superconductivity gap equation

The gap equation for a color superconducting phase can be derived from
the Schwinger-Dyson equation for the quark two-point function, allowing
for a non-vanishing expectation value ( 5.4 ). At this point it is
convenient to introduce a Nambu-Gor’kov basis for the quark spinors,
which is given by @xmath , @xmath . The inverse quark propagator in this
basis is given by [ 38 , 164 , 165 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the gap functions, related by @xmath , and @xmath is
the quark self energy, with @xmath . Flavor and fundamental color
indices are suppressed in Eq. ( 5.9 ).

In order to solve the Schwinger-Dyson equation a suitable approximation
scheme has to be chosen. To date only the exponent and the leading
contribution to the prefactor of the gap [see Eq. ( 5.13 ) below] have
been determined consistently, where the following set of approximations
turned out to suffice:

-   replace the full quark-gluon vertex with its tree level counterpart
    (at least in Coulomb gauge) [ 166 ] ,

-   replace the full gluon propagator with its HDL approximation [ 167 ]
    ,

-   replace the quark self energy with the leading logarithmic result of
    the normal phase (see Eq. ( 3.67 )) [ 164 ] .

A rather lengthy calculation [ 45 , 156 , 164 ] then yields the
following gap equation for the 2SC phase (neglecting the gauge dependent
part)

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is a cutoff, @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is usually called “wave function renormalization factor” in this context
(in the previous chapters we referred to this quantity as group
velocity). With the definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

the solution of the gap equation at zero temperature can be written as [
86 , 156 , 164 , 168 , 169 , 170 , 171 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . @xmath is quite a complicated function, which is given
explicitly in [ 164 ] . At the Fermi surface @xmath is equal to @xmath ,
and away from the Fermi surface it decreases rapidly.

The parametric dependence of the gap on the coupling constant as shown
in Eq. ( 5.13 ) was first derived by Son [ 168 ] using renormalization
group techniques. It is different from the BCS result @xmath , which is
a consequence of the fact that quasistatic chromomagnetic interactions
are only dynamically screened.

The result for the gap can also be derived within the framework of high
density effective theory (HDET), in which the only relevant fermionic
degrees of freedom are those in the vicinity of the Fermi surface [ 43 ,
172 , 173 , 174 , 175 ] .

In the literature also the possible gauge dependence of the prefactor of
the gap, which would indicate an inconsistent approximation scheme, has
been discussed. In [ 176 ] the gap equation was solved numerically in a
general covariant gauge, with the result that large gauge dependences
occur for @xmath . In Ref. [ 177 ] , however, it was argued that in a
covariant gauge one has to include the quark gluon vertex correction in
order to obtain a gauge independent result. In [ 178 ] it was shown that
the prefactor of the gap is gauge independent in a general Coulomb
gauge, if the gap is evaluated on the quasiparticle mass shell. In the
next section we will give a general proof that the fermionic
quasiparticle dispersion laws in a color superconductor are gauge
independent [ 179 ] .

### 5.4 Gauge independence of fermionic dispersion laws

The inverse quark propagator in the Nambu-Gor’kov basis, as shown in Eq.
( 5.9 ), is the momentum space version of the second derivative of the
effective action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the expectation value of @xmath ,
which is in general non-vanishing (see Sec. 5.6 ).

It should be noted that the doubling of fermionic fields in terms of
@xmath and @xmath is just a notational convenience here; the effective
action itself should be viewed as depending only on either @xmath or the
set @xmath .

The gauge dependence identity for the effective action [Eq. ( 2.12 )]
can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 5.15 ) can be cast in a more compact form using the DeWitt
notation, but now only for the fermions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and the comma denotes functional derivation.
Taking the second derivative of ( 5.16 ), setting @xmath , @xmath , and
using the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain a gauge dependence identity for the inverse propagator ( 5.14
),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up to this point, our functional relations are completely general and
apply also to the case of inhomogeneous color superconducting phases. We
do not attempt to cover the complications this case may add to the
question of gauge independence, but continue by assuming translational
invariance. This allows us to introduce @xmath and to write ( 5.18 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we can transform Eq. ( 5.19 ) into momentum space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices @xmath and @xmath from now on comprise only color,
flavor, Dirac and Nambu-Gor’kov indices. Using Eq. ( C.1 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left hand side of this identity is the total variation [ 62 , 63 ]
of the determinant of the inverse quark propagator, with the first term
corresponding to the explicit variation of the gauge fixing function,
and the second term coming from the gauge dependence of @xmath .

Since the determinant is equal to the product of the eigenvalues, Eq. (
5.21 ) implies that the location of the singularities of the quark
propagator is gauge independent, provided that the singularities of
@xmath do not coincide with those of the quark propagator. The
singularity structure of @xmath may be discussed in a similar way as in
the case of the Higgs model, see Sec. 2.3.3 . The quantity @xmath is 1PI
up to a full ghost propagator, and up to gluon tadpole insertions (see
Ref. [ 60 ] for the explicit diagrammatic structure) ³ ³ 3 It should be
noted that @xmath will not contain any gluon tadpoles if its
perturbative expansion is constructed using the shifted field @xmath . .
As in [ 60 , 64 ] one may argue that the singularities of the ghost
propagator are not correlated to the singularities of the quark
propagator. Gauge independence of the zeros of the inverse fermion
propagator then follows provided that also the 1PI parts of @xmath have
no singularities coinciding with the singularities of the fermion
propagator. An important caveat in fact comes from massless poles in the
unphysical degrees of freedom of the gauge boson propagator, which are
typical in covariant gauges and which can give rise to spurious mass
shell singularities as encountered in the case of hot QCD in [ 73 ] .
But, as was pointed out in [ 74 ] , these apparent gauge dependences are
avoided if the quasiparticle mass-shell is approached with a general
infrared cut-off such as finite volume, and this cut-off lifted only in
the end, i.e., after the mass-shell limit has been taken.

The determinant which appears in ( 5.21 ) is taken with respect to
color, flavor, Dirac and Nambu-Gor’kov indices. The determinant in
Nambu-Gor’kov space may be evaluated explicitly using Eq. ( C.2 ). From
Eq. ( 5.9 ) we obtain in this way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The inverse of the matrix of which the determinant is taken here
appears, of course, in the ordinary quark propagator, which is obtained
by inverting ( 5.9 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

At leading order, when the quark self energy @xmath can be neglected, (
5.22 ) can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.25)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the projection operators introduced in [ 180 ] are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the chirality projector, @xmath is the helicity
projector, and @xmath is the energy projector given in Eq. ( 3.42 ).
(Note that @xmath in the massless limit which we are considering here [
180 ] .) If we assume for simplicity that @xmath is diagonal with
respect to color and flavor indices, the determinant in Eq. ( 5.25 ) can
be readily evaluated,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.27)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

giving the well known branches of the quasiparticle excitation spectrum
for each value of the color-flavor index @xmath [ 180 ] .

At leading order, when the quark self energy can be neglected, Eqs. (
5.21 ) and ( 5.22 ) imply that the gap function is gauge independent on
the quasiparticle mass shell. It should be noted, however, that at
higher orders only dispersion relations obtained from ( 5.22 ), which
also include the quark self energy @xmath , can be expected to be gauge
independent.

We note furthermore that for @xmath the determinant ( 5.22 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Therefore, in this case the gauge independence proof, of
course, boils down to the gauge independence proof for the singularities
of the quark propagator without diquark condensates.

### 5.5 Computation of @xmath

The aim of this subsection is the evaluation of @xmath for the 2SC phase
in covariant gauge. This is interesting because the existing
calculations in the literature give gauge dependent results for the gap
in this gauge ⁴ ⁴ 4 In [ 181 ] the gap equation was considered in a
non-local gauge, with the result that the “best” value of the gauge
parameter in covariant gauge should be @xmath , but then the result for
the gap does not agree with the well-established result in Coulomb gauge
[ 178 ] . .

We will focus on possible singularities of @xmath , since they might
invalidate the above proof of gauge independence. At one-loop level
@xmath contains terms like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the gluon propagator, @xmath is the quark
propagator (see below), and we have used

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 5.29 ) corresponds to the diagram in Fig. 5.1 , where the vertex
with a circle denotes @xmath and the small triangle denotes @xmath .

In the 2SC phase the gap matrix is given by [ 39 , 156 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are flavor indices and @xmath , @xmath are
fundamental color indices. The @xmath ’s are the projection operators
defined in Eq. ( 5.26 ). We have assumed for simplicity that the
right-handed and the left-handed gap functions are equal up to a sign [
156 ] . For the quark propagator @xmath one finds then [ 139 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with [ 139 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the energy projectors given in Eq. ( 3.42 ). We shall
consider only the part of @xmath which contains the propagator @xmath ,
because it is this part which depends on the condensate. We will call
this part @xmath . In the HDL approximation the gluon propagator obeys
the following Ward identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we obtain after taking the color trace, neglecting the antiparticle
propagator and the imaginary part of the gap function [ 156 ] , and
dropping an irrelevant prefactor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . The integral is dominated by @xmath ,
therefore we may set @xmath in the numerator. We set @xmath and define
@xmath . After carrying out the @xmath -integration (assuming that
@xmath is almost independent of @xmath ) we perform the analytical
continuation @xmath and take the on-shell limit, @xmath . Then the
@xmath -integral (with UV cutoff @xmath ) gives terms proportional to
@xmath . Thus there may be indeed a mass shell singularity in @xmath ,
at least within our approximations. It is however only a logarithmic
singularity, which is harmless because on the right hand side of the
gauge dependence identity we have expressions like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanish for @xmath . We conclude that no IR cutoff should be
necessary to assure gauge independence of the dispersion laws (at zero
temperature).

An explicit calculation shows indeed that a simple IR cutoff for the
gauge dependent part of the gluon propagator in the gap equation is not
sufficient to remove the gauge dependence of the gap in covariant gauge.
In Ref. [ 177 ] it has been argued that this gauge dependence will only
disappear after the inclusion of vertex corrections in the gap equation.

### 5.6 Gluon tadpoles

In a color superconductor global color symmetry is dynamically broken by
the diquark condensate. Therefore there is no symmetry which forbids the
existence of gluon tadpoles, cf. the discussion in Sec. 2.2 . This
section is devoted to a detailed analysis of the tadpole diagrams.

#### 5.6.1 Leading order tadpole diagram (2SC)

Let us consider the one-loop tadpole diagram as shown in Fig. 5.2 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the quark propagator in the Nambu-Gor’kov basis, which is
given by Eq. ( 5.9 ). At leading order we may neglect the quark self
energy @xmath . The quark-gluon vertex @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . The trace in ( 5.40 ) has to be taken with
respect to Dirac, color, flavor and Nambu-Gor’kov indices. First we
evaluate the trace over Nambu-Gor’kov space which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in Eq. ( 5.34 ) for the 2SC phase. Evaluating the
trace over flavor and color space we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that @xmath [ 156 ] and that @xmath has negligible
four-momentum dependence in the vicinity of the quasiparticle pole we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to obtain an order of magnitude estimate, we make the
approximation @xmath with @xmath [ 139 ] . Then the @xmath -integration
can be readily performed, with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is in fact of order @xmath , because @xmath is of order
@xmath [see Eq. ( 5.13 )].

#### 5.6.2 Gluon tadpoles for CFL with @xmath

We would like to evaluate the gluon tadpole in the CFL phase with a
non-vanishing strange quark mass @xmath . The inverse Nambu-Gor’kov
propagator takes the same form as in Eq. ( 5.9 ) (with @xmath at leading
order), where the free inverse propagators are now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again the lower indices are color indices and the upper ones are flavor
indices. At finite @xmath the Dirac structure of the gap is more
complicated than in the massless case [ 180 ] , but for @xmath we may
assume that the additional terms are suppressed at least with @xmath [
182 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

As usual we have @xmath . The inverse full quark propagator can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nine rows and columns of this matrix correspond to color and flavor
indices, namely (color,
flavor)=(1,1),(1,2),(1,3),(2,1),(2,2),(2,3),(3,1),(3,2), (3,3). The
@xmath are matrices in Dirac space, given explicitly by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The full quark propagator is obtained by inverting the
matrix in ( 5.49 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Similar expressions can be obtained for @xmath .

The gluon tadpole is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the trace over color and flavor space we find that the only
non-vanishing tadpole is @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We perform a Taylor expansion in @xmath , keeping only the leading term
which is of order @xmath . With the approximation @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This integral seems to be proportional to @xmath . It turns out,
however, that the factor @xmath cancels against a factor @xmath from the
result of the integration. This is related to the fact that for @xmath
the integral would contain an infrared singularity, which is regulated
by the gap [ 183 ] .

We make the approximation @xmath . After the integration we take the
limit @xmath , since we assume @xmath . This leads to [ 184 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.6.3 Color neutrality

To address the question of color neutrality [ 142 , 146 , 185 , 186 ,
187 , 188 ] we consider the partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the set of all fields, and @xmath is the QCD action
(including gauge fixing terms and ghosts). Following the argument given
in [ 189 ] it is easy to see that the system described by this partition
function is color neutral, at least if one chooses a gauge fixing which
does not involve @xmath , for instance Coulomb gauge: The fields @xmath
appear in the action as Lagrange multipliers for the Gauss law
constraint [ 190 ] . Therefore in the path integral the integration over
the zero-momentum modes @xmath produces delta functions, @xmath , where
@xmath are the color charges. This means that only color neutral field
configurations contribute to the partition function, q.e.d.

The gluon tadpole in the 2SC phase [Eq. ( 5.45 )] induces a
non-vanishing expectation value for the gluon field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the corresponding leading-order Debye mass [ 139 ] .
This expectation value acts as an effective chemical potential for the
color number 8,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

It may be noted that the chemical potential @xmath which has been found
by requiring color neutrality in an NJL model is also proportional to
@xmath [ 187 ] . In a similar way one finds in the CFL phase from Eq. (
5.56 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which agrees again qualitatively with the result of the NJL model
calculation [ 187 ] . One should emphasize, however, that whereas in NJL
models color neutrality has to be imposed as an additional condition,
color neutrality is guaranteed automatically in QCD by the integration
over the @xmath zero-momentum modes.

The tadpole diagrams we computed above correspond to the first
derivative of the effective action at vanishing mean field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 191 ] the expectation value of @xmath is computed self-consistently
from the Yang-Mills equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This approach is completely equivalent to our approach, which can be
seen from the Taylor expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the right hand side the first term vanishes, while the second term is
essentially the inverse gluon propagator at zero momentum times the
expectation value of @xmath .

The tadpole diagram in Fig. 5.2 which we evaluated above corresponds to
the fermionic part of the color charge density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

One might ask whether the gluons could also contribute to the charge
density. In Ref. [ 142 ] it was argued that the gluonic contribution
should vanish, since the gluonic part of the charge density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

contains the chromoelectric field strength, which vanishes in any
(super-)conducting system. The aim of the next subsection is to
corroborate this argument by analyzing the tadpole diagram with a gluon
loop (Fig. 5.3 ) [ 192 ] .

#### 5.6.4 Gluon self energy and gluon loop tadpole (2SC)

Let us consider the tadpole diagram in Fig. 5.3 , where the rhombus
indicates a resummed gluon propagator. In [ 139 ] integral
representations for the various components of the gluon self energy in
the 2SC phase have been derived. (The Feynman diagram for the gluon self
energy at leading order looks like the second one of Fig. 3.1 , with the
normal fermion propagators now replaced by Nambu-Gor’kov propagators.)
It turns out the the gluon self energy in the 2SC phase has some
off-diagonal components with respect to the color indices, therefore the
tadpole diagram in Fig. 5.3 does not vanish a priori . The non-vanishing
components of the gluon self energy in the 2SC phase are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Ref. [ 139 ] the gluon self energy is diagonalized by a unitary
transformation in color space. For our purposes it is more convenient
not to perform this transformation, since we want to keep the structure
constants totally antisymmetric. For the @xmath and @xmath components of
the self energy analytical results can be obtained rather easily, as we
will demonstrate in the following. We shall always assume that the
energy and the momentum of the gluon are much smaller than @xmath ,
because if there is any contribution to the tadpole diagrams, it will
come from soft gluons ⁵ ⁵ 5 For @xmath the gluon self energy is the same
as in the normal phase. Since it is then proportional to @xmath , it
gives no contribution to the tadpole diagram. Furthermore the typical
gluon momenta relevant for the tadpole diagram would be of the order of
the Debye or Meissner masses (or even smaller). . In the notation of
Ref. [ 139 ] we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have used the notations of Ref. [ 139 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the on-shell gap function. The superscript “0” means
@xmath . First let us evaluate @xmath . Without loss of generality we
assume @xmath . For @xmath the only contribution arises from @xmath .
With @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the step function in the second line we have @xmath for
@xmath . Therefore it is sufficient to approximate @xmath with its value
at the Fermi surface, which we denote with @xmath . Rewriting the delta
functions as @xmath , we find for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We make the substitution @xmath in the term with @xmath , which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -integration is now straightforward, and we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is a generalization of the one-loop gluon self energy at
zero temperature in the normal phase given in [ 77 ] (see also Sec. 3.2
). As in the normal phase, the leading part of the gluon self energy is
of the order @xmath (for @xmath ). In order to maintain consistency in
the following, we shall keep only these leading terms, since
contributions from lower powers of @xmath might mix with contributions
from diagrams with a higher number of loops. Denoting this approximation
with a tilde, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we will refer to this analogon of the HDL approximation
as the “leading order” approximation. @xmath is an odd function of
@xmath , therefore the real part can be calculated with the following
dispersion relation ⁶ ⁶ 6 In principle it is not sufficient to take only
the part of Eq. ( 5.67 ) where @xmath when computing the real part of
the gluon self energy. However, as argued in [ 167 ] , for @xmath
antiparticles (being always far from the “Fermi surface”) only give a
constant term in the transverse gluon self energy, and this constant is
the same in the superconducting phase and in the normal phase (at
leading order). [ 167 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

In contrast to the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath components of the
gluon self energy, the principal value integral can be performed
analytically in this case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consistency check, we may extract the Debye mass in the normal and
in the superconducting phase,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which are the standard results for @xmath [ 139 ] . For the other
Lorentz components of the self energy one finds following the same steps
as above

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.82)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Again the real parts could be obtained analytically via
dispersion relations, but the resulting expressions are rather unwieldy
and we shall refrain from writing them down here.

The off-diagonal components of the gluon self energy can be evaluated in
an analogous way. In place of Eq. ( 5.75 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that in this one-loop result there is a term which is linear
in @xmath , but there is no term of order @xmath . Therefore we have at
our order of accuracy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact this can be seen rather directly from the ( @xmath )-component
of Eq. ( 5.68 ): if we set @xmath we find at the order @xmath that the
integrand is odd with respect to @xmath , @xmath , and therefore the
integral vanishes at this order. This argument also holds for the real
part, @xmath . In the same way it can be shown that @xmath and @xmath .

This implies that the resummed gluon propagator is diagonal in the color
indices at leading order. Since the three-gluon vertex is antisymmetric
in the color indices at tree level, we conclude that the tadpole diagram
of Fig. ( 5.3 ) vanishes at the order of our computation. This means
that at this order the expectation value of the gluon field, Eq. ( 5.58
), is not changed by the tadpole diagram in Fig. ( 5.3 ). Therefore the
effective chemical potential is determined completely by the quark part
of the color charge density at the order of our computation, whereas the
gluonic part is negligible at this order.

We note that there is no contribution from the tadpole diagram with a
ghost loop. The reason is that there is no direct coupling between
quarks and ghosts in the QCD Lagrangian, therefore the ghost self energy
vanishes at the order @xmath , and the ghost propagator is proportional
to the unit matrix in color space at leading order. Furthermore we
remark that e.g. in covariant or Coulomb gauge in particular the gauge
dependent part of the gluon propagator is diagonal in the color indices
at leading order. Therefore the effective chemical potential is gauge
independent at this order.

#### 5.6.5 Gluon vertex correction (2SC)

We would like to check whether the above result is modified if one
replaces the tree level gluon vertex with the one-loop vertex
correction, as shown in Fig. 5.4 . We remark that the tadpole diagram in
Fig. 5.4 corresponds to a higher order correction to the fermionic part
of the charge density [Eq. ( 5.64 )]. Let us evaluate the one-loop
three-gluon vertex of Fig. 5.4 in the limit where one of the gluon
momenta approaches zero. After taking the trace with respect to
Nambu-Gor’kov, color and flavor indices we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.87)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.88)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.89)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore one finds the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The propagators @xmath and @xmath in Eqs. ( 5.87 )-( 5.90 ) are defined
in Eqs. ( 5.35 ) and ( 5.36 ), and @xmath is given by [ 139 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.92)
     @xmath      (5.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

(In the following we will assume again @xmath [ 139 ] .) In order to
evaluate Eqs. ( 5.87 )-( 5.90 ) we need the following Dirac traces,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.95)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.96)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.98)
     @xmath      (5.99)
     @xmath      (5.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath contain a common factor @xmath , which we do
not write in the following. Then we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.101)
     @xmath      (5.102)
     @xmath      (5.103)
     @xmath      (5.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After performing the energy integration one finds for instance

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.105)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The integrals can be evaluated in a
similar way as in the previous section. It is easy to see that @xmath
vanishes at the order @xmath . In general (see also [ 140 ] ) one finds
that @xmath is non-vanishing at the order @xmath only for those
combinations of color indices where @xmath is non-vanishing. In the
previous section we have seen that the gluon propagator is diagonal in
the color indices at leading order. Therefore the tadpole diagram in
Fig. 5.4 also vanishes at this order.

#### 5.6.6 Mixing with Nambu-Goldstone bosons (2SC)

The symmetry breaking pattern of the 2SC phase is @xmath [ 39 ] .
Therefore five massless (would-be) Nambu-Goldstone (NG) bosons appear in
this phase, which correspond to fluctuations of the diquark condensate.
As shown in [ 136 , 137 , 138 ] , one finds the following effective
action for gluons, ghosts and NG bosons after integrating out the
quarks,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the gluonic part of the Lagrangian is e.g. in covariant gauge
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the usual field strength of the gluons, @xmath and
@xmath are the (anti-)ghost fields, and @xmath is the covariant
derivative in the adjoint representation (see e.g. [ 190 ] ). The quark
propagator @xmath reads, in the notation of Ref. [ 138 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is the (Lie algebra valued) Maurer-Cartan one-form
introduced in [ 136 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

parametrizes the coset space @xmath [ 137 ] , @xmath is a generator
orthogonal to the one of @xmath , and @xmath are the NG bosons. We may
expand @xmath in powers of the fields,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath otherwise.

Let us examine the various terms in the effective action ( 5.107 ).
First consider the term linear in @xmath , which contains the one-loop
gluon tadpole ⁷ ⁷ 7 The @xmath -tadpole vanishes because the external
external momentum of the tadpole diagram is zero. (Fig. 5.2 ). In
principle this term also gives contributions to higher @xmath -point
functions, since @xmath contains arbitrarily high powers of @xmath . In
particular, there is a contribution to the bosonic self energy, but this
effect is negligible at leading order since the one-loop tadpole [Eq. (
5.45 )] is only linear in @xmath .

The term quadratic in @xmath contains the bosonic self energy. As in
section 5.6.5 one finds that at leading order the self energy is
diagonal in the color indices. There are mixed terms between gluons and
NG bosons, which could be eliminated by choosing a suitable t’Hooft
gauge [ 138 ] . This is not necessary for our purposes, but we note that
choosing this t’Hooft gauge would not alter our conclusion, since also
in the t’Hooft gauge of Ref. [ 138 ] the gluon, NG and ghost propagators
are diagonal in the color indices at leading order. The gluon and NG
propagators in the t’Hooft gauge are given explicitly in Eqs. (54) and
(55) of Ref. [ 138 ] . At leading order the propagators (and in
particular the gauge dependent parts of the propagators) are diagonal in
the color indices also without the unitary transformation in color space
that is employed in Ref. [ 138 ] .

The term quadratic in @xmath also contains new types of three-boson
vertices proportional to @xmath , which involve at least one NG boson.

The term cubic in @xmath is only non-vanishing at the order @xmath for
those color indices where @xmath . In this thesis we do not consider
vertices with more than three legs, since these would appear only in
two-loop tadpole diagrams.

To summarize, we find at leading order as in the previous subsections
that the bosonic propagators are diagonal in the color indices, and that
three-boson vertices of the type @xmath are non-zero only for those
combinations of color indices where @xmath . We conclude that the
tadpole diagram in Fig. ( 5.4 ) vanishes at the order of our
computation, even if we take into account NG bosons.

#### 5.6.7 Tadpoles with bosonic loops in the CFL phase

In the case @xmath the situation for the diagrams in Figs. ( 5.3 ), (
5.4 ) is similar to the 2SC phase. In the CFL phase the one-loop gluon
self energy is proportional to the unit matrix in color space [ 128 ]
(as in the normal phase). Therefore the diagram in Fig. 5.3 vanishes
identically. For the gluon vertex correction one finds after taking the
trace with respect to Nambu-Gor’kov, color and flavor indices

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and [ 128 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.115)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.116)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

(As in the 2SC case we have assumed that right-handed and left-handed
gap functions are real and equal up to a minus sign [ 128 ] .) Here
@xmath is the singlet gap and @xmath is the octet gap [ 128 , 134 ] . It
is straightforward to show that in the three-gluon vertex correction
@xmath only the term proportional to @xmath is non-vanishing at the
order @xmath .

The structure of effective action for gluons and NG bosons is similar to
the 2SC phase [ 127 , 131 , 133 , 134 ] . Thus we find that all the
three-boson vertices are proportional to @xmath at leading order, and
all the boson propagators are proportional to @xmath . Therefore the
tadpole diagram in Fig. 5.4 vanishes also in the CFL phase.

### 5.7 Some remarks on the specific heat (outlook)

We would like to conclude this chapter with some remarks on the specific
heat of color superconducting phases. First let us consider the
contribution of a fermionic mode to the specific heat. We assume that
the imaginary part of the fermion self energy is negligible. In a
similar way as in Eq. ( 4.14 ) one finds then the following contribution
to the entropy density,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the propagator of the corresponding fermionic mode ⁸ ⁸ 8
Compared to the notation of chapter 4 , we have shifted the energy
variable by @xmath , such that now the propagator instead of the
distribution function depends on @xmath . This notation is much more
convenient in the context of superconductivity. . Since we neglect the
imaginary part of the fermion self energy, the imaginary part of the
logarithm in Eq. ( 5.117 ) gives essentially a step function @xmath ,
where @xmath is the solution of the dispersion relation @xmath . For the
specific heat we find then [see Eq. ( 4.12 )]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . For a gapped fermionic mode we have @xmath . Then one
finds that the corresponding contribution to the specific heat is
exponentially suppressed, @xmath . For an ungapped mode one finds the
usual Fermi liquid result, @xmath , provided that @xmath is analytic in
@xmath .

For a bosonic mode one finds in a similar way (again neglecting the
imaginary part of the bosonic self energy)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the solution of the respective bosonic dispersion law.
For massless bosons one finds @xmath , whereas for massive bosons (
@xmath ) the contribution is exponentially suppressed, @xmath .

In the CFL phase all fermionic quasiparticles are gapped. Therefore the
specific heat is is at low temperature dominated by light bosonic
excitations [ 52 ] , leading to a specific heat proportional to @xmath .
Other color superconducting phases discussed in the literature have also
ungapped fermionic quasiparticles, leading to a specific heat
proportional to @xmath [ 57 ] . E.g., in the 2SC phase the quarks of
color @xmath are ungapped. Since they have only couplings with massive
gluons [ 139 ] , one expects that there will be no anomalous @xmath
contribution to the specific heat [ 57 ] . Also for the LOFF phase the
specific heat is linear in @xmath , at least in the NJL model approach [
193 ] . Only for the gapless CFL phase the specific heat is of the order
@xmath as a consequence of an (almost) quadratic dispersion relation of
one of the fermionic quasiparticles [ 151 ] .

These results for the specific heat will receive corrections from the
energy-momentum dependence and from the non-vanishing imaginary parts of
the self energies and the gap. These issues certainly deserve further
studies, since the specific heat is of central importance for the
cooling behavior of compact stars.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions and outlook

In this thesis we have investigated properties of cold dense quark
matter. The initial motivation was the fact that in the core of (some)
neutron stars the density may be high enough for deconfinement of quarks
at comparatively small temperatures.

In chapters 3 and 4 we have computed the quark self energy and the
specific heat in ultradegenerate QCD. At high density and zero
temperature the chromomagnetic screening mass vanishes, and quasistatic
chromomagnetic fields are only dynamically screened. These long-range
interactions lead to a non-Fermi-liquid behavior at high density and
small temperature. In the quark self energy the leading result at zero
temperature is proportional to @xmath [see Eq. ( 3.77 )].
Correspondingly, the leading term in the interaction part of the
specific heat is of the order @xmath [see Eq. ( 4.163 )]. We have
corrected an error in a recent paper [ 92 ] , in which it was claimed
that the leading term in the interaction part of the specific heat
should instead be of the order @xmath . Furthermore we have performed a
perturbative expansion of the quark self energy and the specific heat in
powers of @xmath . These expansions contain fractional powers which come
from the dynamical screening scale @xmath . An important application of
the results for the specific heat and the quark self energy is neutrino
emission from ungapped quark matter in neutron stars [ 57 ] .

Chapter 5 of the thesis has been devoted to color superconductivity.
Using a general gauge dependence identity we have given a formal proof
of gauge independence for the fermionic quasiparticle dispersion
relations in a color superconductor. As long as the gauge dependence of
the quark self energy can be neglected, this implies gauge independence
of the gap function on the quasiparticle mass shell. The application of
gauge dependence identities for gauge theories with spontaneous symmetry
breaking at finite temperature has also been demonstrated in chapter 2
for the Abelian and a non-Abelian Higgs model. We found furthermore that
the spontaneous breaking of global color symmetry induces a
non-vanishing expectation value for the gluon field in a color
superconductor. This expectation value acts as an effective chemical
potential for the color charge. As shown explicitly in [ 191 ] this
mechanism ensures color neutrality of the color superconducting system.
The expectation value of the gluon field can be computed from the gluon
tadpole diagram. We have computed the leading order tadpole diagrams,
both for the 2SC phase and for the CFL phase, where we have also
included a small, but non-vanishing strange quark mass in the latter
case. We have also shown that the expectation value of the gluon field
is at leading order not modified by one-loop tadpole diagrams with
resummed gluon or Nambu-Goldstone boson propagators.

There are several natural continuations of the present work, some of
which I would like to sketch briefly. As mentioned already in Sec. 4.6
one could use the results of chapters 3 and 4 to compute the cooling
behavior of a neutron star with a normal quark matter component beyond
the leading logarithmic accuracy of Ref. [ 57 ] . Still a lot of work
has to be done in the field of color superconductivity. We have computed
the gluon tadpole diagrams only for the 2SC and CFL phases. A
straightforward exercise would be the computation of gluon tadpoles for
other color superconducting phases, and at finite temperature. It would
certainly be more challenging to compute higher order corrections to the
tadpole diagram. Probably such a computation will only be possible after
higher order corrections to the gap have been determined consistently.
Another important subject is the specific heat of color superconducting
phases, which we briefly discussed at the end of chapter 5 . Also the
inhomogeneous color superconducting (LOFF) phases deserve further
studies. In particular it would be interesting to compute the neutrino
emissivity of neutron stars which contain quark matter in the LOFF phase
[ 57 ] .

It is fair to say that at present our understanding of cold dense quark
matter is still very incomplete. As discussed in the Introduction, the
major obstacle is the fact that lattice simulations at large chemical
potential are not possible so far. In view of this situation the
(semi-)perturbative methods which we have used in this thesis provide an
extremely valuable tool for an (at least) approximate description of the
properties of cold dense quark matter.

## Appendix A Matsubara sums

In this appendix we shall briefly review some standard techniques for
the evaluation of Matsubara sums.

For the computation of Feynman diagrams at finite temperature in the
imaginary time formalism [ 76 , 115 ] we need the following Matsubara
sum in the bosonic case,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can rewrite this sum as a contour integral using the residue
theorem. Assuming that @xmath is regular along the imaginary axis, one
gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The contour @xmath consists of the small circles shown in Fig. A.1 ,
which enclose the singularities of the @xmath at @xmath . The contour
can be deformed to two vertical lines enclosing the imaginary axis, see
Fig. A.1 . In this way we arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the first term on the right hand side is the vacuum contribution,
and the second term is the thermal contribution involving the
Bose-Einstein distribution,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The sum ( A.1 ) can be evaluated in a slightly different way by
considering instead of ( A.2 ) the object

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which fulfills @xmath Since we have for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can add arcs at infinity (loosely speaking) which give no
contribution, assuming that @xmath decays sufficiently fast at infinity.
In this way we obtain a new integration contour that pinches the real
axis, as shown by the dashed lines in Fig. A.1 . Taking the limit @xmath
and assuming that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

(Schwarz reflection principle), we find ¹ ¹ 1 The point @xmath should be
excluded from the integration path.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the function @xmath fulfills @xmath , we can rewrite Eq. ( A.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to the part of Eq. ( A.10 ) which contains @xmath as the “
@xmath -part”, and to the other part as the “non- @xmath -part”.

For fermions one finds in place of ( A.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in place of ( A.9 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Fermi-Dirac distribution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

At finite chemical potential one has to replace @xmath with @xmath .

## Appendix B HDL/HTL gluon spectral densities

In this appendix we review the spectral densities of the gluon
propagator in the HDL/ HTL approximation, as given in [ 76 ] . From Eq.
( 3.37 ) one finds for the transverse spectral density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the dispersion law @xmath is determined from the pole of the
propagator,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the residue @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the plasma frequency

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 3.32 ). For the cut contribution @xmath
one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . For the longitudinal spectral density one finds from Eq.
( 3.38 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again the dispersion law @xmath is determined from the pole of the
propagator [see Eqs. ( 3.9 ), ( 3.38 )],

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the residue @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the cut contribution @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath .

Fig. B.1 shows the dispersion laws @xmath and @xmath , as determined
from Eqs. ( B.2 ) and ( B.7 ). Fig. B.2 shows the residues @xmath and
@xmath which are given by Eqs. ( B.3 ) and ( B.8 ).

## Appendix C Matrix identities

In order to be complete, we give here the proof for two matrix
identities which are needed in the main text.

Proposition 1: For the variation of the determinant of an invertible
matrix @xmath one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof : Using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath can be expanded in a series, for instance about the unit matrix.
Under the trace cyclic permutations of a product of matrices are
allowed. Therefore one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 2: For any @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
(with @xmath invertible) one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof : With the definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can write the inverse matrix as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

A short calculation using this relation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denote the @xmath zero and unit matrices,
respectively. Therefore we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --