This thesis is devoted to properties of quark matter at high density and
(comparatively) low temperature. In nature matter under these conditions
can possibly be found in the interior of (some) neutron stars. Under
“normal” conditions quarks are confined in the hadrons. Under the
extreme conditions in the core of a neutron star, however, the strong
interaction between the quarks becomes weaker because of asymptotic
freedom. Then the hadrons will break up, and for the remaining
interaction between the quarks a (semi-)perturbative treatment should be
sufficient, at least at asymptotic densities.

It turns out that cold dense quark matter does not behave like a Fermi
liquid as a consequence of long-range chromomagnetic interactions
between the quarks. While the specific heat of a Fermi liquid is a
linear function of the temperature ( @xmath ) at low temperature, the
specific heat of normal (non-superconducting) quark matter is
proportional to @xmath at low temperature. In this thesis the specific
heat and the quark self energy in normal quark matter are discussed in
detail. A discrepancy between earlier papers on the specific heat is
resolved by showing that in one of these papers gluonic contributions to
the energy density were overlooked. Moreover higher order corrections to
the known leading order terms are computed in this thesis in a
systematic manner.

The quark-quark interaction mediated by one-gluon exchange is attractive
in the color antitriplet channel. Therefore quarks form Cooper pairs at
sufficiently small temperatures, which leads to the phenomenon of color
superconductivity. During the last years the issue of gauge
(in)dependence of the color superconductivity gap has been discussed in
the literature. Here a formal proof is given that the fermionic
quasiparticle dispersion relations in a color superconductor are gauge
independent. In a color superconductor the gluon field acquires a
non-vanishing expectation value in general, which acts as an effective
chemical potential for the color charge. This expectation value is
computed for two different color superconducting phases (2SC and CFL).
It is shown that at leading order this expectation value is determined
from a tadpole diagram with a quark loop. Tadpole diagrams with gluon or
Nambu-Goldstone loops turn out to be negligible at our order of
accuracy.
