###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The Standard Model
        -    1.1.1 Gauge Bosons and Fermions
        -    1.1.2 Standard Model Higgs Mechanism
    -    1.2 Alternative Models of EWSB
-    2 Spontaneous @xmath Symmetry Breaking
    -    2.1 Spontaneous @xmath Symmetry Breaking with Fundamental
        Scalars
    -    2.2 Dynamical @xmath Symmetry Breaking
    -    2.3 Domain Walls
    -    2.4 Flavor Changing Neutral Currents
-    3 Nambu-Jona-Lasino Approach for the EWSB: the Minimal Scheme
    -    3.1 The Lagrangian
    -    3.2 The Gap Equation
    -    3.3 Scalar and Goldstone Modes
    -    3.4 Gauge boson masses
-    4 Auxiliary Fields and the Effective Potential
    -    4.1 Auxiliary Fields
    -    4.2 The Effective Potential
    -    4.3 The Case of One Auxiliary Field
-    5 One Generation of Quarks
    -    5.1 Four-fermion interaction term
    -    5.2 Auxiliary fields and the effective potential
    -    5.3 Minimum of the effective potential
        -    5.3.1 First derivatives of the effective potential
        -    5.3.2 The case @xmath
        -    5.3.3 The case @xmath
    -    5.4 Composite Higgs boson masses
        -    5.4.1 Goldstone bosons
        -    5.4.2 Change of Basis of Auxiliary Fields
        -    5.4.3 The case @xmath
        -    5.4.4 The case @xmath
        -    5.4.5 Composite Higgs boson masses: Summary
-    6 Three Generations of Quarks
    -    6.1 Self-consistent Approach
    -    6.2 Derivatives of the Effective Potential
        -    6.2.1 First Derivatives of the Effective Potential
        -    6.2.2 Analysis of the First Derivatives
        -    6.2.3 Second Derivatives of the Effective Potential
        -    6.2.4 Summary
    -    6.3 Quark Mass Expansion
        -    6.3.1 Example
    -    6.4 Masses of the Composite Higgs Bosons
-    7 Compositeness Condition and Renormalization Group Analysis
-    8 Summary and Conclusions
-    A Surface Terms in the Spherical Cutoff Regularization

###### List of Figures

-    3.1 Feynman diagrams contributing to the top quark self-energy. The
    crosses represent @xmath insertions.
-    3.2 Diagrammatic representation of the gap equation. The crosses
    represent @xmath insertions.
-    3.3 Feynman diagrams contributing to two-point correlation
    functions of fermion-antifermion composite fields.
-    3.4 Feynman diagram associated with the self-energy contribution
    @xmath .
-    3.5 Feynman diagrams contributing to the self-energy @xmath , which
    contain four-fermion interaction insertions.
-    5.1 Diagrammatic representation of the gap equation for @xmath .
-    5.2 Feynman diagrams contributing to the neutral two-point proper
    vertices of auxiliary fields in the case of one quark family. The
    fields @xmath and @xmath stand for the four bosonic fields @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
-    5.3 Feynman diagrams contributing to the charged two-point proper
    vertices of auxiliary fields in the case of one quark family. The
    fields @xmath and @xmath denote the charged fields @xmath and @xmath
    .
-    6.1 Diagrammatic representation of the contributions to the neutral
    two-point proper vertices.
-    6.2 Diagrammatic representation of the contributions to the charged
    two-point proper vertices.
-    A.1 @xmath dependence of the momentum flow in the internal lines.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

One of the major problems of present-day particle physics is to
understand the mechanism which is responsible for electroweak gauge
symmetry breaking (EWSB). The standard model of particle physics (SM)
assumes that this phenomenon is caused by the condensation of one type
of Higgs bosons. In view of the phenomenological success of the SM its
prediction that there exists a neutral Higgs boson must be taken very
seriously. Nevertheless it is a fact that within the SM electroweak
symmetry breaking is only parametrized but not explained. Therefore
theorists have been investigating extensions of the SM which offer a
more satisfactory treatment of this phenomenon. These include
supersymmetric models and models of dynamical gauge symmetry breaking –
see Section 1.2 . It is believed that the experiments which will be made
at future accelerators, especially at the Large Hadron Collider and at
the future planned electron-positron collider, will permit a qualitative
improvement in the understanding of this mechanism in the near future.

In this thesis we investigate a class of models known as
top-condensation models [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ] . Top-condensation models
are special cases of models that aim at providing a dynamical reason for
electroweak symmetry breaking [ 6 ] . The aim of this work is to
formulate a phenomenologically acceptable model within this class, in
which the dynamical breaking of the electroweak symmetry causes also the
breaking of the @xmath symmetry.

The content of the thesis is as follows. We start in this Chapter
introducing the standard model, discuss its limitations, and thereby
motivate its extentions. In Chapter 2 we introduce the concepts of
spontaneous and dynamical @xmath breaking. Then in Chapters 3 , 4 , and
5 minimal top-condensation models are studied within the
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio approach. Chapter 6 contains the central part of this
thesis. Here, a three-generation model of dynamical gauge and @xmath
symmetry breaking is presented. It is shown that this class of models
leads, for a range of four-quark couplings, to the correct ground state.
Thus, dynamical generation of gauge boson and quark masses, quark flavor
mixing angles, and in particular, dynamical generation of the @xmath
-violating phase of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix is realized. In
Chapter 7 we make use of a complementary method based on the
renormalization group in order to compute for a class of
top-condensation models the values of the top-quark and spin-zero bound
state (composite Higgs bosons) masses at low energies. Finally in
Chapter 8 we give a summary and present our conclusions.

### 1.1 The Standard Model

In this Section we review the standard model of electroweak (EW)
interactions. In the first Subsection we discuss the electroweak gauge
bosons and fermions. Then in the second Subsection we review the
mechanism of electroweak symmetry breaking. For this purpose the SM
postulates a scalar particle, the Higgs boson, which so far has not been
observed in laboratory experiments. The SM model does not predict the
value of the Higgs boson mass. It predicts, however, the couplings of
this particle to gauge bosons, fermions, and its self-couplings in terms
of the measured masses. A major experimental effort at future colliders
is therefore to search for the Higgs particle and, if it is found, to
measure its couplings. After that in Section 1.2 we briefly discuss some
unsatisfactory aspects of the SM which motivate extensions of it, in
particular, alternative models of electroweak symmetry breaking.

#### 1.1.1 Gauge Bosons and Fermions

The EW interactions are described with an impressive precision by a
weakly-coupled gauge theory with gauge group @xmath . (The indices
@xmath and @xmath refer to left-handed and the weak hypercharge,
respectively.) The four gauge bosons are the photon @xmath , the neutral
@xmath boson, and the charged @xmath bosons. These particles are
described by the four vector fields @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
respectively. The experimental values of the gauge boson masses are ¹ ¹
1 All experimental values are taken from [ 7 ] unless stated otherwise.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fact that the @xmath and @xmath bosons are massive is at first sight
not compatible with gauge invariance because mass terms for gauge bosons
in the Lagrangian of the theory are not invariant under local gauge
transformations. In order to see this in more detail we present below
the infinitesimal @xmath gauge transformations of gauge fields. We shall
see in the next Subsection how the concept of a spontaneously broken
symmetry solves this apparent incompatibility.

Vector fields appear naturally in a theory by demanding it to be
invariant under local transformations. These fields are used to
construct gauge-invariant kinetic terms for fermions and bosons. In the
SM we associate to the gauge groups @xmath and @xmath the vector fields
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively. As we see below, linear
combinations of these fields correspond to the mass eigenstate fields
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Under infinitesimal @xmath gauge
transformations the gauge fields transform as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge coupling constant and the gauge
transformation parameter related to the @xmath group. For the
non-abelian @xmath group the corresponding expressions are given by
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. In this case the gauge group possesses
three generators and hence three gauge fields and three transformation
parameters numerated by @xmath . Besides, the Lie algebra of the @xmath
group is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , with @xmath , denote the generators of the group and the
structure constants @xmath are chosen completely antisymmetric with the
normalization @xmath . Now we can see from Eqs. ( 1.2 ) that gauge boson
mass terms, for instance @xmath , are not gauge invariant.

Gauge fields allow to construct covariant derivatives and with them
gauge-invariant kinetic terms for fermions and bosons. The @xmath gauge
transformation of a fermionic or bosonic field @xmath in the fundamental
representation of the @xmath and with a @xmath charge @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which for infinitesimal transformation parameters can be approximated to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , with @xmath , are the Pauli matrices ( @xmath fulfill Eq.
( 1.3 )). The covariant derivatives acting on these fields are defined
as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Covariant derivatives of the field @xmath are objects which contain a
derivative of the field @xmath and transform under gauge transformations
like the field itself:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these objects it is possible to write gauge-invariant kinetic
terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for fermions and scalars, respectively.

In the SM there are three generations of fermions. Each generation
contains leptons, which do not feel the strong interactions directly,
and quarks that do. In each lepton generation there is a left-handed
@xmath doublet and a right-handed @xmath singlet (we ignore here the
recently established fact that at least two of the three neutrinos are
massive). Similarly, each quark generation contains one left-handed
@xmath doublet and two right-handed @xmath singlets. In addition quarks
transform under the @xmath gauge group in the fundamental representation
and couple to gluon fields as described by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD).
The weak @xmath hypercharges @xmath of the SM fermions are given in
Table 1.1 . Apparently no logical structure governs them. However they
appear in nature in such a way that the theory has no anomalies related
to the gauge symmetry currents. A weak hypercharge assignment like this
can naturally be implemented in grand unified theories (GUTs).

We also quote the masses of the SM fermions. The experimental values of
the lepton masses are (without error bars)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and those of the quark masses are ² ² 2 The value of the top-quark mass
was taken from a recent reanalysis of direct observation of top events [
8 ] . @xmath ³ ³ 3 The values of the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath quark
masses are estimates of so-called “current-quark masses”, in a
mass-independent subtraction scheme such as @xmath at a scale @xmath .
The @xmath and @xmath quark masses are the “running” masses at @xmath in
the @xmath scheme.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the heaviest fermion is about 5 orders of magnitude heavier
than the lightest one (without considering neutrino masses which would
increase this ratio).

Like the gauge boson mass terms, SM fermion mass terms are not invariant
under @xmath gauge transformations. Fermion mass terms are invariant
only under transformation which treat the right- and left-handed fermion
fields in the same way. The four-dimensional @xmath gauge group has a
one-dimensional subgroup of this type, namely the @xmath electromagnetic
one. This is related to the long-range electromagnetic force, mediated
by the massless photon and is an exact symmetry of nature.

Using the gauge-invariant fermionic kinetic term given in Eq. ( 1.8 ),
with the weak hypercharges taken from Table 1.1 we obtain the SM fermion
kinetic terms (without considering the strong interactions):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , are the left-handed leptons and
quarks, respectively. The right-handed leptons are denoted by @xmath ,
while @xmath and @xmath correspond to the right-handed quarks. The
previous quark fields are in the weak basis. As we see later, they are
related to the mass eigenstate quark fields by a chiral transformation.

Before turning to the spontaneous symmetry breaking mechanism of the SM
we consider the kinetic terms for the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath .
The abelian @xmath and non-abelian @xmath groups possess the following
Yang-Mills terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-abelian part of Eq. ( 1.12 ) contains triple gauge couplings
(proportional to @xmath ) and quartic gauge couplings (proportional to
@xmath ). There is a strong evidence, remarkably from electron-positron
scattering experiments at LEP [ 9 ] , that the gauge bosons with masses
given in Eq. ( 1.1 ) self-interact as dictated by the Lagrangian given
in Eq. ( 1.12 ). The relations between the mass eigenstates fields
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and the fields @xmath and @xmath are given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Yang-Mills Lagrangian (Eq. ( 1.12 )) predicts the structure and
strength (in terms ⁴ ⁴ 4 Approximate values of the gauge coupling
constants at scales @xmath are given by @xmath and @xmath . of @xmath
and @xmath , or equivalently, in terms of @xmath and @xmath ) of the
interactions of the electroweak gauge bosons among each other. The
following vertices exist at tree level:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath and @xmath interactions and thus the non-abelian nature of
the @xmath , @xmath boson interactions were confirmed by experiments at
LEP which investigated @xmath -boson pair production: @xmath [ 9 ] .

#### 1.1.2 Standard Model Higgs Mechanism

We reviewed in the last Subsection that the @xmath gauge symmetry, which
dictates the dynamics of the EW sector, is spontaneously broken to the
electromagnetic @xmath group. This can be seen from the fact that the
weak gauge bosons and the quark and leptons are not massless.
Classically speaking, a spontaneously broken symmetry is a symmetry of
the equations of motion but not a symmetry of the solution of these
equations. A well known example of this phenomenon from condensed matter
is: Although the Lagrangian of a ferromagnetic material is invariant
under spatial rotations, at temperatures below a critical one the spins
of the molecules tend to point in the same direction, breaking
spontaneously the rotational symmetry of the Lagrangian. The symmetry
breaking takes place because the non-symmetric configuration is
energetically favorable. A similar situation occurs in the SM where the
vacuum (or ground state) of the theory does not respect three of the
four @xmath gauge symmetries of the Lagrangian.

The SM model is a renormalizable weakly-coupled theory where the gauge
boson and fermion mass terms appear in the gauge-invariant Lagrangian as
a consequence of the condensation of an elementary scalar field, the
Higgs field @xmath . This field @xmath has a weak hypercharge @xmath ,
is a doublet under the @xmath group, and a singlet under the @xmath
group transformations. A vacuum expectation value (VEV) of this field
different from zero, i.e. @xmath , causes exactly the symmetry breaking
pattern described in the last Subsection.

All possible gauge-invariant hermitian operators of dimension four or
less which involve the Higgs field form part of the Higgs Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first is the Higgs kinetic term, the second contains the
Higgs-fermion interaction, and @xmath is the Higgs potential, a function
only of the Higgs field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The potential possesses two parameters, @xmath and @xmath . In order for
@xmath to be bounded from below @xmath must be bigger than zero. If
@xmath the minimum of the potential is located at @xmath , which is a
field configuration invariant under @xmath gauge transformations. In
this case the EW symmetry remains unbroken. On the other hand for @xmath
the minimum is located at @xmath . A VEV of @xmath different from zero
is not invariant under general EW gauge transformations but only under a
@xmath subgroup of them. Three of the four symmetry generators of the
group are broken in this way. This corresponds to the situation observed
in nature.

We consider in the following the theory in the unitarity gauge where
three of the four real components of the field @xmath are gauged away:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factor @xmath provides the real field @xmath with the
conventional normalization. The constant @xmath corresponds to the VEV
of the Higgs field and the field @xmath , with VEV @xmath , is the only
remaining scalar degree of freedom in this gauge. Inserting the Higgs
VEV into the kinetic term given in Eq. ( 1.16 ) we obtain the gauge
boson mass terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to get the observed gauge boson masses the Higgs VEV must be
@xmath . This can be seen as the only dimensionful parameter of the SM
and is responsible for setting the EW scale. The whole Higgs kinetic
term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides the gauge boson mass terms this includes an ordinary kinetic
term for the real field @xmath and gauge boson-Higgs interactions.

We turn to the Higgs potential in the unitarity gauge. Inserting Eq. (
1.18 ) into Eq. ( 1.17 ) we get the Higgs potential as a function of the
field @xmath which describes displacements around the potential’s
minimum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we neglected a constant term. In this tree level treatment the
mass of the Higgs particle is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other two terms of the potential are the triple and quartic Higgs
self-couplings. The mass of the Higgs particle, together with @xmath ,
completely fixes the Higgs potential. Once one knows the mass of the SM
Higgs boson, the triple and quartic Higgs self-couplings are predictions
of the theory.

What is known about the SM Higgs particle from experiment? The direct
search for the production of the Higgs particle at LEP led to the lower
bound [ 7 ] : @xmath . On the other hand, calculating electroweak
precision observables including quantum corrections within the SM and
using these formulae in global fits to the corresponding experimental
data yields an allowed range for the SM Higgs boson mass. With the
recently updated value of the mass of the top quark such a fit yields
the upper bound [ 8 ] : @xmath at the 95% confidence level.

Finally, the Yukawa term of Eq. ( 1.16 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Yukawa couplings @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are three
completely arbitrary @xmath matrices. Inserting Eq. ( 1.18 ) into @xmath
we get mass terms for fermions. Because the Yukawa matrices are
arbitrary, the fermion mass terms are in general non-diagonal in flavor
space. In order to diagonalize the fermion mass matrix it is necessary
to perform unitary rotations of the chiral fields. For the quarks these
rotations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are basis transformation
matrices, and the primed fields denote the quark fields in the mass
basis. In the leptonic sector we diagonalize @xmath by means of similar
transformations. After have diagonalized the Yukawa matrices Eq. ( 1.24
) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are mass terms for the SM fermions. The values of the
masses are given by @xmath , where @xmath denote the eigenvalues of the
three Yukawa matrices. Besides, in Eq. ( 1.26 ) we see fermion-Higgs
interaction terms with coupling constants proportional to the fermion
masses.

The Lagrangian of the SM is not invariant under the chiral rotation we
defined in Eq. ( 1.25 ). In addition to the quark mass terms, there are
two other terms in the Lagrangian which are not invariant under this
transformation, the QCD @xmath -term and the term containing the charged
current.

The QCD @xmath -term is a dimension 4 operator which is non-invariant
under a discrete @xmath (parity) transformation and under @xmath (charge
conjugation together with parity) transformations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameter @xmath sets the strength of the interaction, @xmath
is the strong coupling constant, @xmath is the gluon field strength
tensor, and @xmath its dual tensor. This operator reflects the
non-trivial structure of the of the QCD vacuum.

As a consequence of the chiral anomaly, the chiral transformation of the
quark fields given in Eq. ( 1.25 ) modifies the parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quark mass matrix in the weak basis. The QCD @xmath
-term induces @xmath -violating effects in flavor diagonal quark
amplitudes, in particular an electric dipole moment of the neutron. For
this observable a very stringent upper bound has been obtained
experimentally. This gives a very stringent upper bound for the
parameter @xmath , namely @xmath .

Why the value of @xmath is so small or maybe zero, including an
interplay between @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 1.28 ), is still an open
question. This is called the strong @xmath problem [ 10 ] .

The other part of the Lagrangian which is not invariant under chiral
transformations of the quark fields is the charged current. From Eq. (
1.11 ) we get the interaction term between the charged @xmath bosons and
the left-handed quarks. The gauge boson @xmath couples to the current

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 1.25 ) one obtains the charged current in the quark mass
basis:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the unitary matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one considers only two quark generations, the complex phases in
@xmath can be absorbed by means of redefinitions of the quark fields.
@xmath is then a orthogonal matrix parametrized by the Cabibbo angle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Including the three quark generations the matrix @xmath contains 3
rotation angles and one CP-violating phase (starting from a general
@xmath unitary matrix, redefinitions of the quark fields do not remove
of all the phases). This is the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix.
The entries of the CKM matrix can be obtained experimentally from data
on weak decays of quarks and, in some cases, from neutrino deep
inelastic scattering. Assuming unitarity and the existence of only three
families of quarks, the CKM matrix in the standard parametrization,
@xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.34)
  -- -- -- --------

The following are reference values for the three angles and the phase [
7 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these values one obtains, to three decimals in each matrix entry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

At present all @xmath -violating phenomena found in laboratory
experiments can be explained by the phase @xmath of the CKM matrix.

For leptons the situation is somewhat different because they do not
transform under @xmath , having no contribution to the QCD @xmath -term.
Further, it is known by now that at least two of the three neutrinos are
massive, but we do not know whether neutrinos are Dirac or Majorana
fermions. If neutrinos are Dirac particles then the structure of the
charged weak leptonic current in the mass basis is completely analogous
to the quark sector, with a leptonic mixing matrix @xmath [ 11 ] which
has four observable parameters: three angles and one @xmath -violating
phase. If neutrinos are Majorana particles then @xmath contains three
angles and three observable @xmath -violating phases. In the remainder
of this thesis we shall ignore neutrino masses and discuss only the
quark sector.

### 1.2 Alternative Models of EWSB

In this Section we discuss some unsatisfactory aspects of the SM. In
particular we concentrate on three features, or problems, related to the
Higgs sector of the model. Then, we turn to some extensions of the SM
and comment on how they could solve these problems.

The SM successfully describes the strong and electroweak interactions.
It parametrizes the EWSB, but cannot be considered as an explanation of
this phenomenon. In the SM the dimensionful parameter of the Higgs
potential @xmath is chosen to be positive (see the convention in Eq. (
1.17 )), yielding EWSB. This choice is possible but is not explained by
any dynamics. A more satisfactory theory would explain dynamically why
this symmetry breaking takes place.

Let us mention a second aspect. The @xmath function related to the Higgs
self-coupling @xmath is a positive quantity, leading to a Landau pole
and to triviality of the @xmath theory [ 12 , 13 ] . The theory is
trivial in the sense that if one demands it to be valid up to arbitrary
large energy scales, then the renormalized Higgs self-coupling @xmath
must go to zero, that is, the theory becomes a non-interacting one.
Triviality of the @xmath theory has been also confirmed by simulations
on the lattice [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] . Besides, it is believed that
the inclusion of the SM gauge and Yukawa interactions do not affect the
previous conclusions. Triviality implies that the SM must be considered
as an effective theory valid below some cutoff scale @xmath which is
associated with the Landau pole. Imposing the condition @xmath one gets
an upper bound for the Higgs boson mass, @xmath [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] . An
important point is that the Landau pole is connected with the appearance
of new physics. After fixing the Higgs mass, and therefore the position
of the Landau pole, new physics must appear at energies of the order
@xmath or below (it is possible that new physics appears before the
Landau pole is reached).

Another unpleasant feature of the SM is the hierarchy problem. In the SM
there is no explanation of why the EWSB scale is @xmath (and not 20
orders of magnitude higher or lower). This is of course closely related
to the first unsatisfactory aspect of the SM we mentioned. Specifically,
the hierarchy problem is the lack of an answer to the question why the
EWSB scale is much smaller than the GUT ( @xmath ) or Planck ( @xmath )
scale. Another important physical scale is @xmath . The generation of
this scale is however understood from dimensional transmutation. QCD is
an asymptotically free theory where the running coupling @xmath
increases logarithmically with decreasing energy scale. Therefore
starting at the energy scale @xmath with a value of @xmath smaller but
of order 1, this coupling constant becomes naturally non-perturbative at
the scale @xmath . In this way a dimensionless parameter of the model (
@xmath ) can be expressed in terms of a dimensionful one ( @xmath ).
Many of the extensions of the SM include new asymptotically free gauge
interactions in order to provide a solution to the EW hierarchy problem.
Closely related to this problem is the fine-tuning problem. Radiative
corrections to the squared Higgs mass are proportional to @xmath , which
is the upper limit of the validity range of the theory used as cutoff
regulator. These huge corrections occur because there is no
(approximate) symmetry which protects the Higgs mass. Radiative
corrections to other parameters of the SM diverge only logarithmically.
In order to have a prediction for the Higgs mass of the order of the EW
scale (the order of the tree level value) huge fine-tunings between the
divergent quantum corrections and their counterterms must be made order
by order in perturbation theory. One can, however, adopt a pragmatic
point of view and make the cancellation of the divergent quantities
without considering it as a problem.

Among the many extentions of the SM that have been proposed we would
like to mention three types, namely supersymmetry and two types of
models of dynamical symmetry breaking. We start with the supersymmetric
extentions. Supersymmetry is a symmetry between fermions and bosons.
Supersymmetric theories have a certain number of superpairs which are
made of one fermion and one boson, both having the same mass if
supersymmetry is not broken. The most studied supersymmetric extension
of the SM is the minimal supersymmetric SM (MSSM). In this model for
each SM degree of freedom a new one is introduced. Besides the Higgs
sector must be extended to a two-Higgs doublet model in order that the
currents that couple to gauge bosons are anomaly-free. In this way the
particle content of the theory is more than doubled as compared with the
SM. However the experimentally observed particle spectrum does not
include any superpartner. Thus supersymmetry, if is realized in this way
in nature, must be spontaneously broken. From the non-observation of
supersymmetry so far, one concludes that the scale @xmath at which this
symmetry breaking takes place must be @xmath .

It can be said that the MSSM solves almost all of the previous problems
in a very nice manner. However, important questions related to the
supersymmetry breaking mechanism appear. The MSSM provides a dynamical
explanation for EWSB. Starting at very high scales with a Higgs
potential having a @xmath invariant minimum (i.e. @xmath ), the
evolution down to scales of the order of the EW scale, which is dictated
by the perturbative renormalization group equations, leads to a
low-energy Higgs potential with a @xmath non-symmetric minimum, i.e. to
radiative EWSB. The fine-tuning problem is also solved. This occurs
because the Higgs masses are protected by supersymmetry. In order to
have an acceptable level of tuning in the calculation of these masses,
the scale @xmath at which supersymmetry is restored cannot be much
higher than the scale of EWSB. Finally to the hierarchy problem: In the
MSSM, as we said, the EW scale is explained in terms of @xmath .
However, it is not clear how the last scale is generated. The hierarchy
problem of the SM has its analogy in the MSSM. Namely, how can one
understand the hierarchy between @xmath and @xmath . The key, unsolved
question is: Which mechanism causes supersymmetry breaking?

Concerning EWSB there is one common feature between the SM and the MSSM:
EWSB is caused by the condensation of elementary Higgs bosons. On the
other hand models of EW dynamical symmetry breaking are based on the
hypothesis that EW symmetry breaking is caused by the condensation of
fermion-antifermion pairs (for a review see [ 6 ] ). The idea is taken
from the theory of superconductivity: On the one side there is the
phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau model of superconductivity, which
corresponds to the Higgs model. However, superconductivity is
dynamically explained in the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory by the
Bose condensation of @xmath pairs.

In particle physics two type of models of this class have been
considered. Namely models where known (SM) fermion pairs condense
(top-condensation), and models where pairs made of new type of fermions
condense (technicolor). In both cases a new strong interaction is
postulated. The elementary particle content of these models includes
only fermions and gauge bosons. The absence of fundamental scalar fields
is supported by the fact that so far no particle of this type has been
found in nature. Due to the fact that these models do not include
fundamental scalar particles, the first and second problems of the SM we
mentioned above do not arise. The third one can potentially be
understood from dimensional transmutation.

The most prominent example of this class of models is technicolor (TC) [
22 , 23 ] which is directly inspired by QCD. In these models a new
non-abelian technicolor @xmath gauge group is added to the SM @xmath
one. Besides, new fermions, technifermions, which carry technicolor
charges are postulated. The @xmath charge assignment of technifermions
is similar to the one of the SM fermions. Thus, the condensation of
technifermion bilinears breaks the @xmath symmetry to the
electromagnetic @xmath . The logarithmic evolution of the technicolor
running coupling constant provides a dynamical explanation for the
origin of the EW scale. In this way technicolor is able to break the EW
symmetry and, through the Higgs mechanism, to provide the weak gauge
bosons with masses. However, it fails in generating fermion masses. A
new sector, e.g. extended technicolor [ 24 , 25 ] , must be included in
order to explain them.

Finally we consider top-condensation models [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ] . The
main motivation for this type of models is given by the fact that the
top mass and the scale of EW symmetry breaking are of the same order.
This suggests that the top quark plays an active rôle in the EWSB
mechanism. In top-condensation models a four-fermion interaction term
involving SM fermions is postulated at some high energy scale @xmath .
The strong four-fermion interaction induces the formation of
fermion-antifermion (mainly from the third quark generation) bound
states, which correspond to composite Higgs bosons, and the condensation
of the corresponding composite fields. These condensates transform
non-trivially under @xmath transformations and therefore break the EW
symmetry. As a consequence gauge bosons and fermions acquire masses. In
the minimal models no new particles are postulated. On the other hand
these models are generally considered as effective theories valid only
for energies scales below @xmath (see, however, second scenario below).

Two possible scenarios concerning the origin of the four-fermion
interaction term can be considered. In the traditional one, a
non-abelian gauge theory becomes strongly-coupled at a scale @xmath .
For energies below @xmath the new interaction is effectively described
by operators constructed with the fields corresponding to the light (
@xmath ) degrees of freedom of the theory. The new interaction must
violate the flavor symmetry, i.e. must be non-universal, in order to
generate the observed fermion mass pattern. Topcolor [ 26 ] , topcolor
assisted technicolor [ 27 ] , and top-quark see-saw [ 28 , 29 ] are
examples of theories of this type.

At low energies the most important non-renormalizable operators are the
ones having the lowest dimension. Therefore, only dimension 6
four-fermion operators are considered (however, higher dimensional
operators could also be important). Besides, only four-fermion operators
made of (pseudo)scalar fermion bilinears are generally considered (they
lead to (pseudo)scalar composite fields), ignoring the ones made of
(axial)vector fermion bilinears. Note that the distinction between
(pseudo)scalar and (axial)vector bilinears is ambiguous due to Fierz
identities.

In the second scenario the four-fermion interaction term acquires a more
fundamental status. It is assumed that the SM with the Higgs sector
being replaced by a general dimension 6 four-fermion interaction is a
(non-perturbatively) renormalizable theory [ 30 ] . This is the case if
one or more of the non-Gaussian ultraviolet stable fixed points found in
[ 30 ] using the point-like approximation are established.

## Chapter 2 Spontaneous @xmath Symmetry Breaking

In this Chapter we consider models in which the @xmath symmetry is
spontaneously broken (for related reviews see [ 31 , 32 , 33 ] ). The
Lagrangian of such models is invariant under a @xmath transformation,
but the related vacuum is not. In this way the breaking of the @xmath
symmetry is put on the same footing as the breaking of the EW symmetry.
This sort of models attempts to explain @xmath violation by the same
mechanism which breaks the EW symmetry, while in models with explicit
@xmath violation the Lagrangian does not possess that symmetry from the
beginning. Concerning the strong @xmath problem these models potentially
offer a solution because the parameter @xmath could become a small
calculable quantity. In the following Sections we consider models with
spontaneous @xmath violation, first due to condensation of fundamental
scalar fields, and then due to condensation of fermion-antifermion
composite fields. We discuss also a potential problem of spontaneous
@xmath violation coming from cosmology. Finally we comment on
flavor-changing neutral currents (FCNCs).

### 2.1 Spontaneous @xmath Symmetry Breaking with Fundamental Scalars

The VEV of one Higgs field can always be made real by means of a global
@xmath transformation. In order to have spontaneous @xmath violation
complex VEVs of scalar fields, and hence a non-minimal Higgs sector, are
needed. In this Section we briefly describe the models of Lee [ 34 ] and
Weinberg [ 35 ] (or their generalizations to the case of 3 quark
families) which are based on the SM gauge group. These are two
representative examples of models which incorporate spontaneous @xmath
violation by condensation of fundamental Higgs fields.

The model of Lee [ 34 ] contains, in addition to the SM fermion and
gauge boson fields, 2 Higgs doublets, @xmath and @xmath . The VEVs of
the electrically neutral components can always be written in the
following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . A value of @xmath leads in general to @xmath
non-conservation. The VEVs, Eq. ( 2.1 ), minimize the Higgs potential
which is sensitive to the phase @xmath . The most general
gauge-invariant renormalizable potential for 2 Higgs doublets is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the part of the potential which is independent from the
relative phase between the two electrically neutral Higgs fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By definition the parameters of the Higgs potential are real and thus
@xmath invariant under a @xmath transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potential has its minimum located at a non-trivial value of @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following we assume that these conditions are fulfilled. Because
we start with a @xmath -invariant theory the Yukawa couplings in the
weak basis are all real. However due to the phase @xmath , complex mass
matrices are generated:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are the quark mass matrices and @xmath , @xmath
are the Yukawa coupling matrices in the weak basis. Diagonalizing the
quark mass matrices one gets in general a complex CKM matrix. Thus the
model contains a number of @xmath -violating interactions, namely @xmath
boson exchange (as in the SM), charged and (flavor violating and flavor
conserving) neutral Higgs boson exchange. Nevertheless @xmath violation
in this model is determined by a single parameter, to wit @xmath .
Furthermore FCNCs are present in this model already at tree level (see
Section 2.4 ). This requires a mechanism for their suppression in order
to avoid conflict with experimental data.

Let us also consider the specific case @xmath , @xmath [ 36 ] which can
be motivated by imposing a discrete @xmath symmetry on the Higgs
potential, e.g. by demanding the Higgs potential to be invariant under

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case we get from Eq. ( 2.5 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the two minima in Eq. ( 2.9 ) are related to each other by the
transformation Eq. ( 2.8 ). If we define the field @xmath we see that
the Higgs potential as well as the vacuum are invariant under the
conventional @xmath transformation related to the fields @xmath and
@xmath . We have to inspect also the Yukawa sector. If the quark fields
transform under the @xmath transformation according to one of the
following two cases:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , are the up- and down-type
right-handed quark fields respectively, and we require that the Yukawa
interactions respect the discrete symmetry, then the factor @xmath
introduced in the Yukawa terms due to the replacement @xmath can be
eliminated. In the case (a) no factor @xmath is actually introduced in
the Yukawa terms because the Higgs field @xmath does not couple directly
to quarks. In case (b) the factor @xmath can be absorbed by redefining
the right-handed quark fields. One ends up with a @xmath -invariant 2HD
model type I (case (a)) or type II (case (b)).

If on the other hand the discrete @xmath symmetry is not imposed on the
Yukawa sector the resulting theory is very different as discussed above.
In particular the motivation to put the tree level parameters @xmath is
lost because these terms are generated radiatively through fermion-loop
contributions.

In the Weinberg model [ 35 ] some discrete symmetry [ 37 ] (as the one
given in Eqs. ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.10 )) is imposed in such a way that FCNCs
are avoided at tree level. Right-handed quark fields of the same
electrical charge couple only to one Higgs doublet with non-vanishing
VEV. In this way each quark mass matrix is proportional to a Yukawa
coupling matrix. A diagonalization of the quark mass matrix corresponds
to a diagonalization of the associated Yukawa coupling matrix. This
implies that there are no FCNCs at tree level. Minimization of the
model’s tree level potential @xmath , with @xmath , being invariant
under the discrete symmetry, yields the VEVs and in particular their
phases. Only if the model possesses 3 (or more) Higgs doublets exists a
parameter subspace for which the @xmath symmetry is spontaneously broken
by non-trivial phases of the Higgs VEVs. The resulting theory has a real
CKM matrix and has @xmath -non-invariant interactions only in the Higgs
sector, that is, charged Higgs boson exchange and flavor-diagonal
neutral Higgs boson exchange. However, these models are ruled out
because they cannot explain, on the one hand, the observed @xmath
phenomena in @xmath and @xmath meson decays and, on the other hand, why
an electric dipole moment @xmath of the neutron has not been observed (
@xmath cm [ 38 ] ).

### 2.2 Dynamical @xmath Symmetry Breaking

By dynamical @xmath violation we denote spontaneous @xmath violation
caused by fermion-antifermion condensation rather than by condensation
of fundamental scalar fields.

The dynamics in the two cases are very different. If fundamental scalar
fields condense, weak coupling is normally assumed. This justifies a
tree level analysis. One considers renormalizable gauge-invariant
operators built of Higgs fields only and constructs with them the Higgs
potential. The Higgs VEVs and their possible @xmath -violating phases
are obtained by minimizing it. On the contrary, fermion-antifermion
condensation is a strong-coupling phenomenon. In order to make
predictions drastic approximations are necessary.

In the case of technicolor theories the assumed picture [ 33 ] is as
follows. Technicolor interactions become strong at the EW scale and
break the chiral EW symmetries through the formation of techniquark
condensates, in analogy to chiral symmetry breaking in QCD. After EWSB
the theory and in particular its vacuum possesses a residual global
symmetry @xmath . On the other hand, in order to provide fermions with
mass terms, additional interactions, the so-called extended technicolor
(ETC) interactions, are postulated. The ETC interactions break the
residual global symmetry @xmath explicitly, and thereby lift the
degeneracy of the vacuum. In this way the ETC interactions select one
direction in the degenerated vacuum. It is possible that the selected
vacuum is not invariant under a @xmath transformation, leading to @xmath
violation by the charged weak current interaction ( @xmath exchange),
and by the ETC interactions.

In this thesis we are interested in dynamical symmetry breaking caused
by the condensation of quark-antiquark pairs, dominated by @xmath pairs.
Differently from technicolor theories, in this model the same
interactions are responsible for EWSB, fermion mass generation, and for
spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking. In Chapter 6 we consider this
model for EWSB involving the 3 quark families in detail and show that
dynamical @xmath symmetry breaking, including generation of a @xmath
-violating CKM matrix, is possible.

Dynamical @xmath violation in top-condensation models has been
investigated in [ 39 ] starting from a different type of interactions as
the ones considered in this thesis, namely non-local four-fermion
interaction terms [ 40 , 41 ] . In [ 39 ] four-fermion interaction terms
involving space-time derivatives (thus, dimension @xmath operators) and
quarks belonging to the third family were considered. For a special
configuration of the four-fermion coupling constants dynamical @xmath
violation occurs leading to a @xmath -violating composite two-Higgs
model. The question of dynamical generation of the CKM matrix is not
studied in this paper.

### 2.3 Domain Walls

Here we briefly mention a potential cosmological problem which appears
if spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking occurs at the EW scale [ 42 ] .
The effective potential @xmath related to a @xmath invariant Lagrangian
obeys in general the following relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes fundamental or composite Higgs fields and @xmath
their complex conjugate fields. For the case of weak-coupled fundamental
fields Eq. ( 2.11 ) can be easily checked. The effective potential is
just a gauge-invariant function of the scalar fields and their complex
conjugate fields with real parameters (for the 2HD model at tree level
see Eqs. ( 2.2 ) and ( 2.3 )). In technicolor theories Eq. ( 2.11 ) is
replaced [ 33 ] by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a function of the transformation matrices between the
weak and mass basis of the quark fields and @xmath denotes its complex
conjugate.

Due to Eq. ( 2.11 ) domains with different signs of the phases of the
VEVs are formed at the EW phase transition. These domains are separated
by walls with energy density much bigger than the closure energy of the
universe (after taking into account the effect of the universe
expansion) [ 42 ] . If one considers this problem to be a serious one,
some solution must be found in order that spontaneous @xmath symmetry
breaking at the EW scale is viable.

### 2.4 Flavor Changing Neutral Currents

It can be shown [ 43 , 44 ] that the requirements of spontaneous @xmath
symmetry breaking at the EW scale, absence of FCNCs at tree level ¹ ¹ 1
Here we refer to the general case without assuming any discrete
symmetry. , and a realistic CKM matrix cannot be simultaneously
satisfied. For this reason, in models with spontaneous @xmath symmetry
breaking the Yukawa coupling matrices in the mass basis cannot be
completely diagonal.

To be more precise let us consider @xmath fundamental or composite Higgs
fields @xmath which couple to the 6 quark fields. The Yukawa
interactions of the neutral Higgs fields are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath are the Yukawa couplings, the
fields @xmath , @xmath denote the up- and down-type chiral fermion
fields, and @xmath denote the neutral components of the Higgs fields
@xmath . The dynamics of the theory determine that some or all the Higgs
fields acquire non-vanishing VEVs. Inserting these VEVs @xmath in Eq. (
2.13 ) one obtains the quark mass matrices. The up- and down-type mass
matrices are in general not diagonal. Bringing them to a diagonal form
one introduces the CKM matrix in the charged current. In the mass basis
the neutral Yukawa terms are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath are the Yukawa couplings in
the mass basis and the primed fields @xmath , @xmath denote the chiral
fermion fields also in the mass basis.

Now we can state more precisely what was proven in [ 43 ] . If the
Yukawa couplings in the weak basis @xmath , @xmath are real, and thus
@xmath is @xmath -invariant, and the CKM matrix has the experimentally
observed form (small mixing between generations and a non-vanishing
@xmath -violation phase), then the Yukawa coupling matrices in the mass
basis @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath , cannot be all diagonal, i.e. FCNCs
at tree level cannot be avoided. We shall come back to this issue in
Chapter 6 .

## Chapter 3 Nambu-Jona-Lasino Approach for the EWSB: the Minimal Scheme

### 3.1 The Lagrangian

Before the discovery of the top quark a new type of model of EWSB was
proposed. Experiments had indicated that the top quark is very heavy,
@xmath at that time. This motivated the possibility of a quark-antiquark
(mainly from the third generation) bound state playing the rôle of the
Higgs boson, being in this case a composite Higgs boson [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4
] (for reviews, see [ 5 , 6 ] ).

In this chapter we consider the simplest model of this type. Its
Lagrangian consists of the usual SM-Lagrangian but without the
elementary Higgs field. In its place, a four-fermion interaction term is
considered. The Lagrangian is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first sum is over all left- and right-handed fermions of the
theory and the second contains the 3 Yang-Mills terms of the SM-symmetry
group, @xmath . The Lagrangian @xmath is locally invariant under this
symmetry group. In the simplest model [ 4 ] the four-fermion interaction
term @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the top and bottom quark
fields. The @xmath and @xmath indices are suppressed. A color-index
contraction in each parenthesis and a @xmath -index contraction between
@xmath and @xmath are understood. The term @xmath should be considered
as an effective interaction produced by some underlying physics. In this
Section we use @xmath as a given starting point and do not postulate any
possible origin. The whole theory is defined for energies @xmath . The
scale @xmath is a parameter of the theory identified with the scale of
the four-fermion term @xmath (remember that @xmath has mass dimension
@xmath ). All momentum integrals of the theory are regularized using
@xmath as a spherical cutoff.

### 3.2 The Gap Equation

In the following we investigate the consequences of the four-fermion
interaction Eq. ( 3.2 ) for EWSB. We make several approximations which,
however, are assumed to preserve those features of the full model, Eq. (
3.1 ), which are relevant to EWSB.

The calculation is made at first order in the @xmath expansion, where
@xmath is the number of colors. Besides, the @xmath gauge interactions
are neglected. With these approximations only the quarks of the third
family interact. The relevant part of the Lagrangian Eq. ( 3.1 ) is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the free Lagrangian and @xmath the interaction term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian Eq. ( 3.3 ) is a version of the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model
[ 45 ] .

There are no fermion mass terms in Eqs. ( 3.4 ), ( 3.5 ), which would
violate the @xmath gauge symmetry. Below we see how this symmetry is
broken by the vacuum. The top quark acquires a dynamical mass (the
right-handed component of the bottom quark field does not interact and
in consequence the bottom field cannot get a Dirac mass term). Let us
start redefining conventionally the free and interaction terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using the convention given by Eqs. ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.5 ) one would obtain
the same result we arrive below. In Eqs. ( 3.7 ) and ( 3.8 ) @xmath
denotes the physical top mass of the interacting theory. Thus, the top
self-energy @xmath must vanish for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the diagrams contributing to @xmath are shown in Fig. 3.1 .
Remember that we perform calculations to leading order in the @xmath
expansion. The limit @xmath is taken keeping @xmath fixed. In this
approximation the top self-energy @xmath is momentum independent. The
condition Eq. ( 3.9 ) can be expressed in a simplified manner: If the
sum of the two first diagrams of Fig. 3.1 is zero, then Eq. ( 3.9 ) is
fulfilled ¹ ¹ 1 This can be shown by introducing an auxiliary field and
demanding that the associated 1PI one-point function of the shifted
theory vanishes. . Eq. ( 3.9 ) is therefore equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is expressed diagrammatically in Fig. 3.2 . Taking the
trace one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

After doing the Wick rotation and performing the momentum integral using
@xmath as spherical cutoff, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the gap equation for the top mass. We shall derive this equation
again using auxiliary fields in Chapter 4 . Note that the factor inside
the outer parenthesis is smaller than 1. For @xmath smaller than a
critical coupling, @xmath , only @xmath is a solution of Eq. ( 3.12 ).
If @xmath is bigger than @xmath , the gap equation possesses 2
solutions, the symmetrical one @xmath and a non-symmetrical solution
@xmath . In Chapter 4 we shall see that for @xmath the solution @xmath
corresponds to the state of lowest energy of the model, the vacuum. The
top mass is given in this case by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.13 ) reveals that in order to obtain a top mass much smaller
than the cutoff, @xmath , a fine-tuning is needed. The parameters of the
theory, @xmath and @xmath , must be chosen in such a way that @xmath ,
with @xmath .

The dynamically created top mass breaks the @xmath symmetry of the
Lagrangian Eq. ( 3.1 ). The theory remains, however, invariant under a
subgroup of the original symmetry, namely under electromagnetic @xmath
transformations. Due to the Goldstone theorem we expect, as in the SM, 3
Goldstone bosons. In the next Section we find these massless modes and,
in addition, a neutral scalar boson explicitly. All of them are
fermion-antifermion bound states.

In order to motivate extensions of this minimal scheme, we give some
comments about the possible mass terms which can be dynamically
generated. The term @xmath is the only mass term that can be generated
by the interaction Eq. ( 3.5 ). ² ² 2 One could say that more general
terms are in this case also possible, e.g. @xmath or @xmath . However
these terms are related to the term @xmath by @xmath or @xmath - @xmath
-chiral transformations, respectively. The Lagrangian Eq. ( 3.1 ) is
invariant under these transformations. If instead of Eq. ( 3.2 ) we
consider gauge invariant four-quark interaction terms involving all
quarks, other dynamical mass terms could also be induced. In particular,
it could happen that the electroweak symmetry gets broken completely if
in addition to the usual electrically neutral mass terms a term such as
@xmath appears (this term violates the @xmath symmetry). We refer to
this possibility as the vacuum alignment problem. Furthermore complex
mass terms which mix quarks of the same electric charge could also
appear. They can lead to a non-trivial CKM-matrix and, if the Lagrangian
of the model is @xmath -invariant, to spontaneous @xmath -breaking. We
study this possibility in Chapter 6 .

### 3.3 Scalar and Goldstone Modes

Quark-antiquark bound states show up as poles in two-point correlation
functions of quark-antiquark composite fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the field @xmath is a Lorentz scalar, quark-bilinear composite
field and @xmath its hermitian adjoint.

In this Section we calculate such correlation functions in the scalar,
pseudoscalar, and charged channels. We shall find 3 massless modes
corresponding to the 3 Goldstone bosons, and a fourth pole in the scalar
channel corresponding to a composite Higgs boson. In order to obtain the
poles, it is necessary to use the gap equation (Eq. ( 3.13 )) in the
calculations.

The composite fields we deal with are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath stand for scalar,
pseudoscalar, and charged, respectively.

The Feynman diagrams contributing to the two-point correlation functions
are shown in Fig. 3.3 . In the scalar channel the amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one uses, as we do, a spherical cutoff as regulator, the Feynman
integrals are in general not invariant under a shift of the integration
variables. Convergent or logarithmically divergent integrals are
invariant under this operation, while linearly or more than linearly
divergent integrals are not. In the last case additional surface terms
appear [ 46 ] . A consequence of the appearance of surface terms is that
ambiguities show up in some correlation functions. In particular, the
mass of the Higgs particle becomes ambiguous. On the other hand the
position of the Goldstone boson poles is not affected [ 47 ] . These
surface terms are treated in more detail in Appendix A . In what follows
we neglect surface terms, assuming that their ambiguous contributions
are not physically relevant.

It is convenient to write @xmath as a quadratically divergent plus a
logarithmically divergent contribution. Neglecting surface terms we
obtain for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Summing the geometric series in Eq. ( 3.16 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 3.18 ) and the gap equation we finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the amplitude of the scalar channel has a pole at @xmath . That
means that there is a composite scalar particle, a composite Higgs
boson, with mass equal to @xmath . This quantitative prediction of the
model for the mass of the composite Higgs particle should not be
considered as an exact one, mainly because of the crude approximation we
are doing. For example in a renormalization group analysis including
gauge interactions this result receives important corrections (see
Chapter 7 ). Concerning the regularization procedure and its possible
influence on this result, some comments are made in the next Section.

In a similar way one finds the amplitudes in the pseudoscalar and
charged channels. One gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that none of the three four-point correlation functions depends
directly on the coupling constant @xmath . From Eqs. ( 3.21 ) and ( 3.22
) one can see that the pseudoscalar and charged amplitudes have a pole
at @xmath . These massless modes are the Goldstone bosons. In the next
Section we see how these modes manifest themselves.

### 3.4 Gauge boson masses

Finally we study in this minimal scheme the masses of the gauge bosons,
which appear in the theory according to the Higgs mechanism. Recall that
this denotes the mechanism where Goldstone bosons related to local
symmetries are eaten by the corresponding gauge fields which, in turn,
get massive. Let us remark that the Higgs mechanism does not require
elementary scalar bosons [ 48 , 49 ] .

As a consequence of the gauge invariance, the gauge-boson self-energies
@xmath , with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , must fulfill the Ward identity
@xmath (where @xmath is the external momentum). The self-energies can
then be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is known that a momentum cutoff is not a good regulator, in the sense
that it does not respect the Ward identities. In order to obtain
self-energies of the form given in Eq. ( 3.23 ) we use as an
intermediate stage dimensional regularization. We proceed as follows:
first we calculate the self-energies using dimensional regularization
(which is a good regulator). Then we express the results as a function
of the cutoff @xmath using Table 3.1 .

By using dispersion relations [ 50 ] it is possible to obtain directly
transverse gauge bosons self-energies. In this approach one imposes the
appearance of the Goldstone bosons related to the @xmath symmetry
breaking. As a consequence, one obtains the gap equation and the mass
pole at @xmath in the scalar channel (the same we obtained using a
spherical cutoff as regulator). Still another possibility is to use
proper time regularization. For a comparison between these different
schemes and the spherical cutoff regularization in the context of a
next-to-leading order calculation in @xmath , see [ 51 ] . For
simplicity we stick to the spherical cutoff regularization.

We calculate the self-energies to all orders in @xmath in the @xmath
limit. In this approximation the contribution of gauge boson loops is
suppressed by a factor @xmath as compared with the quark-loop
contribution shown in Fig. 3.4 and are therefore omitted. Consequently a
gauge fixing is not required. Let us first calculate the self-energy of
the @xmath boson. We consider two types of contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the contribution we obtain without considering the
four-fermion interaction @xmath (Fig. 3.4 ), and @xmath contains all
diagrams with @xmath insertions (Fig. 3.5 ). The first term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denotes the @xmath gauge coupling. After
integration we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath fulfills the Ward identity. In order
to obtain a transversal self-energy for @xmath one must also consider
the contributions coming from the interaction @xmath which is
responsible for the generation of @xmath . Because of the tensor
structure of @xmath (see Fig. 3.5 ) this term must be proportional to
@xmath . Therefore, the only way for @xmath to respect the Ward identity
is that the second term of Eq. ( 3.24 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this expression does not depend on @xmath . Now we show that
this is indeed what one obtains for @xmath from direct calculation. We
use the fact that the sum of the diagrams of Fig. 3.5 is proportional to
the sum of the diagrams given in Fig. 3.3 (which are calculated in Eq. (
3.22 )). The contribution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 3.22 ) one obtains Eq. ( 3.27 ). The self-energy fulfills
the Ward identity as it should. Extracting the tensor structure from
@xmath (using Eq. ( 3.23 )) one obtains finally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The Goldstone boson contribution makes @xmath singular at
@xmath . This shifts the @xmath mass away from zero. The dressed
propagator is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the @xmath fields. We define @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath mass is given by the pole of its dressed propagator (Eq. (
3.30 )) through the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath evaluated at @xmath .
On the other hand the Fermi constant is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The experimental value of the Fermi constant is @xmath . Using the
experimental value of the top mass @xmath and the number of colors
@xmath Eq. ( 3.35 ) gives the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation demands a value of @xmath .

Next we perform a similar calculation for the neutral gauge bosons. We
consider the fields @xmath and @xmath from the @xmath and @xmath gauge
groups, respectively. The difference in this case is that the gauge
bosons mix. Instead of calculating a single self-energy we have to
calculate a @xmath matrix. As in the case of the charged-boson
self-energy we distinguish two contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath refers to the fields @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath
). Similar as in Eq. ( 3.23 ) we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dressed propagator is given in this case by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath matrix. The first
contribution to the self-energy, @xmath , is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.40)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath . The weak hypercharges are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the
weak isospin charges are @xmath . The @xmath and @xmath gauge couplings
are denoted by @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Again @xmath is not
transversal for non-vanishing quark masses. Adding the contributions
with @xmath insertions (only the pseudoscalar channel, i.e. the
Goldstone boson, contributes) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where Eq. ( 3.38 ) was used. After a rearrangement we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The masses of the @xmath and @xmath particles are given by the poles of
the propagator Eq. ( 3.39 ) (the values of @xmath for which @xmath has
vanishing eigenvalues). For @xmath one can see in Eq. ( 3.42 ) that the
last term dominates the sum. This matrix has all entries equal and hence
possesses a vanishing eigenvalue. As expected, a pole in the propagator
located at @xmath is found. The second pole related to the @xmath
particle is located at @xmath , with @xmath given by the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eqs. ( 3.34 ) and ( 3.46 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference between @xmath and @xmath is essentially the usual
correction to the @xmath parameter due to the weak isospin breaking
effects.

We can in general say that the self-energies @xmath do not depend on the
details of the four-fermion interactions we consider, as long as each of
these interactions is a product of two Lorentz (pseudo)scalar bilinears.
By separating the self-energies in the contributions @xmath and @xmath
we saw that the part containing four-fermion interaction insertions
@xmath is completely determined by its Lorentz structure and the
requirement that @xmath must satisfy @xmath . For this reason the gauge
boson propagators, and in consequence the gauge boson masses, do not
change if we consider more a general four-fermion interaction @xmath ,
as we do in Chapters 5 and 6 .

## Chapter 4 Auxiliary Fields and the Effective Potential

### 4.1 Auxiliary Fields

For the study of EWSB we have used until now a formalism involving only
fermionic fields. This is mainly because we considered a model without
elementary scalar fields, as for instance a fundamental Higgs field. The
particle content of this model includes only gauge vector bosons and
chiral fermions. However, as we saw in Chapter 3 , fermion-antifermion
bound states can appear in the scalar, pseudoscalar, and charged
channels. These spin-0 channels correspond to relevant degrees of
freedom of the model. In this Section we introduce new fields, auxiliary
fields, with the quantum numbers of the resonant channels. This allows
us to work directly with these degrees of freedom.

The auxiliary field formalism [ 52 , 53 ] is very convenient, especially
if one goes beyond the minimal scheme studied in Chapter 3 , in
particular for the more realistic case where the six quarks are
considered. The formalism is also useful for studying next-to-leading
order corrections in the @xmath expansion [ 54 , 55 , 51 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 To
see the connection between the formalisms with and without auxiliary
fields in the case of one auxiliary field, see [ 56 ] . In this paper
the effective potential is calculated diagrammatically.

In general there is no prescription which tells us which and how many
auxiliary fields should be introduced. That would imply the knowledge of
the relevant degrees of freedom at each scale, something we normally do
not know. An example of this difficulty are Fierz rearrangements which
often lead to ambiguities [ 57 , 58 ] .

Motivated by the results of Section 3 we consider in this Section a
generalized four-fermion effective interaction defined at the scale
@xmath which involves the 3 quark generations. Next, we introduce
auxiliary fields with the same quantum numbers of the resonant channels
found in Section 3 , i.e., the quantum numbers of the SM Higgs doublet
field. The auxiliary fields are, in the case of EWSB, relevant degrees
of freedom at scales comparable with the bound state masses.

The effective interaction term we work with is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coupling constants @xmath and the quark fields @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath have indices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , which go from
the first to the third quark generation, and the antisymmetric matrix
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We introduce now the auxiliary fields @xmath by replacing the
four-fermion interaction @xmath by the equivalent term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with complex parameters @xmath , @xmath , and real mass parameters
@xmath . The @xmath auxiliary fields @xmath are @xmath doublets, @xmath
singlets, and possess weak hypercharge +1/2. The auxiliary fields have
mass terms and couple to fermions through Yukawa terms. A main feature
is that at the scale @xmath no kinetic term and no quartic boson
interaction are present. This is the so-called compositeness condition.
In Chapter 7 we shall see how these terms are induced at lower energies.

Starting from @xmath we recover the effective interaction term @xmath ,
showing that both formulations of the model are equivalent. This can be
achieved either in the path integral formalism or using the
Euler-Lagrange equations for the auxiliary fields. In the path integral
formalism the auxiliary fields @xmath can be easily integrated out from
the generating functional because they appear only quadratically in the
Lagrangian. Alternatively, one can impose the constrains, i.e.
Euler-Lagrange equations, for the auxiliary fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Replacing Eqs. ( 4.5 ) in Eq. ( 4.3 ), the auxiliary fields are
eliminated from @xmath and the four-quark interaction term @xmath is
recovered. The relations between the Yukawa couplings @xmath , @xmath
and the couplings @xmath are then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following we call the fields @xmath (composite) Higgs fields. The
idea behind this is that, as we said before, at scales below @xmath
these fields become dynamical. The fields @xmath play a similar rôle as
the Higgs field in the SM, the difference being, however, that in the
present consideration they are composite fields.

### 4.2 The Effective Potential

We calculate the effective potential associated with the auxiliary
fields @xmath . The effective potential allows us to find the vacuum of
the theory. We make the same approximations we did in Chapter 3 . We
consider only the leading order contributions in the @xmath expansion,
i.e. in the @xmath limit keeping @xmath fixed, which is equivalent to
the fermionic determinant approximation. The effective potential [ 59 ,
60 ] associated with the Lagrangian Eq. ( 3.1 ) with @xmath given by Eq.
( 4.1 ) but effectively replaced by @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.3 ) and ( 4.4 ),
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fermionic propagator in momentum space. It is a
function of the scalar fields @xmath and of the momentum @xmath . In Eq.
( 4.7 ) and in the following a sum over repeated indices is understood.
As usual we extract the propagator from the fermionic quadratic terms of
the Lagrangian, which in our model correspond to all the fermionic
terms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath contains the fermionic kinetic terms. We calculate now
@xmath . All terms in Eq. ( 4.8 ) are diagonal in the color indices,
therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath contains the momentum space quadratic terms associated with
the 12 Weyl spinors of the three generations of quarks. With respect to
these degrees of freedom @xmath is a @xmath matrix and is given in the
basis @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the term @xmath is proportional to the @xmath identity matrix, and
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the last expression @xmath and @xmath are @xmath matrices. Now we use
the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

perform the Wick rotation @xmath , and consider an extra factor 2 in the
exponent of the last expression coming from the 2 spinorial degrees of
freedom of each of the 12 Weyl spinors ( @xmath is diagonal in the
spinor indices). We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we obtain the fermionic determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we return to the effective potential. After performing the Wick
rotation and the spherical momentum integration, Eq. ( 4.7 ) takes the
following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the momentum cutoff @xmath is identified with the energy scale of
the new interaction @xmath . Now inserting the determinant calculated in
Eq. ( 4.16 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective potential is of course gauge invariant.

We shall use the effective potential Eq. ( 4.19 ) in different models.
In the next Section we apply this method to the case of having only one
auxiliary field and an arbitrary number of quarks. Considering more
auxiliary fields increases the complexity in the dependence of the
effective potential on the Higgs fields. In Chapter 5 we study a model
with two auxiliary fields involving only one quark generation. Finally,
in Chapter 6 the case with two auxiliary fields and 3 quark generations
is analyzed.

### 4.3 The Case of One Auxiliary Field

We consider here models with four-fermion interactions which can be
rewritten by means of only one auxiliary field. We shall consider 3
quark generations. This includes the minimal scheme treated in Section 3
. The Eqs.( 4.6 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Thus, the couplings @xmath in Eq. ( 4.1 ) must fulfill the
following conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . In the case of one family it reduces to @xmath , or, in
the notation of Chapter 5 to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

By means of gauge transformations any constant configuration of the
auxiliary field @xmath can be brought into the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the classical field @xmath . The effective potential, which is
gauge-invariant, is in this case a function of one variable, namely
@xmath . The matrix @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.20 ) is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is convenient to express @xmath in the quark mass basis where it is a
diagonal matrix ( @xmath is invariant under the replacement @xmath ,
with @xmath being a unitary matrix):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameters @xmath , with @xmath , are the Yukawa couplings in
the quark mass basis, and @xmath , with @xmath , are the quark masses.
Replacing Eq. ( 4.26 ) in Eq.( 4.19 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The VEV @xmath of @xmath is given by the value of @xmath which minimizes
the effective potential. The first and the second derivatives of @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.29)
  -- -- -- --------

The first derivative condition @xmath has two solutions. A gauge
symmetrical one at @xmath , and a non-symmetrical solution, i.e. with
@xmath , determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.30 ) must be understood as an equation for @xmath with the
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath kept fixed. Again a
fine-tuning is necessary in order to get @xmath . Eq. ( 4.30 ) has a
solution only if the following inequality is satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the condition Eq. ( 4.32 ) is not fulfilled one gets @xmath , and the
EW symmetry is not broken. If on the other hand the coupling constants
do fulfill Eq. ( 4.32 ) one can see from Eq. ( 4.29 ) that the second
derivative of @xmath is negative at @xmath (the quadratically divergent
terms domain) and positive at the non-zero value of @xmath determined by
Eq. ( 4.30 ). Thus, in this case the minimum of @xmath is located at
@xmath , and the fermions acquire masses given by Eq. ( 4.31 ).

The condition Eq. ( 4.32 ) can be rewritten as a function of the
original coupling constants @xmath (which fulfill as well Eq. ( 4.22 )).
One gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides, taking the scalar neutral component of @xmath from Eq. ( 4.5 ),
one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the quark fields in the mass basis and @xmath the
field operator. The composite Higgs particle is a quark-antiquark bound
state. It is mainly made of top-antitop, but also contains the other
quark flavors.

For completeness we also calculate the mass of the composite Higgs
particle in this framework. The two-point proper vertex (amputated 1PI
correlation function) associated with the field @xmath , @xmath , which
corresponds to the inverse @xmath propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for arbitrary fields @xmath and @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The physical mass @xmath of the composite Higgs boson is obtained from
the condition @xmath . It follows from Eq. ( 4.35 ) that, neglecting the
quark mass dependence of the momentum integrals, the position of the
composite Higgs mass is given by [ 61 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the factors @xmath the term related to the top-quark dominates
the sum. The mass of the composite Higgs is @xmath . We see that the
result obtained for the minimal scheme is stable under the inclusion of
further fermions with masses much smaller than @xmath .

The coupling constants between the composite Higgs and the fermions are
also of interest. At the energy scale @xmath the Yukawa term in the mass
basis is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relevant couplings are however the ones defined at scales much lower
than @xmath where the Higgs field @xmath possesses a kinetic term. In
order to have an induced kinetic term for @xmath with the conventional
prefactor at scales @xmath - for definiteness, we put here and in the
following @xmath - the field @xmath must be scaled. The coefficient of
@xmath in the expression for @xmath calculated in Eq. ( 4.35 ) gives the
correct factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand the fermionic kinetic terms do not receive corrections
in this approximation and hence the fermion fields need not be scaled.
Replacing Eq. ( 4.39 ) in Eq. ( 4.38 ) one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the Yukawa couplings at the scale @xmath , @xmath , do not
depend on the four-fermion couplings explicitly. They depend on them
only indirectly through the quark masses. Besides, the top Yukawa
coupling for the case in which only the top-quark gets a mass, @xmath ,
is also stable under the inclusion of further fermions that are much
lighter than the top quark.

By considering only one flavor in Eqs. ( 4.30 ), ( 4.33 ), and ( 4.35 )
we recover the gap equation, the critical coupling condition, and the
mass of the composite Higgs found in Chapter 3 .

## Chapter 5 One Generation of Quarks

### 5.1 Four-fermion interaction term

In this Section we assume the existence of a more general four-fermion
effective interaction involving both quarks of the third family. We
determine the main properties of this model in the @xmath limit.

The most general (dimension 6) gauge-invariant four-fermion interaction
term which can be written as a sum of products of fermion bilinears with
the quantum numbers and Lorentz structure of the SM Higgs boson are
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .
Due to the hermiticity of the Lagrangian @xmath and @xmath are real. One
can set @xmath also real (or positive) by redefining one of the
right-handed fermion fields. In this way the interaction term @xmath
possesses only real coupling constants. In any case the Lagrangian –
more precisely @xmath – is invariant under a @xmath transformation ¹ ¹ 1
We ignore here the QCD @xmath -term. of the fields.

### 5.2 Auxiliary fields and the effective potential

In order to study the ground state of the theory it is convenient to
introduce @xmath spin-zero auxiliary fields @xmath . Following Chapter 4
we replace @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Yukawa coupling constants and @xmath are
mass parameters associated with the auxiliary fields. The relations
between the coupling constants in the two formulations of the model are
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to parameterize the space of couplings @xmath , it is enough to
consider @xmath and real coupling constants @xmath (for @xmath and/or
@xmath negative or if @xmath , negative parameters @xmath are needed).
Therefore we restrict ourselves to @xmath and real coupling constants
@xmath in the following.

The self-interaction @xmath given in Eq. ( 5.1 ) possesses 3 parameters
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . This term is replaced by @xmath with
@xmath which has 4 parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
one more than the original Lagrangian @xmath (the mass parameters @xmath
can be set equal to 1 by scaling the auxiliary fields @xmath ). At this
stage it seems that there is an inconsistency. We clarify this point at
the end of this Chapter.

We consider now the effective potential of the model in the auxiliary
field formulation. In Section 4 , the effective potential was calculated
for a general four-fermion interaction @xmath . Using this result we
obtain for the one family case

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the @xmath matrix @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where summation over the indices @xmath and @xmath is understood.

### 5.3 Minimum of the effective potential

#### 5.3.1 First derivatives of the effective potential

The ground state of the theory is found by minimizing the effective
potential with respect to the auxiliary fields @xmath and @xmath . Due
to the gauge invariance of the effective potential it is possible to
gauge any field configuration into the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Note that in the 1HD case the effective
potential depends only on one variable, while in the 2HD case it depends
on four, making the task of finding its minimum more laborious. In the
following @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote the classical fields
and the corresponding non-primed symbols denote their VEVs,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. ( 5.7 ) in Eq. ( 5.5 ) the effective potential becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

(As we see later it is convenient to use @xmath instead of @xmath ). In
order to preserve the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry, the VEV @xmath
must be zero.

Next we inspect the effective potential as a function of these 4
variables. We shall restrict ourselves to the parameter subspace with
@xmath and search for local minima in this region. It is possible to
show [ 62 ] that for @xmath there is no local minimum (at least for
@xmath ). The following conditions are sufficient in order to have a
local minimum at a point with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions a) evaluated at the point @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.11)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.12)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first derivative of the effective potential with respect to @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 5.12 ), with @xmath , the last expression can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.16)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 5.3.2 The case @xmath

If @xmath in Eq. ( 5.1 ) is equal to zero, the Lagrangian has, in
addition to the local @xmath and global baryon number symmetries, an
extra global symmetry, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known in the context of fundamental Higgs fields as
Peccei-Quinn (PQ) symmetry [ 63 , 64 ] .

It is convenient to introduce the two auxiliary fields in a way that
@xmath couples only to @xmath and @xmath only to @xmath (with @xmath ).
² ² 2 This model and its generalizations for more quark families (
@xmath couples only to up-type right-handed quarks and @xmath couples
only to down-type right-handed quarks) are called type-II 2 Higgs
doublet (2HD) models. In these models FCNCs are naturally suppressed.
These two composite scalar fields transform under the PQ symmetry as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to this extra symmetry of the Lagrangian and of the effective
potential one can eliminate the dependence of @xmath on the phase @xmath
(we choose @xmath ). That is, the effective potential is a function of
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath only.

We can choose @xmath (see Eqs. ( 5.4 )). In this way we get
automatically positive quark mass parameters:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we turn to the conditions ( 5.11 )-( 5.13 ). In the case in which
both auxiliary fields condense ( @xmath ), Eqs. ( 5.11 ) and ( 5.12 )
become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These two conditions have exactly the same form as the condition
obtained in the minimal scheme (compare with Eq. ( 4.30 )). As in that
case, they can be fulfilled only if @xmath .

We check now that the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry is conserved, i.e.
that @xmath . As can be seen from Eq. ( 5.16 ) the first derivative of
the effective potential with respect to @xmath is always bigger than
zero:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the @xmath Hessian matrix is positive definite. The
non-vanishing second derivatives of the effective potential, @xmath and
@xmath , are bigger than zero at the critical point.

In summary we have seen that in the case we have @xmath and @xmath the
EW symmetry is broken. Both auxiliary fields @xmath and @xmath condense
in such a way that the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry remains unbroken.

#### 5.3.3 The case @xmath

Now we consider the case @xmath for a non-symmetrical stationary point
with @xmath , @xmath . The following equations must hold (from Eqs. (
5.11 )-( 5.13 )):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.23)
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.25)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

The last equation can be fulfilled only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see this, assume that @xmath . In that case the following equality
must hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But this implies @xmath . The case @xmath was treated separately in the
previous Subsection.

We also have to check the condition b) of ( 5.10 ). Taking only the
quadratically divergent terms, Eq. ( 5.16 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to fulfill condition b) the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

must hold. This can be achieved by choosing the sign of @xmath equal to
the sign of @xmath .

For the condition c) we need the Hessian of @xmath . For @xmath , using
Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.25 ) in the calculation we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Considering only terms of order @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, using Eq. ( 5.28 ), we see that the Hessian matrix possesses two
positive eigenvalues and one equal to zero. Expanding in @xmath the next
contribution to the eigenvalue, which is zero at leading order, is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the Hessian evaluated at the point given by Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and
( 5.25 ) is positive definite.

We compare this local minimum with the symmetrical point @xmath . To do
that we do not calculate the Hessian at @xmath , we just compare the
value of @xmath at the two points. Using the following two equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can see that the asymmetric point has a lower energy than the
symmetric one.

We consider now the Lagrangian ( 5.1 ) in the approach used in Section 3
, i.e. without introducing auxiliary fields. Doing that, one should
investigate the possibility of having further symmetry breaking mass
terms besides the mass terms @xmath , with @xmath . Additional terms
like @xmath would in general violate the @xmath symmetry in the
four-fermion interaction term (by going to the fermion mass basis, the
coupling @xmath can become complex) while a term like @xmath would break
the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry. The auxiliary field method offers,
as we saw, a convenient framework to treat these phenomena. We saw that
the VEVs of the auxiliary fields are real and that @xmath . This is
equivalent to show that these additional mass terms ( @xmath and @xmath
) are not dynamically generated. Considering only the usual mass terms
we obtain the following gap equations ³ ³ 3 A numerical analysis of
these equations including also gluon exchange is made in [ 65 ] for
@xmath . for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where negative mass parameters are allowed. Eq. ( 5.34 ) is shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 5.1 . For Eq. ( 5.35 ) there is an analogous
representation. One can also see that Eqs. ( 5.34 ), ( 5.35 ) may be
obtained from Eqs. ( 5.23 ), ( 5.25 ).

Now we discuss Eqs. ( 5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) assuming @xmath . These
equations can only be fulfilled if @xmath and @xmath are both zero or
both non-zero. We consider @xmath and estimate the values of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath which are needed in order to have non-vanishing quark
masses. From these equations we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . For the top-bottom mass ratio this implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain non-zero quark masses (remember we are assuming here
@xmath ) the couplings @xmath must then obey the equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the condition for having only one Higgs doublet, @xmath , holds, one
obtains @xmath as expected.

For a given @xmath ( @xmath ), the values of @xmath and @xmath which
fulfill Eq. ( 5.38 ) describe a hyperbola. @xmath , @xmath need not
necessarily be positive. As in the previous cases, in order to obtain
quark masses much smaller than @xmath , it is necessary to consider the
terms suppressed by a factor @xmath and do fine-tuning.

There is a question for which we do not present a direct answer because
it involves fine-tuning of many parameters: Given the parameters of the
theory, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , is there symmetry breaking or
not? It is enough to say that if Eqs. ( 5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) can be
fulfilled (with @xmath ), EWSB occurs. We do not give here an analogon
to the symmetry breaking condition @xmath obtained for the minimal
scheme.

In summary we have seen in this Subsection that for a @xmath interaction
term of the form given in Eq. ( 5.1 ) with @xmath EWSB occurs if Eqs. (
5.34 ) and ( 5.35 ) are fulfilled (with @xmath ). Besides, the @xmath
symmetry is not spontaneously broken. For the auxiliary field analysis
we restricted ourselves to the case where both auxiliary Higgs doublets
condense, because only in this case spontaneous electromagnetic or
@xmath symmetry breaking are possible. In Section 6 we shall see that
for a four-fermion interaction term involving the 3 families,
spontaneous @xmath violation can occur.

### 5.4 Composite Higgs boson masses

#### 5.4.1 Goldstone bosons

In order to calculate the mass spectrum of the composite Higgs bosons,
it is helpful to identify the Higgs boson degrees of freedom which
correspond to Goldstone bosons. In this Subsection we express the
neutral and charged Goldstone bosons in the auxiliary field basis. We
shall use this information for choosing a convenient basis for the
calculation of the Higgs boson self-energies.

The Goldstone theorem states that for every spontaneously broken
generator of a continuous global symmetry a massless boson, i.e., a
Goldstone boson, appears. If the broken symmetry is a local one, the
Goldstone boson does not appear in the physical particle spectrum of
theory. In this case the Higgs mechanism takes place: The Goldstone
boson is absorbed by the gauge boson associated with the broken local
symmetry, which in turn gets massive. A massive gauge boson possesses 3
degrees of freedom, one more than a massless one.

If a global symmetry is broken by the VEVs of some scalar fields, the
Goldstone theorem says also how to express the associated Goldstone
boson field as a function of the scalar fields. The Goldstone bosons are
given by the infinitesimal displacements of the scalar field VEVs under
the transformations generated by the broken generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Goldstone boson fields, @xmath the broken
generators, and @xmath represents the VEVs of the scalar fields. Let us
write the VEVs of @xmath and @xmath , given in Eq. ( 5.8 ), using a real
matrix (only to avoid @xmath factors)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the two columns refer to the two Higgs doublets and the four rows
refer from above to below to the real part of the neutral component, the
imaginary part of the neutral component, the real part of the charged
component, and the imaginary part of the charged component,
respectively. The broken generators of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.41)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.42)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Inserting into Eq. ( 5.39 ) we obtain the following expressions for the
charged and neutral Goldstone boson fields

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.44)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

where the fields @xmath , @xmath are components of the Higgs fields
@xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Change of Basis of Auxiliary Fields

We define new bases for the auxiliary fields in the neutral and charged
sectors. We choose the new bases in such a way that the Goldstone
bosons, identified in the previous Subsection, become basis vectors.
Later we calculate the two-point proper-vertex matrices in these bases.
The advantage is that in each sector, neutral and charged, one of the
basis vectors of the proper-vertex matrix is already an eigenvector with
associated eigenvalue equal to zero, i.e. a pole of the propagator.

In the four-dimensional neutral sector we define the new basis by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the orthogonal transformation matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field @xmath is the normalized Goldstone boson found in Eq. ( 5.45
). In this new basis the mass term of the neutral bosonic fields is
given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.48)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.49)
  -- -- -- --------

Now we turn to the charged sector which is composed of two charged
fields. The new basis is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charged field @xmath is the normalized charged Goldstone boson
found in Eq. ( 5.44 ). In this new basis the mass term for the charged
scalar fields is given by

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

We shall use these auxiliary field bases in the Subsection 5.4.4 and in
Chapter 6 .

#### 5.4.3 The case @xmath

For @xmath the neutral sector is approximately twice as large as the
neutral sector of the minimal scheme (see Section 4.3 ). In the neutral
sector of the minimal scheme one continuous symmetry is spontaneously
broken. A Goldstone boson appears. Besides there is a neutral Higgs
boson with a mass equal to @xmath . In the present case there are, at
least classically, two broken symmetries. The one with the quantum
numbers of the @xmath boson and the PQ symmetry. We obtain here a
Goldstone boson and an axion [ 10 ] . The PQ symmetry is actually
anomalous which implies that the axion ⁴ ⁴ 4 An axion at the electroweak
scale is experimentally ruled out. gets a mass from instanton
contributions. Furthermore in analogy with the minimal scheme there are
two Higgs bosons with masses @xmath and @xmath .

Let us now consider the charged sector. The relevant part of the
Lagrangian is given in the quark mass basis by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath proper vertex matrix of the charged fields, shown
diagrammatically in Fig. 5.3 , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Eq. ( 4.36 ) for the definition of @xmath ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we evaluate the matrix @xmath for a vanishing external momentum
squared:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determinant of @xmath is zero. This reflects the appearance of the
expected charged Goldstone boson. To find the mass of the charged
composite Higgs, we need the value of @xmath at which the second
eigenvalue of @xmath becomes 0. If we make the following approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath states, e.g., for @xmath , the matrix @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last matrix has vanishing eigenvalue at @xmath . If one calculates
the second eigenvalue from @xmath without the last approximation, one
finds that the charged Higgs mass, for example for @xmath , differs only
by 1%.

#### 5.4.4 The case @xmath

Now we consider the case when @xmath and both auxiliary fields condense.
Let us first calculate the composite Higgs masses in the neutral sector.
It is convenient to adopt the auxiliary field basis defined in Eqs. (
5.46 )-( 5.49 ) in which the neutral Goldstone boson field is one of the
basis vectors. The orthogonal matrix @xmath is given, for @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that only the VEV of @xmath is different from zero, @xmath . The
Yukawa coupling term involving the neutral fields @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the couplings @xmath are the Yukawa couplings in the quark mass
basis. Due to the condition ( 5.26 ) these are real coupling constants
which can differ from the respective Yukawa couplings in the weak basis
@xmath only by a sign. Using Eq. ( 5.46 ) we obtain the Yukawa term in
the new basis:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots represent analogous terms for the bottom field. The only
difference which appears in the @xmath -quark terms is that in this case
it is necessary to replace @xmath by @xmath , as we can see from Eq. (
5.60 ). There are top-loop and bottom-loop contributions to the
two-point functions we want to calculate. These two contributions have
however the same form. A change of the sign in front of @xmath has no
consequences for the neutral two-point functions.

As we saw at the beginning of this Chapter the Lagrangian we consider is
@xmath -invariant. This symmetry is also not broken by the vacuum of the
theory because @xmath . As a consequence the @xmath -even ( @xmath and
@xmath ) and the @xmath -odd ( @xmath and @xmath ) fields do not mix and
the @xmath two-point proper vertex matrix is a block diagonal one.

The Feynman diagrams we have to calculate are shown in Fig. 5.2 . Using
Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.25 ), the non-vanishing two-point functions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.62)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the @xmath -odd sector, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.65)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the @xmath -even sector. The factor @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The masses of the bound states are given by the values of @xmath at
which the proper vertex matrix has vanishing eigenvalues. From Eqs. (
5.63 ) and ( 5.64 ) we see that at @xmath a zero eigenvalue with
associated eigenvector @xmath , the neutral Goldstone boson, appears. In
the @xmath -even sector the @xmath entry of the @xmath matrix is of
order ⁵ ⁵ 5 It follows from the reasoning after Eq. ( 5.25 ) that @xmath
. @xmath and therefore, for @xmath , much bigger than the other matrix
elements. In first approximation the smaller eigenvalue of this matrix
is given by @xmath . From Eq. ( 5.66 ) we see that the propagator has a
pole located at @xmath . The other two eigenvalues, associated with a
@xmath -even and a @xmath -odd field, are of order @xmath .

Now we treat the charged sector in an analogous way. We use the
auxiliary field basis defined in Eqs. ( 5.50 ) and ( 5.4.2 ). The Yukawa
terms are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the left and right projectors. For the
two-point proper vertices, represented by the diagrams of Fig. 5.3 , we
obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.71)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.73)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have here a similar situation as in the neutral @xmath -odd sector.
The @xmath element is of order @xmath and the other elements of the
matrix vanish at @xmath . Therefore the two poles are located at @xmath
and at @xmath .

We turn now to the Yukawa coupling constants at low energy. From the 8
scalar degrees of freedom which are present in this model, 3 are
Goldstone bosons (they are treated in detail in Section 3.4 ) and 4
possess masses of order @xmath , which is the upper limit of the
validity range of the model. For energies lower than @xmath only one
neutral scalar particle, with mass @xmath , is present. In a good
approximation this particle can be described by the field @xmath . Its
Yukawa interaction at the scale @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we express the Yukawa coupling at zero momentum. From the inverse of
the propagator, Eq. ( 5.66 ), we obtain the appropriate scaling factor
in order to get the conventional normalization of @xmath at the scale
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Replacing Eq. ( 5.76 ) in Eq. ( 5.75 ) we get the same interaction we
found in Section 4.3 , Eqs. ( 4.40 ) and Eq. ( 4.41 ), modified for the
case of 2 quark flavors. We see in this way that at energies much lower
than @xmath this model cannot be distinguished from the one which has
only one auxiliary Higgs doublet from the beginning. In the last case
the condition @xmath must hold, see Section 4.3 .

#### 5.4.5 Composite Higgs boson masses: Summary

We calculated the masses of the composite Higgs bosons when both
auxiliary fields condense considering separately the cases of having
@xmath equal or different from zero. There are qualitative differences
between these two cases. For @xmath the Lagrangian possesses a PQ
symmetry and the theory contains an axion. A further qualitative
difference is related to quadratic divergences in the two-point
functions. For @xmath there are quadratic divergences in these
amplitudes and as a consequence the theory predicts bound states with
masses of order @xmath , the upper limit of the validity range of the
model. In the case of having @xmath the gap equations cancel all these
divergences and all poles lie well below @xmath . In the two cases there
are, as expected, 3 Goldstone bosons related to the broken electroweak
symmetry generators. For @xmath the theory predicts also an axion, 2
neutral @xmath -even Higgs bosons with masses @xmath , @xmath and a
charged Higgs boson with a mass @xmath . If @xmath one expects one
neutral @xmath -even Higgs bosons with mass @xmath . The other poles in
this case are of order @xmath and cannot be interpreted a Higgs
particles.

We see that both for the case of having @xmath and for @xmath the number
of parameters at low energies is two. Once one fixes them, e.g. by the
experimental values of the quark masses, the model is completely
specified. For the case @xmath one would like to understand why the
number of parameters is only two and not three. The technical reason is
that in order to satisfy the first derivative conditions simultaneously,
the relation Eq. ( 5.38 ) must hold. This supplies an extra constraint.

Finally it must be said that the case @xmath is experimentally ruled out
because an “electroweak” axion has not been found.

## Chapter 6 Three Generations of Quarks

So far we have studied models which either have only one composite Higgs
doublet (Section 4.3 ), or we considered just the third family of quarks
(Chapter 5 ). In order to construct a model with three quark generations
with dynamical EW and @xmath symmetry breaking which leads to a quark
mass spectrum, to family transitions, and to a @xmath phase which are in
accord with observations, a more general four-fermion self-interaction
is needed. We investigate such a self-interaction term in this Chapter.

In order to get a realistic CKM matrix which is @xmath -violating, one
could start with a four-quark interaction term which violates the @xmath
symmetry explicitly. In that case one obtain naturally a non-trivial
phase (and mixing angles) in the CKM matrix. We are interested, however,
in a different possibility. We put the @xmath symmetry on the same
footing as the EW symmetry, that is, we consider it as a spontaneously
broken symmetry. That would give a dynamical explanation to this
phenomenon (see Chapter 2 ).

The generalization of Eq. ( 5.1 ) to the case where all quarks interact
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The notation used in this equation was introduced in Chapter 4 . The
Lagrangian @xmath includes four-fermion terms which mix quark fields of
different quark families.

Because we demand the Lagrangian to be @xmath -invariant, all the
coupling constants @xmath in @xmath are considered to be real. In this
case the number of parameters of Eq. ( 6.1 ) is 171. ¹ ¹ 1 After
requiring hermiticity of the Lagrangian there are 45 independent
couplings @xmath , 81 couplings @xmath , and further 45 couplings @xmath
. Where we do not count the cutoff @xmath which is also a parameter of
the model.

We now rewrite the interaction term, Eq. ( 6.1 ), in terms of auxiliary
fields which have the quantum numbers of the SM Higgs doublet field, as
we explained in Chapter 4 . We do not consider completely arbitrary
couplings @xmath . For simplicity we restrict ourselves to the subset
for which the theory can be described by means of only two auxiliary
fields, @xmath and @xmath . In terms of these auxiliary fields the
four-fermion term @xmath is replaced by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relations between the real coupling constants in the two
formulations of the model are given in Eqs. ( 4.6 ). In consequence we
restrict ourselves to a model with 36, essentially the four @xmath
Yukawa matrices, parameters (plus the cutoff scale @xmath ).

We are now confronted with the following problem. We want to find the
values of the parameters of the model such that the vacuum of the theory
breaks the EW symmetry in the observed way. Besides, the generated CKM
matrix and the quark masses must correspond to their measured values.
However, the relation between the 36 parameters of our model and the
quantities to be reproduced is rather complicated. In order to find an
analytical solution we introduce in the next Section a self-consistent
approach to the problem.

### 6.1 Self-consistent Approach

For the purpose of finding local minima of the effective potential we
proceed in a similar way as we did in Chapter 5 for a simpler
Lagrangian. Due to gauge invariance it is possible to consider the
dependence of the effective potential on the auxiliary fields, @xmath
and @xmath just through the four variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . We examine the three conditions written in Eq. ( 5.10 )
which are sufficient in order to have a local minimum which respects the
electromagnetic @xmath symmetry, i.e. with @xmath . These conditions
consist in having a) vanishing first derivatives of the effective
potential with respect to the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
b) a positive first derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath , and c)
a positive definite @xmath Hessian matrix related to the variables
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

We use a self-consistent method in order to find the portion of the
parameter space for which the model generates realistic CKM matrix
elements and quark masses. First, we assume that the minimum of the
effective potential (denoted by non-primed symbols) is given by a field
configuration with non-trivial values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (
@xmath ) and with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

VEVs of this form are necessary in order to have a theory with
spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking and unbroken @xmath symmetry.

Inserting the Higgs VEVs in the Yukawa interactions, Eq. ( 6.3 ), one
gets the quark mass term:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quark mass matrices for the up- and down-type quarks in the last
equation are in general non-diagonal. In order to diagonalize them we
perform the following chiral rotations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the primed fields denote the fermion fields in the mass basis and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are basis transformation matrices. The
CKM matrix is given by @xmath . In the new basis the quark mass
matrices, which are now diagonal and real are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Yukawa couplings in the mass basis @xmath , @xmath are defined
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We emphasize that the Higgs VEVs in Eq. ( 6.8 ) are still not
determined.

Using the last definitions, the relations between the composite fields
@xmath and their constituent quark fields are given by:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.10)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath . Besides, the interaction term @xmath is given in this basis
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

Combining Eqs. ( 6.8 ) and ( 6.9 ) and using the fact that the matrices
@xmath and @xmath are real, it is possible to write the Yukawa couplings
in the weak basis, @xmath , @xmath , as a function of the Higgs VEVs,
the quark masses, and the basis transformation matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have in this way transformed the original problem into one which can
be solved in a self-consistent way: We must find values of @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , to which we associate the Yukawa couplings given
in Eqs. ( 6.12 ), such that the resulting effective potential has its
minimum at the same values @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (besides @xmath ).
For this purpose we can vary the basis transformation matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These are arbitrary unitary matrices which
must obey the condition @xmath .

### 6.2 Derivatives of the Effective Potential

In this Section we calculate the first and second derivatives of the
effective potential related to the Lagrangian Eq. ( 6.1 ). These
expressions are needed in order to apply the minimum conditions given in
Eq. ( 5.10 ).

The effective potential was calculated in Chapter 4 . We are considering
the special case in which the Lagrangian @xmath given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) can
be rewritten with the help of only two auxiliary fields. The function to
be minimized is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath matrix @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the last equations and in the following ones a sum over repeated
indices is understood.

We only consider derivatives of @xmath at the hyperplane given by @xmath
. At each point of the hyperplane it is possible to diagonalize the
matrix @xmath . This is equivalent to the diagonalization of the quark
mass matrices that can be done performing the chiral transformations
introduced in Eqs. ( 6.7 ). The change of fermion basis modifies the
matrix @xmath of the fermion determinant in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the r.h.s. of the last expression is a diagonal matrix. The
determinant @xmath does not change after the substitution Eq. ( 6.14 ).

We put the matrix @xmath in diagonal form because it simplifies the
calculation of the derivatives of the effective potential. In
particular, the matrix @xmath at the minimum of @xmath corresponds to a
diagonal matrix formed by the squared quark masses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 6.7 ) and ( 6.9 ) the matrix @xmath can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.16)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 6.2.1 First Derivatives of the Effective Potential

Having expressed the effective potential in a more convenient form, we
calculate its first derivatives. First we consider the derivatives with
respect to the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The following
relation will be useful:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.17)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . The fact that at the evaluation point the matrix
@xmath is diagonal and that the first derivatives of its matrix elements
with respect to the variables @xmath are well defined (that is not true
for @xmath , see below) leads to the previous relation. From Eqs. ( 6.13
) and ( 6.17 ) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.18)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . Only the diagonal elements of @xmath are
relevant to these first derivatives of @xmath . Writing the matrix
@xmath in block form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

we need to concentrate only on

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivatives of the diagonal elements of @xmath with respect to
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath block-diagonal matrix given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have spontaneous CP violation both @xmath and @xmath must be
non-zero at the minimum. Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the last condition does not depend on @xmath or @xmath
explicitly. Now we consider the first derivative of @xmath with respect
to the variable @xmath . The derivatives of the diagonal elements of
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the following notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way we obtain the first derivative condition related to the
variable @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we consider the dependence of the effective potential on @xmath .
The matrix @xmath at a given point @xmath can be written as a sum of the
matrix @xmath evaluated at the point @xmath in its diagonal basis, and
terms proportional to @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determinant of @xmath contains only even powers of @xmath . This is
because all terms have the same number of factors @xmath coming from the
submatrix @xmath and from the submatrix @xmath . Thus, the effective
potential written as a function of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant @xmath is a sixth degree polynomial of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first derivative of the effective potential with respect to @xmath
at the point @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 6.35 ). There are two types of terms which
contribute to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

namely, terms which are a product of only diagonal elements of the
matrix @xmath , and terms with one factor from the submatrix @xmath ,
one factor from @xmath , and further 4 diagonal factors. These two type
of terms are given by the first and second contribution on the r.h.s. of
Eq. ( 6.37 ) respectively. The sum in the second term is over all the
entries of the matrix @xmath . Inserting @xmath into Eq. ( 6.36 ) and
performing the momentum integral, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we finally make use of the first derivative condition related to
@xmath (Eq. ( 6.30 )) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.40)
  -- -- -- --------

The relevant results of this Subsection are given in Eqs. ( 6.25 ), (
6.28 ), ( 6.30 ) and ( 6.40 ).

#### 6.2.2 Analysis of the First Derivatives

Before we calculate the second derivatives of @xmath , we analyze the
minimum conditions involving the first derivatives. One can easily find
a set of parameters which obey the minimum conditions associated with
the variables @xmath and @xmath , Eqs. ( 6.28 ) and ( 6.30 ). It
suffices to choose suitable Higgs mass parameters on the l.h.s. of these
equations. As in the previous cases which we have studied, fine-tuning
is needed in each equation in order to get @xmath . The other two
conditions, Eqs. ( 6.25 ) and ( 6.40 ), demand a self-consistent
treatment.

Let us start with the first derivative condition related to @xmath . Eq.
( 6.25 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are real coefficients
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Direct expressions for these coefficients are given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.43)
  -- -- -- --------

Making use of the cyclicity of the trace, the last expressions simplify
to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath vanishes, Eq. ( 6.41 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain a solution for @xmath different from @xmath the
coefficient @xmath must not vanish. Remember that we formulate the
problem in a self-consistent way. We obtain the required quark masses
and the CKM matrix only if the solution for @xmath of Eq. ( 6.45 ) is
given by @xmath . The self-consistent solution of Eq. ( 6.45 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from Eq. ( 6.45 ) that if @xmath then @xmath must be of the
same order than @xmath which has a suppression factor @xmath . A
fine-tuning is then necessary also for this equation. In consequence the
three first derivative conditions related to the variables @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath must be fine-tuned.

Finally we rewrite the vacuum alignment condition. Using the solution
for @xmath found in Eq. ( 6.46 ), and Eqs. ( 6.40 ), ( 6.42 ), the first
derivative condition related to @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2.3 Second Derivatives of the Effective Potential

We calculate the Hessian matrix associated with the effective potential
and the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in order to check the
minimum condition c) of Eq. ( 5.10 ). We need to calculate the following
derivatives:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.48)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath . For the second term of the r.h.s. the following relation
is useful

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we again used the fact that the matrix @xmath is diagonal at the
point @xmath . Inserting this equation into Eq. ( 6.48 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in Eq. ( 6.39 ). The first derivatives of the matrix
@xmath needed in Eq. ( 6.50 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides, the second derivatives of the diagonal elements of @xmath ,
relevant for Eq. ( 6.50 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the last expressions and the first derivative conditions we found
in Subsection 6.2.1 we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and @xmath .

#### 6.2.4 Summary

Here we summarize the procedure which allows to find the parameter
subspace of the coupling constants @xmath of the Lagrangian given in Eq.
( 6.1 ) for which the model predicts the correct CKM matrix and quark
masses. We restrict our analysis to the case in which the four-fermion
Lagrangian can be rewritten using only two auxiliary Higgs fields.

First we choose the four unitary matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath with the only restriction of having a realistic CKM matrix @xmath
. For this it is necessary to determine the value of 32 real parameters,
9 from each unitary matrix minus the 4 physical parameters of the CKM
matrix. We also have to choose the values of the VEVs @xmath and @xmath
. However, it is possible to fix the values of @xmath and @xmath without
losing generality. This is because other values of the VEVs @xmath and
@xmath correspond just to rescalings of the auxiliary fields @xmath .
Using the basis transformation matrices we chose and the quark masses,
we calculate the values of the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
using Eqs. ( 6.44 ). Next we do the first check: The value of @xmath
must be different from zero. This is necessary in order to have a
non-trivial value of @xmath and hence spontaneous @xmath symmetry
breaking. If this is the case, the value of @xmath is given by Eq. (
6.46 ). Because @xmath is a function with period @xmath , the last
equation leads to two possible values for @xmath , which are, however,
equivalent. After that, using Eqs. ( 6.12 ) and ( 6.9 ), we find the
values of the Yukawa matrices in the weak and mass bases. Replacing
these matrices in Eqs. ( 6.28 ) and ( 6.30 ) we get the appropriate
values of the auxiliary field mass parameters @xmath and @xmath . At
this point we make two further checks related to the conservation of the
electromagnetic symmetry and the second derivatives of the effective
potential. The first of these restrictions is given in Eq. ( 6.47 ) and
the second corresponds to having a positive definite Hessian matrix
which is given in Eq. ( 6.53 ). Finally, if the chosen parameters pass
all checks the four-fermion parameters @xmath can by obtained from Eqs.
( 5.4 ). If not, the chosen parameters do not generate a realistic
model.

### 6.3 Quark Mass Expansion

In order to obtain approximate expressions for the quantities calculated
in the previous Subsection, in particular for @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , we perform an expansion in the quark mass ratios. We profit
from the fact that the top quark is much heavier than the other quarks.

In this expansion only some entries of the basis transformation matrices
are relevant. We introduce the following notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 3-dimensional vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath fulfill,
as a consequence of the unitarity of the transformation matrices, the
following relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

First we consider the coefficients @xmath and @xmath given by Eqs. (
6.44 ). The contributions to @xmath and @xmath can be grouped, depending
on the factors @xmath , in the following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the leading terms are of order @xmath . If they are not suppressed
by basis transformation matrix elements, the following approximations
are valid

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

We give now an approximated expression for @xmath (Eq. ( 6.46 )).
Because we are considering the coefficient @xmath to be of order @xmath
, we can neglect the contribution of @xmath in the denominator of Eq. (
6.46 ). In this way we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We repeat that the last expression is valid only if the numerator and
the denominator of this ratio are of order 1, and if @xmath .

Let us now consider the first derivative of the effective potential with
respect to @xmath evaluated at the minimum of the effective potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we examine the second term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ). For
@xmath much bigger than the quark masses we can make the following
approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 6.33 ), ( 6.9 ), and ( 6.12 ), and the cyclicity of the
trace, we obtain for the second term of Eq. ( 6.58 ) the following
expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the factor @xmath depends only on the quark masses and on the
basis transformation matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the basis transformation matrices do not suppress the
factor @xmath , we can consider its absolute value to be of order @xmath
. In this case we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign of the contributions is equal to the sign of the factor
@xmath . We estimate now the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ).
For that, we need an approximate expression for @xmath . The leading
contribution to @xmath is proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used Eqs. ( 6.55 ). The last result is only valid if @xmath .
Using it, we obtain for the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 6.58 ) the
following approximate expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the Schwarz inequality Eq. ( 6.63 ) is always negative, while the
sign of the second contribution to @xmath , given in Eq. ( 6.61 ), is
equal to the sign of the factor @xmath . The ratio between their
absolute values is @xmath . In order to have a ratio smaller than 1
(smaller first term), and thus, if @xmath is positive, alignment, the
leading contribution to @xmath must be suppressed, i.e. @xmath .
Besides, if we suppress the contribution to @xmath proportional to
@xmath , we also suppress the whole term with @xmath in the sum for
@xmath in Eq. ( 6.44 ), and the term proportional to @xmath coming from
@xmath in this sum. Thus, the leading contribution to @xmath are of the
order of the terms proportional to @xmath , @xmath .

#### 6.3.1 Example

In order to be more specific we give an example in which the
transformation matrices @xmath and @xmath are both real. (The two
transformation matrices for the left-handed fields cannot be
simultaneously real because the CKM matrix is complex. In a similar way,
the transformation matrices for the right-handed fields cannot be both
real because @xmath must be different from zero, see Eq. ( 6.44 ).) As
we did in Eq. ( 6.54 ) for the up-sector, we introduce a convenient
notation for the relevant matrix elements of the down-type
transformation matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath we obtain from Eq. ( 6.57 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last approximation is valid only if @xmath . On the other, hand
imposing the constraint @xmath , we get a restriction on the left
transformation matrix elements: The three vectors @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath must be parallel to each other. Using Eq. ( 6.65 ) and @xmath we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and also @xmath , @xmath . Therefore the approximation we did in Eq. (
6.65 ) is valid if @xmath . Besides, the factors @xmath and @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and the angle @xmath is given by @xmath .
Choosing @xmath and @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this choice of parameters we obtain @xmath and @xmath (see Eq. (
6.58 )). It is necessary to check also the second derivative condition.
Calculating the Hessian, Eq. ( 6.53 ) up to order @xmath , one finds
that two eigenvalues of this matrix are real and one is equal to zero.
In order to obtain the third eigenvalue more precisely and to see
whether it is positive, a more detailed evaluation of the Hessian is
needed. We verified this numerically for some specific cases.

We give approximate, non-fine-tuned expressions for the coupling
constants @xmath of Eq. ( 6.1 ). For our example, using Eqs. ( 6.12 )
and ( 4.6 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corrections to Eqs. ( 6.71 ) are by a factor @xmath smaller for each
of the three types of coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

### 6.4 Masses of the Composite Higgs Bosons

We calculate in this Section the neutral and charged two-point proper
vertices associated with the Lagrangian given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) which
involves the three quark families. As before we restrict ourselves to
the case when the Lagrangian can be rewritten using only two auxiliary
fields which condense and break the EW symmetry in the correct way. The
situation is analogous to the one of Section 5.4 where only one family
of quarks was considered. The values of the flowing momentum, for which
an eigenvalue of the proper vertex matrix becomes zero, correspond to
the composite Higgs masses we are looking for.

For the calculation we use the neutral and charged auxiliary field bases
which we defined in Subsection 5.4.2 . In this Subsection we also found
the auxiliary field mass terms in the new bases. We need also the Yukawa
terms in these bases. From Eq. ( 6.11 ) we obtain the following Yukawa
couplings for the neutral auxiliary fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots represent analogous terms for the down sector. In the
charged sector we find for the fields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the left and right projectors. @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are @xmath matrices in flavor space. @xmath is the
CKM matrix, the matrices @xmath with @xmath are the diagonal quark mass
matrices of the up and down sector, and the matrices @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

With these interaction terms and the mass terms of the auxiliary fields
which are given in Subsection 5.4.2 we calculate the two-point proper
vertices. In the calculation we also use the fine-tuned first derivative
conditions found in Subsection 6.2.1 . For the neutral sector the
relevant diagrams are shown in Fig. 6.1 . The related proper vertices
are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.76)
  -- -- -- --------

where the minus sign in the last term corresponds to @xmath and the plus
sign to @xmath . The matrices @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further neutral proper vertices are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.81)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.82)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.84)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where in Eqs. ( 6.82 )-( 6.85 ) @xmath stands for @xmath for @xmath and
for @xmath for @xmath .

In the charged sector the three relevant two-point proper vertices, with
associated diagrams shown in Fig. 6.2 , are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.86)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.87)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

vanishes at @xmath .

In all the two-point proper vertices the quadratic divergences cancel.
As expected, the neutral and charged Goldstone bosons correspond to
eigenvectors of the proper vertex matrix at @xmath with vanishing
eigenvalues. Besides these three Goldstone bosons there are three
neutral and one charged Higgs particles. The masses of these particles
are roughly @xmath . We find that one neutral mass is @xmath and the
rest of the Higgs masses are much smaller.

## Chapter 7 Compositeness Condition and Renormalization Group Analysis

If the scale associated with the new four-fermion interactions is much
higher than the scale of EW symmetry breaking, i.e. @xmath , it is
possible to make a (perturbative) renormalization group (RG) analysis of
the theory. This analysis leads to much better predictions for the
top-quark and Higgs-boson masses than the crude NJL approach because it
includes effects of the gauge boson interactions which become important
at the EW scale. In this Chapter we first review the compositeness
condition and the related RG analysis for the one-Higgs doublet case.
After that we consider the case of having two composite Higgs doublets
which is relevant for our model. Finally we mention the possibility of
including Majorana neutrinos.

In Chapter 4 we rewrote the four-fermion interaction @xmath in terms of
auxiliary fields with the quantum numbers of the Higgs boson. We saw
that for a range of values of the coupling constants @xmath it is
possible to rewrite the theory with the help of only one (auxiliary)
Higgs doublet. The condensation of this field provides all quarks with
masses. In the following analysis, however, we neglect fermion masses
other than @xmath . In the unitarity gauge the Lagrangian of the theory
(without including gauge bosons) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the fermionic kinetic term and the coupling
constant @xmath of the four-fermion interaction is given by @xmath (see
Eq. ( 3.2 )). The Lagrangian @xmath is defined at the scale @xmath ,
with all field components related to higher scales being integrated out.

The Lagrangian given in Eq. ( 7.1 ) is very similar to the one of the SM
(neglecting gauge bosons and fermion masses other than @xmath ). The
only difference is that in our case the running parameters are
constrained at the scale @xmath : The field @xmath has neither a kinetic
term nor a @xmath self-interaction term at this scale. This is known as
the “compositeness condition”.

However, when integrating out high momentum degrees of freedom of the
fields, the @xmath kinetic and self-interaction terms are generated. At
energies @xmath , @xmath becomes a dynamical field. As we see in Chapter
4 , this field describes a scalar particle with mass of about @xmath .
The Lagrangian at energies lower than @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are running couplings. The
@xmath - and @xmath -fields possess also wave-function normalization
constants @xmath and @xmath , respectively. They are equal to one in our
approximation (gauge couplings being turned off and @xmath ).

The compositeness condition is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

at @xmath . Besides we have at this scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By calculating the Higgs two- and four-1PI point functions (see Eq. (
4.35 )) we obtain the running couplings as a function of the scale
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The running parameter @xmath receives a quadratic contribution from the
fermion loop. This contribution makes @xmath negative if @xmath ,
leading to EWSB. We recover in this way the critical coupling @xmath
found in Chapter 3 .

Before we make the crucial step of abstracting the compositeness
condition for the Higgs boson given in Eq. ( 7.3 ) to boundary
conditions in a perturbative RG analysis, it is convenient to change the
normalizations of the fields. The RG equations are normally written
using different field normalizations as in Eq. ( 7.2 ). In the
conventional normalization the fermionic and bosonic kinetic terms are
normalized as in the free theory. We redefine the fields in order to
apply the RG equations written in the conventional normalization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian is now given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the overbar stands for the parameters in the conventional
normalization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The compositeness condition Eq. ( 7.3 ) is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as @xmath .

Now we demand Eqs. ( 7.9 ) and ( 7.10 ) to be the boundary conditions
for the perturbative RG equations of the full theory. The one-loop
@xmath functions of the SM (neglecting light quark masses and mixing
angles) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , are the gauge running coupling
constants. The coefficients @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the original works [ 4 , 66 ] , the RG equation related to the
variable @xmath was not used in order to find its low energy value
@xmath . Instead of that, motivated by the results obtained with the NJL
approach to the model, it was assumed that at @xmath @xmath takes the
necessary negative value in order to break the EW symmetry and to lead
to the observed gauge boson masses, i.e. @xmath . We follow the same
reasoning here.

First we consider the RG equation for @xmath , Eq. ( 7.11 ), with the
boundary condition @xmath as @xmath . Solving this equation yields the
running coupling @xmath and hence a prediction for the top-quark mass.
This is given by @xmath , with @xmath . If @xmath is much bigger than
the gauge couplings we can approximate Eq. ( 7.11 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation shows that starting at a scale @xmath with a big value of
@xmath , this parameter decreases rapidly when evolving towards the
infrared. For numerical computations a large but finite value of @xmath
is chosen at the compositeness scale @xmath . Because of Eq. ( 7.15 ),
the Landau pole is assumed to be located very near to this point.

Once @xmath gets of the order of the gauge couplings the strong coupling
@xmath becomes also important. Taking it into account we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this equation we see that the SM infrared attractive fixed point [
67 , 68 ] is approximately given by the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of the RG equations are attracted to this point. Its
location is modified once one considers all gauge couplings and their
evolution equations. The fixed point makes the low-energy prediction for
@xmath stable against variations of the scale @xmath . Solving the full
one-loop RG equations for @xmath numerically, one obtains predictions
for the top-quark mass [ 4 ] . These are shown in Table 7.1 for
different values of the scale of new physics @xmath .

Now we turn to the evolution of @xmath . This leads to a prediction for
the Higgs-boson mass which is given by @xmath . For big values of @xmath
and @xmath it is possible to neglect gauge couplings in Eqs. ( 7.11 )
and ( 7.13 ). From these two equations we obtain the following evolution
equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This indicates the presence of an infrared attractive
fixed point located at @xmath (besides an ultraviolet attractive fixed
point located at @xmath ). As for the running coupling @xmath , this
ultraviolet fixed point makes the low-energy prediction for @xmath , and
therefore for @xmath , stable against variations of @xmath and against
variations of the initial value (at @xmath ) of the ratio @xmath , as
long as the trajectories correspond to the infrared fixed point.
Numerical results for the Higgs-boson mass are shown in Table 7.1 .

We make now some comments about the validity of the approach. The RG
equations which we use are obtained perturbatively and thus valid only
for small values of the coupling constants. On the other hand our
boundary conditions, Eqs. ( 7.9 ) and ( 7.10 ), demand values of the
coupling constants far away from this regime. This in principle
invalidates the whole analysis. However, using the perturbative RG
equations we see that only for a small “running time” the coupling
constants are not in the perturbative regime. In addition, the
predictions of the model are robust due to the presence of infrared
attractive fixed points. Lattice simulations also in general confirm the
results of the one-loop RG analysis for the case when the trajectories
correspond to these fixed points [ 69 ] . Due to these considerations it
is believed [ 6 ] that the non-perturbative effects are small and that
the whole approach is reliable.

Unfortunately the predictions of the model are phenomenologically not
acceptable. In order to get the right value for the top mass the energy
related to the appearance of new physics @xmath should be (by
extrapolating Table 7.1 ) much bigger than the Planck scale.

Next we consider models including a second Higgs doublet. The RG
equations related to these models allow to obtain a top mass @xmath and
lead to predictions for the Higgs-boson masses which are
phenomenologically acceptable. The following analysis corresponds to a
perturbative RG treatment of the model we studied in Chapter 6 . The
original four-fermion interaction given in Eq. ( 6.1 ) can, for a range
of values of the coupling constants @xmath , be rewritten with help of
two auxiliary Higgs doublets as shown in Eq. ( 6.2 ). In analogy to Eq.
( 7.2 ), in this case the low-energy Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, neglecting Yukawa interactions related to the first and second
quark generation, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Higgs potential @xmath is given by (see Section 2.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The compositeness condition for the two Higgs doublet model is given by
the generalization of Eq. ( 7.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath . Besides, at this scale the Higgs mass parameters and Yukawa
couplings are finite.

As far as we know the compositeness conditions have not been studied in
a RG group analysis of the general two Higgs doublet model given in Eq.
( 7.19 ). Only a special case, the two Higgs doublet type II model has
been studied [ 66 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] . The fact that in the type II
model acceptable top-quark and Higgs masses can be obtained, strongly
support that in the general case which correspond to the model studied
in Chapter 6 this is also the case. The Lagrangian of the two Higgs
doublet type II model is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the Higgs mass parameters. The
fields @xmath , @xmath are linear combinations of the fields @xmath ,
@xmath . The Yukawa interaction is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field @xmath couples only to the quark field @xmath , while the
field @xmath couples only to the quark field @xmath , leading to FCNC
suppression.

At the scale @xmath the Lagrangian of the theory almost respects the PQ
symmetry (see Section 5.3.2 ). Only the term proportional to @xmath
explicitly violates it. In a mass independent renormalization scheme the
RG equations for the dimensionless parameters do not depend on @xmath
and therefore these parameters evolve as if the PQ symmetry were exact.
In this way some parameters of the Higgs potential are zero ( @xmath )
for all energies ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the previous argument relies strongly
on the applicability of the one-loop RG equations at all energies.
@xmath , simplifying the analysis.

An important point arises by the definition of the compositeness
condition as a boundary condition for the RG analysis. In the
conventional normalization the conditions for the Yukawa couplings are
@xmath , @xmath as @xmath . As we mentioned before, in the numerical
calculations large but finite values are chosen for the diverging
couplings at the compositeness scale @xmath . It happens, however, that
low-energy predictions, in particular the top mass, are very sensitive
to the ratio @xmath . For example for ² ² 2 For arguments supporting
this choice see [ 5 ] . @xmath , values for @xmath which are about 10%
lower than the ones of the one Higgs doublet analysis (Table 7.1 ) are
obtained [ 66 ] . These top mass predictions are still too high in order
to be phenomenologically acceptable. Nevertheless, allowing other values
for the ratio @xmath a realistic top mass can be obtained [ 70 , 71 , 73
] , see also [ 5 ] . For example choosing a Higgs VEV ratio @xmath ,
@xmath , or @xmath , a top mass @xmath is found (with different values
of the scale @xmath for each Higgs VEV ratio) [ 73 ] . In this
calculation the boundary conditions at the scale @xmath are given by
@xmath and @xmath . The Yukawa couplings in the conventional
normalization are related to the Higgs wave-function normalization
constants by the relations @xmath and @xmath . Thus both Yukawa
couplings become non-perturbative but not exactly at the same point ³ ³
3 Due to the fact that @xmath is not zero, doubts about the composite
nature of the Higgs doublet @xmath can arise [ 5 ] . However it is
difficult to give definitive statements about that, because at this
scale the perturbative treatment is not fully reliable. . Predictions ⁴
⁴ 4 Corrections due to heavy Higgs boson threshold effects were not
taken into account. [ 66 ] for the masses of the 5 physical Higgs
particles for @xmath and the parameter @xmath (see [ 66 ] ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another possibility investigated in the literature consists in including
Majorana neutrinos [ 74 , 75 ] . The essential idea of these models is
the following. One assumes a four-fermion interaction that involves not
only quarks but also leptons, and large Majorana mass terms for the
right-handed neutrinos. For critical four-fermion couplings,
condensation of neutrino bilinears (and also of top-quark bilinears)
occurs. In this way Dirac neutrino mass terms of the order of the EW
scale are dynamically generated. Then by means of the see-saw mechanism
small physical neutrino Majorana masses are obtained. The compositeness
condition has been studied in models of this type considering one and
two Higgs doublets [ 74 , 75 ] . The RG equations are modified in
comparison to the ones we considered before, due to the presence of the
large Dirac neutrino mass terms (and hence large neutrino Yukawa
couplings), and due to the inclusion of the dimension 5 Majorana
neutrino operator. The value of the top mass is obtained in models
having one or two Higgs doublets. In the one Higgs case the value of the
Higgs mass is predicted to lay between @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath
and for values of the see-saw scale between @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 8 Summary and Conclusions

We studied in this thesis top-condensation models of electroweak
symmetry breaking. In these models a four-fermion interaction term
involving SM fermions is postulated at some high energy scale which we
called @xmath . The strong, attractive four-fermion interaction induces
the formation of color-singlet fermion-antifermion bound states, in
particular in spin-zero states which correspond to composite Higgs
bosons, and their condensation. These condensates transform
non-trivially under @xmath transformations and therefore break the EW
symmetry. As a consequence gauge bosons and fermions acquire masses. The
major goals of this type of models are to explain the origin of the EW
scale, to dynamically generate the gauge boson and fermion masses, and,
as we investigated in this thesis, to generate quark mixing angles and
the @xmath violating phase of the CKM matrix. Specifically, we started
with a @xmath -invariant Lagrangian, and we showed that in our model the
@xmath -violating phase of the CKM matrix was generated through complex
VEVs of the composite Higgs fields.

In order to study top-condensation models the NJL approach is widely
adopted in the literature. In this thesis we applied this method first
to models involving only quarks of the third generation, and then to the
physically relevant model with three quark generations.

Two possible scenarios concerning the origin of the four-fermion
interaction term can be considered. In the traditional one, one starts
with a non-abelian gauge theory at very high energies @xmath which
becomes strongly-coupled at scales @xmath . For energies below @xmath
the new interaction is effectively described by operators constructed
with the fields corresponding to the light ( @xmath ) degrees of freedom
of the theory. The new interaction must violate the flavor symmetry,
i.e. must be non-universal, in order to generate the observed fermion
mass pattern. Topcolor models [ 26 ] are examples of a theory of this
type.

At low energies the most important non-renormalizable operators are the
ones having the lowest mass dimension. Therefore dimension-six
four-fermion operators were considered. Besides, only four-fermion
operators made of (pseudo)scalar fermion bilinears were taken into
account (they lead to (pseudo)scalar composite fields), ignoring the
ones made of (axial)vector fermion bilinears. Note that the distinction
between (pseudo)scalar and (axial)vector bilinears is ambiguous due to
Fierz identities.

In the second scenario the four-fermion interaction term acquires a more
fundamental status. It is assumed that the SM with the Higgs sector
being replaced by a general dimension-six four-fermion interaction is a
(non-perturbatively) renormalizable theory [ 30 ] . This is the case if
one or more non-Gaussian ultraviolet stable fixed points are established
beyond the point-like approximation [ 30 ] .

In this thesis the four-fermion interaction term was used as a starting
point. Therefore, besides the four-fermion and the SM gauge couplings,
the scale @xmath at which the whole Lagrangian was defined, is also a
parameter of the theory. If @xmath is much bigger than the electroweak
scale, complementary to the NJL approach a perturbative RG analysis can
be made. This method, which incorporates the SM gauge interactions,
provides reliable values for the top-quark and Higgs-boson masses. In
this approach the information that composite Higgs doublets appear at
the scale @xmath is encoded in the compositeness condition. This
condition is used as a boundary condition at the scale @xmath in the RG
analysis.

In the two-Higgs doublet type II model the RG analysis leads to
phenomenologically acceptable Higgs masses, with values of about @xmath
and higher (see end of Chapter 7 ). In addition the correct mass of top
quark is obtained if the ratio of the Yukawa couplings at the scale
@xmath is taken different from 1. These results strongly support that
for the general two-Higgs doublet model the compositeness condition in a
RG analysis also leads to phenomenologically acceptable mass values. If
the @xmath -violating phase of the CKM matrix is spontaneously generated
by the condensation of two-Higgs doublet fields, then this necessary
happens within the general two-Higgs doublet model.

To have a very high scale @xmath is, however, not very attractive
because the theory suffers from fine-tuning in exactly the same way as
the SM. Another important point is the one related to the distinction
between fundamental and composite Higgs particles. If the compositeness
scale @xmath is very high, the composite nature of these particles
cannot be directly verified by experiments in the near future.

A more interesting possibility is to have a scale @xmath not very much
higher than the EW scale, @xmath . In this case no fine-tuning problem
appears. Besides, the generation of the scale @xmath could be explained
from dimensional transmutation. This would solve the hierarchy problem.
A perturbative RG analysis cannot be justified in this case. Topcolor
assisted technicolor [ 27 ] , and top-quark see-saw [ 28 , 29 ] are
examples of theories of this type. In these theories the NJL approach is
widely used.

We found that if the dimension-six four-fermion Lagrangian includes only
quarks of the third family, then spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking
does not occur. This model possesses three four-fermion coupling
constants. We considered the case where the EW symmetry is spontaneously
broken, giving both the top and bottom quarks their respective masses.
We distinguished between two possibilities. For @xmath the Lagrangian
has a Peccei-Quinn symmetry and therefore the theory predicts an axion.
An axion related to the EW scale is, however, ruled out. For @xmath the
spectrum of the theory includes only one scalar Higgs particle with mass
about @xmath . It corresponds to a one-Higgs doublet model and not to a
two-Higgs doublet model as one could naively assume. In this model there
are modes which are associated with masses of order @xmath , which is,
however, the upper limit of the validity range of the model. Therefore
these modes cannot be interpreted as particles.

Finally we summarize the results obtained in a model with a
dimension-six four-quark interaction term involving the three quark
generations. All four-fermion couplings were considered to be real in
order to have a @xmath -invariant Lagrangian. We restricted our analysis
to the case where the theory can be rewritten in terms of two auxiliary
Higgs fields. In this case the number of independent four-quark coupling
constants is 36. We found by means of a self-consistent approach a range
for the four-quark couplings where spontaneous @xmath symmetry breaking
occurs together with EWSB. Specifically, complex VEVs of the two
composite Higgs doublets lead to a realistic @xmath -violating CKM
matrix. Besides, masses for all quarks and weak gauge bosons are
generated. We also showed that the vacuum respects the electromagnetic
@xmath symmetry.

The model predicts five physical spin-zero bound states: three neutral
composite Higgs bosons and one charged boson and its charge conjugated
state. The masses of the composite Higgs bosons were also calculated
leading in part to very low (non-acceptable) values. Using the
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio method, we obtained for one neutral state a mass
value of about @xmath . However, the masses of the other states obtained
with this approximation turn out to be unacceptably low. This is not
surprising because this approximation which is the method of choice for
investigating the ground state of the model is not reliable for
calculating the Higgs masses, because the effect of SM gauge
interactions is not and the effect of Higgs self-interactions is only
partly (i.e. only the part induced by fermion loops in the @xmath
approximation) taken into account. If @xmath is very high the RG
analysis, which incorporates these interactions, provides a more
reliable prediction for these masses. As we saw an analysis of this type
leads to acceptable Higgs boson masses. In models with @xmath being not
too much higher than the EW scale, theories like topcolor assisted
technicolor provide a mechanism for increasing the value of the
composite Higgs boson masses [ 27 ] .

Another aspect of our model is related to flavor-changing neutral
currents (FCNCs). We saw that Higgs mediated FCNCs are necessarily
present if the @xmath -violating CKM phase is spontaneously generated.
On the other hand FCNCs are strongly constrained especially in the
down-quark sector. It is possible, however, to construct a model having
non-diagonal Yukawa matrices only in the up-sector. An open question is
whether a model with FCNC connected only to the top quark (or better,
only between the top and charm quarks) can be consistent. More
importantly, the question how FCNCs are suppressed in top-condensation
models remains open.

## Appendix A Surface Terms in the Spherical Cutoff Regularization

In this Appendix we show, using as example the minimal scheme treated in
Chapter 3 , how surface terms affect the position of the poles in some
correlation functions. In particular we see that the mass of the
composite Higgs boson is ambiguous, while the Goldstone bosons remain
massless, as they should.
A Feynman integral defined with a spherical cutoff as regulator, is in
general not invariant under a shift of the integration variables.
Convergent or logarithmically divergent integrals are invariant under
this operation, while linearly or more than linearly divergent integrals
are not. In this case additional surface terms appear [ 46 , 47 ] . For
linearly and quadratically divergent integrals the following surface
terms appear

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We now calculate the poles of the correlation functions (calculated in
Section 3.3 ), considering this time the surface terms. In the scalar
channel the loop integral @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.17 ) is in general
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the value of @xmath in the loop, see Fig. A.1 , is not determined
by the theory. For a regulator which allows a shift in the integration
variable @xmath there is no ambiguity in the definition of @xmath , but
in the case of a spherical cutoff regulator the integral @xmath depends
on @xmath . Using Eq. ( A.2 ) we obtain a new expression for the scalar
four-point function (assuming that all the momentum loops in Fig. 3.3
have the same @xmath -prescription)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Because @xmath is always bigger than @xmath the pole in (
A.4 ) is never at @xmath . The position of the pole is now given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The mass of the composite boson is therefore always smaller than @xmath
if one takes surface terms into account.
Now we turn to the other channels, which are associated with the
Goldstone bosons. The pseudoscalar amplitude is given now by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One sees that the position of the pole does not change. Finally in the
charged channel we find that the position of the pole also remains at
@xmath . After summing the geometric series we obtain (see Fig. 3.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral @xmath is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we introduced a Feynman parameter @xmath . Replacing @xmath in Eq.
( A.9 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In conclusion, taking the surface terms ( A.1 ) and ( A.2 ) into account
does not alter the position of the poles at @xmath in the pseudoscalar
and charged amplitudes. However, in the scalar amplitude the position of
the pole changes.
