## Chapter 1 Introduction

Effective Lagrangians containing massless or massive vector fields with
arbitrary (non–Yang–Mills) self couplings are investigated very
intensively in the literature in order to parametrize possible
deviations of the self interactions of the electroweak gauge bosons
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] and of the gluons [ 4 ] from
the standard model predictions with respect to experimental tests of
these couplings. In [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] it is always implicitely assumed
that the Feynman rules, which are the basis for calculations of @xmath
-Matrix elements and cross sections, can directly be obtained from the
effective Lagrangian, i.e., the quadratic terms in the Lagrangian yield
the propagators and the cubic, quartic, etc. terms yield the vertices in
the standard manner. This simple quantization rule is known as
Matthews’s theorem ¹ ¹ 1 Matthews himself proved this theorem only for
the very simple case of interaction terms with at most first powers of
derivatives and he used the canonical quantization formalism instead of
the PI formalism [ 5 ] . [ 5 ] . Within the framework of the the Feynman
path intergral (PI) formalism [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] (where the Feynman rules
follow from the generating functional) this theorem can be reformulated
as follows:

  Given a Lagrangian @xmath with an arbitrary interaction term, the
  corresponding generating functional can be written as a Lagrangian PI

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (1.1)
    -- -------- -- -------

  (where @xmath is a shorthand notation for all fields in @xmath ). If
  @xmath has no gauge freedom, the quantized Lagrangian @xmath occurring
  in the PI is identical to the primordial one

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (1.2)
    -- -------- -- -------

  If @xmath has a gauge freedom, the generating functional ( 1.1 ) is
  the same as the one obtained in the Faddeev–Popov (FP) formalism [ 7 ,
  8 ] (in an arbitrary gauge) with the quantized Lagrangian

    -- -------- -- -------
       @xmath      (1.3)
    -- -------- -- -------

  which contains an additional gauge-fixing (g.f.) term and a ghost
  term.

The generating functional ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.3 ) is very
convenient for practical calculations because it is manifestly Lorentz
invariant (if a covariant gauge is choosen), it does not involve the
generalized momenta corresponding to the fields and, as mentioned above,
it directly implies the Feynman rules; for this reason it is used in all
practical calculations [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] . However, it is well known
that, in general, quantization has to be based on the more elaborate
Hamiltonian PI formalism [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] . The naive
Lagrangian PI formalism [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] , where ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) is
taken as the ansatz for the generating functional, can a priori only be
applied to quantize physical systems without derivative couplings and
without constraints. Thus, to prove Matthews’s theorem, one has to
derive the Lagrangian PI ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.3 ) from the
Hamiltonian PI, i.e. one has to show that the correct Hamiltonian PI
formalism and the naive Lagrangian PI formalism are equivalent. For this
reason, I will not use the historical designation “Matthews’s theorem”
for the above statement but the name Hamilton–Lagrange equivalence
theorem (HLE theorem), which is more adequate to its modern PI
formulation.

The HLE theorem was proven by Bernard and Duncan [ 10 ] for effective
interactions of scalar fields (without higher derivatives of the
fields), i.e. for physical sytems which do not involve constraints.
Vector fields and fermion fields, however, are subject to constraints.
Thus, in order to derive the HLE theorem for the general case, one has
to take into account the formalism of quantization of constrained
systems, which goes back to Dirac [ 14 ] and was formulated within the
path integral formalism by Faddeev [ 9 ] (for first-class constrained,
i.e. gauge invariant, systems) and by Senjanovic [ 11 ] (for
second-class constrained, i.e. gauge noninvariant, systems). Besides, in
these works the equivalence of Hamiltonian and Lagrangian PI
quantization was shown for Yang–Mills theories [ 9 ] and for massive
Yang–Mills theories [ 11 ] without additional effective interaction
terms. Extensive treatises on Hamiltonian quantization of constrained
systems can be found in textbooks about this subject [ 12 , 13 ] . In
this thesis I will give a general proof of the HLE theorem ² ² 2
Recently several works about the equivalence of Hamiltonian and
Lagrangian PI quantization have been published [ 15 ] . However, in [ 15
] the equivalence of the (Hamiltonian) Batalin–Fradkin–Vilkovisky (BFV)
PI formalism [ 16 ] to the (Lagrangian) Batalin–Vilkovisky (BV) PI
formalism [ 17 ] is proven; both are very formal and abstract
formalisms, which are not directly connected to the usual Hamiltonian [
9 , 11 ] or Lagrangian [ 6 , 7 ] PI formalism. My work is completely
different from [ 15 ] since I prove the equivalence of the (Hamiltonian)
Faddeev–Senjanovic PI [ 9 , 11 ] (which is the fundamental one because
it can be derived from elemantary dynamics) to the (Lagrangian)
Feynman–Faddeev–Popov PI [ 6 , 7 ] (wich is the one used in all
practical calculations [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] ) without applying the BFV [ 16
] or the BV [ 17 ] formalism. for arbitrary interactions of all
physically important types of particles, viz. scalars, fermions,
massless and massive vector bosons. I will also take into account the
case of effective interactions which involve higher derivatives of the
fields.

Particular attention will be paid to effective interactions of massive
vector fields because they are most interesting from the
phenomenological and from the theoretical point of view. Three types of
effective theories with massive vector fields can be found in the
literature, namely gauge noninvariant Lagrangians [ 1 ] , spontaneously
broken gauge theories (SBGTs) with a nonlinearly realized scalar sector
and without physical Higgs bosons [ 2 ] (called gauged nonlinear @xmath
-models or chiral Lagrangians) and SBGTs with a linearely realized
scalar sector which contain (a) physical Higgs boson(s) [ 3 ] . In fact,
the proof of the HLE theorem for gauge noninvariant Lagrangians can be
extended to the case of gauge invariant Lagrangians because, by applying
a Stueckelberg transformation [ 18 , 19 ] , each SBGT can be rewritten
as a gauge noninvariant model (after a nonlinear parametrization of the
scalar sector [ 20 , 21 ] in the case of a linear Higgs model). A
Stueckelberg transformation is a field transformation (that involves
derivatives of the fields) which results in removing all unphysical
scalar fields (pseudo-Goldstone fields) from the Lagrangian. The
resulting Lagrangian is called the unitary gauge (U-gauge) of the
original SBGT. On the other hand, by using the Stueckelberg formalism,
an arbitrary gauge noninvariant Lagrangian can be written as a
(nonlinear) SBGT [ 22 ] and by introduction of (a) physical Higgs
boson(s) it can be extended to a linear Higgs model. In this thesis I
will reformulate the Stueckelberg formalism within the Hamiltonian
formalism, thereby establishing the physical equivalence of gauge
invariant Lagrangians and the corresponding gauge noninvariant U-gauge
Lagrangians. On this basis I will prove the HLE theorem for SBGTs by
first deriving the Faddeev--Popov PI for the case of the U-gauge ³ ³ 3
It will be shown later that for the case of this special gauge the
Faddeev–Popov formalism yields no explicit g.f. term and ghost term. and
then using the equivalence of all gauges, i.e. the independence of the
@xmath -matrix elements from the choice of the gauge in the
Faddeev–Popov formalism [ 20 , 23 ] , in order to generalize this result
to any other gauge.

A priori it is not clear that two Lagrangians which are related by a
Stueckelberg transformation are equivalent, since such a transformation
is not a simple point transformation because it involves derivatives of
the unphysical scalar fields; however, within the Hamiltonian formalism
this equivalence can be properly shown. In Hamiltonian framework no more
“Stueckelberg transformation” is made, instead, one passes from the
gauge noninvariant (second-class constrained) system to the gauge
invariant (first-class constrained) system by a phase space enlargement
followed by an application of the constraints in order to convert the
Hamiltonian and the constraints themselves.

In distinction to massive vector fields, massless vector fields
necessarily have to be understood as gauge fields. A Lagrangian with
massless vector fields but gauge noninvariant interactions of these has
no physical meaning because without a gauge-fixing term, which only
becomes introduced for gauge invariant Lagrangians (within the
Hamiltonian PI formalism as well as within the Lagrangian PI formalism),
the operator occurring in the quadratic part of the Lagrangian has no
inverse and therefore it is impossible to obtain a propagator for the
vector fields. I will present a general proof of the HLE theorem for
gauge theories with additional arbitrary (non–Yang–Mills) self
interactions of the gauge fields, with arbitrary couplings of the gauge
fields to scalar fields and to fermion fields and with arbitrary
interactions among the scalar and fermion fields (which are all gauge
invariant). The proof also applies to the case of SBGTs, i.e. gauge
theories with massive gauge fields, because one can assume that the
scalar fields that are coupled to the gauge fields have a nonvanishing
vacuum expectation value. In fact, this way one obtains a proof of the
HLE theorem for SBGTs alternative to the one announced above which is
more direct and which is not based on the Stueckelberg formalism.

Within the Hamiltonian PI formalism, a gauge theory cannot be directly
quantized in the Lorentz-gauge or, for the case of SBGTs, in the @xmath
-gauge (which are the most convenient gauges for practical calculations)
because the corresponding g.f. conditions cannot be written as relations
among the fields and the conjugate fields alone, and thus they are not
g.f. conditions within the Hamiltonian framework. Therefore, I will
first derive the generating functional ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ) in the
Coulomb-gauge; due to the equivalence of all gauges [ 20 , 23 ] this
result can then be rewritten in any other gauge.

When carrying out a complete analysis of the extensions of the standard
model, one necessarily has to consider effective interaction terms which
depend on higher derivatives [ 24 ] . Therefore, I will also derive the
HLE theorem for effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives of the
fields (effective higher-order Lagrangians). However, theories described
by higher-order Lagrangians have quite unsatisfactory properties [ 25 ,
26 ] , namely: there are additional degrees of freedom, the energy is
unbound from below, the solutions of the equations of motion are not
uniquely determined by the initial values of the fields and their first
time derivatives and the theory has no analytic limit for @xmath (where
@xmath denotes the coupling constant of the higher-order interaction
term). Clearly, these features are very undesirable when dealing with
effective Lagrangians in order to parametrize small deviations from a
renormalizable theory like the standard model, in which no unphysical
effects occur.

Fortunately however, the abovementioned problems are absent if a
higher-order Lagrangian is considered to be an effective one. This
means, one assumes that there exists a renormalizable theory with heavy
particles at an energy scale @xmath (“new physics”), and that the
effective Lagrangian parametrizes the effects of the “new physics” at an
energy scale lower than @xmath by expressing the contributions of the
heavy particles (which do not explicitely occur in it) through
nonrenormalizable effective interactions of the light particles.
Supposed that the renormalizable Lagrangian describing the “new physics”
does not depend on higher derivatives, it causes no unphysical effects
and therefore such effects also do not occur at the lower energy scale,
i.e. at the effective-Lagragian level. Actually, I will show in this
thesis that in the first order of the effective coupling constant @xmath
(with @xmath ) all higher time derivatives can be eliminated from the
effective Lagrangian. Higher powers of @xmath can be neglected because
an effective Lagrangian is assumed to describe the effects of
well-behaved “new physics” in the @xmath approximation only;
consequently all ill-behaved effects (which do not occur in the first
order of @xmath ) become cancelled by other @xmath @xmath effects of the
“new physics”.

Each effective higher-order Lagrangian can be reduced to a first-order
Lagrangian because one can apply the equations of motion (EOM) to
eliminate all higher time derivatives from the effective interaction
term (by neglecting higher powers of @xmath ). This is a nontrivial
statement because, in general, the EOM must not be used to convert the
Lagrangian. However, it was shown in [ 27 , 28 ] that it is possible to
find field transformations which have the the same effect as the
application of the EOM to the effective interaction term (in the first
order of @xmath ). I will show that these field transformations are
point transformations (and thus canonical transformations) within the
Hamiltonian formalism for higher-order Lagrangians (Ostrogradsky
formalism [ 25 ] ) although they involve derivatives of the fields. The
reason for this is that within the Ostrogradsky formalism the
derivatives up to order @xmath are formally treated as independent
coordinates if the Lagrangian is of order @xmath , and the order @xmath
of the Lagrangian can be chosen arbitrarily without affecting the
physical content of the theory [ 13 ] (as long as @xmath is greater or
equal to the order of the highest actually appearing derivative). This
implies that the reduced first-order Lagrangian which is obtained from
the primordial higher-order Lagrangian by applying the EOM to its
effective interaction term is physically equivalent to this (at the
classical and at the quantum level).

In this thesis I will prove the HLE theorem for the case of effective
higher-order Lagrangians by reducing them to first-order ones, as
explained above, and then applying the HLE theorem for effective
Lagrangians with at most first time derivatives of the fields.
Especially the treatment of fermion fields can be simplified very much
this way because the EOM of these fields only depend on first time
derivatives. Therefore one can eliminate not only higher but also first
time derivatives of the fermion fields from the effective interaction
term and thus it is sufficient to derive the HLE theorem for the case of
effective interactions in which no time derivatives of these fields
occur. Furthermore, within the Ostrogradsky formalism, the proof of the
canonical equivalence of Lagrangians that are related by a Stueckelberg
transformation can be generalized to the higher-order case and, besides,
it can be simplified very much because, as mentioned above, in this
formalism a field transformation which involves derivatives of the
fields becomes a canonical transformation.

In the Hamiltonian treatment of effective theories with scalar fields in
[ 10 ] it is assumed that the effective interaction term is proportional
to a small @xmath and in the subsequent procedure higher powers of
@xmath are negelected because otherwise it is not possible to find
closed expressions for the generalized velocities and the Hamiltonian in
terms of the fields and the generalized momenta (if there are higher
than second powers of the velocities in the Lagrangian). I will proceed
similarly; I will assume that the effective interactions, which are only
the deviations from the standard interactions (i.e. from the Yang--Mills
self-interactions of the vector fields, minimal gauge couplings of these
to the scalar and fermion fields, Yukawa couplings of the scalars to the
fermions and derivative-free scalar self-interactions), are proportional
to a coupling constant ⁴ ⁴ 4 In general, effective Lagrangians contain
more than one coupling constant in the nonstandard interaction terms.
However, this does not affect the results of this thesis because each
effective coupling constant @xmath can be written as @xmath with @xmath
, where @xmath is the same for all @xmath . @xmath with @xmath . In the
proof of the HLE theorem I will only consider terms which are at most
first order in @xmath , neglecting higher powers ⁵ ⁵ 5 One should keep
in mind that the neglection of higher powers of @xmath is not a
restriction to the tree level because one can consider loops in which
one vertex follows from the effective interaction term ( @xmath ) while
the other(s) are standard (Yang–Mills) vertices. of @xmath . This
treament is justified when dealing with phenomenologically motivated
effective Lagrangians as in [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] since these are considered
in order to investigate the effects of small deviations from the
standard model and since an effective Lagrangian only describes the
@xmath -approximation of “new physics” (see above).

It will turn out that the result ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.3 ) is only correct up
to additional quartically divergent terms, i.e. terms proportional to
@xmath . According to [ 10 ] I will neglect @xmath -terms when
establishing the equivalence of Hamiltonian and Lagrangian PI
quantization because they become zero in dimensional regularization [ 10
, 29 ] .

Throughout this thesis, I will introduce the source terms in the PI
after all manipulations will have been done. This is consistent because
the source terms for the ghost fields have to be introduced later,
anyway. Actually, if the source terms would be considered from the
beginning, they would not remain unchanged in the subsequent treatment.
However, a change in the source terms does not effect the @xmath -matrix
elements [ 23 ] .

This thesis is organized as follows: In chapter 2 I show how the unitary
gauge of a spontaneously broken gauge theory can be constructed within
the simple Lagrangian path integral formalism, I give an introduction to
the Stueckelberg formalism and I apply it in order to show that each
effective Lagrangian can be written in a gauge invariant form. Chapter 3
contains a brief review of the dynamics and the Hamiltonian path
integral quantization of constrained systems. In chapter 4 I prove the
Hamilton–Lagrange equivalence theorem (HLE theorem) for effective
interactions of massive vector fields, namely for gauge noninvariant
effective Lagrangians and for spontaneously broken gauge theories (with
linearly and with nonlinearly realized symmetry) and I reformulate the
Stueckelberg formalism within the Hamiltonian framework. In chapter 5 I
prove the equivalence of Lagrangians which are related to each other by
a field transformation that involves derivatives, I show that a
higher-order effective Lagrangian can be reduced to a first-order one by
applying the equations of motion to the effective interaction term and I
derive the HLE theorem for effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives
of the fields. In chapter 6 I present a general proof of the HLE theorem
for effective gauge theories. Chapter 7 contains the summary of the
results derived in this thesis.

## Chapter 2 The Unitary Gauge and the Stueckelberg Formalism

In this chapter I will study the various approaches to the unitary gauge
of a spontaneously broken gauge theory within the simple Lagrangian
(Faddeev–Popov) PI formalism; i.e., I will show how the unphysical
scalar fields can be removed from such a theory by quantizing it in this
formalism. I will give an introduction to the Stueckelberg formalism and
I will utilize it in order to connect gauge noninvariant Lagrangians
with massive vector fields (containing standard or nonstandard
self-interactions of these) with (linearly or nonlinearly realized)
SBGTs.

The treatment of this chapter is a bit aside from the main point of this
thesis, namely Hamiltonian PI quantiztion, because here all
considerations are based on the naive Lagrangian PI ansatz. However, the
results obtained in this chapter and the physical methods introduced
here (especially the Stueckelberg formalism) are of importance for the
Hamiltonian treatment of SBGTs in the following chapters.

SBGTs contain unphysical degrees of freedom, the pseudo-Goldstone
scalars. At the classical level, the unphysical fields can be removed by
means of a gauge transformation, i.e., for given values of the
pseudo-Goldstone fields at each space-time point there exists a gauge
transformation (in which the choice of the gauge parameters depends on
these values) that maps the unphysical fields identically to zero. This
gauge, which is characterized by the fact that the Lagrangian contains
only “physical fields”, is called the unitary gauge (U-gauge).

However, this naive definition of the U-gauge cannot be applied in
quantum physics which is best seen within the framework of Feynman’s
path integral formalism [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] , where quantization is based on
the generating functional ( 1.1 ). Since the gauge transformation which
removes the unphysical fields is dependent on the values of these fields
at each space-time point, it cannot be applied to the generating
functional where a functional integration over all values of the fields
is done. In other words there is not a “universal” gauge transformation
which maps arbitrary pseudo-Goldstone fields equal to zero.

There are three (equivalent) ways of constructing a gauge without
unphysical fields (i.e. without pseudo-Goldstone fields and without
ghost fields) within the Lagrangian PI formalism. I discuss them mainly
for the case of linearly and minimally realized SBGTs (i.e. those which
contain physical Higgs scalars and which are renormalizable). The case
of nonlinear and/or nonminimal theories will also be treated at the end
of this chapter. The construction of the U-gauge within the correct
Hamiltonian PI formalism will be discussed in the chapters 4 and 5 of
this thesis.

The first and most direct procedure to construct the U-gauge within the
Faddeev–Popov (FP) formalism is simply to impose the gauge-fixing
condition that the pseudo-Goldstone fields be equal to zero (which can
be done because of the existence of the abovementioned gauge
transformation). The resulting FP @xmath -function is used in order to
integrate out the unphysical scalar fields while the FP determinant can
be written as an exponential function without introducing ghost fields,
which yields a quartically divergent (i.e. proportional to @xmath )
nonpolynomial Higgs self-coupling term. Alternatively, the FP
determinant can be rewritten as a ghost term with static ghost fields.
All ghost loops are quartically divergent and the ghost term can be
replaced by the abovementioned Higgs self-interaction term, which has
the same effect on physical matrix elements.

The second method is to construct the @xmath -gauge [ 20 , 23 , 30 , 31
] in which the unphysical fields are still present but with masses
proportional to the free parameter @xmath , and then to take the limit
@xmath . In this limit, the unphysical fields get infinite masses and
decouple. However, the ghost-ghost-scalar couplings get infinite, too,
with the consequence, that the ghost term does not completely vanish; I
will show that some of the ghost loops vanish in this limit and the
others become quartically divergent. The contribution of the latter
terms yields again the quartically divergent Higgs self-interaction
term. The @xmath -limiting procedure goes back to [ 31 , 32 ] . I will
apply this formalism to an SBGT with only partly broken symmetry, which
requires a modification of the @xmath -gauge, namely the introduction of
different parameters @xmath corresponding to the massive and to the
massless gauge fields.

The third way is most similar to the classical treatment: the unphysical
fields are decoupled from the physical ones by applying appropriate
field transformations [ 20 ] . This procedure consists of two subsequent
field transformations; first the unphysical scalars are paramatrized
nonlinearly and then they are decoupled and can be integrated out. When
making field transformations in the PI, one also has to take into
account the Jacobian determinant which arises owing to the change of the
functional integration measure [ 20 , 33 ] ; in this case this yields
again the abovementioned Higgs self-interaction term.

Thus, all three methods lead to a quantized U-gauge Lagrangian which
contains, in addition to the classical U-gauge Lagrangian, an extra
nonpolynomial quartically divergent Higgs self-interaction term. The
same term was derived by quantizing the classical U-gauge Lagrangian
canonically [ 32 , 34 ] where it emerges as a remnant of
covariantization. In section 4.4 I will derive it within the Hamiltonian
PI formalism. However, the @xmath -term becomes zero if dimensional
regularization is applied [ 10 , 29 ] . Besides, it was shown in [ 35 ,
36 ] , that this term cancels against other quartic divergences arising
from vector-boson loops, so that, when summing over all Feynman
diagrams, no quartic divergent terms contribute to the @xmath -matrix
elements (within a renormalizable theory). Due to the equivalence of all
gauges [ 20 , 23 ] , loop calculations can either be carried out within
the @xmath -gauge or within the U-gauge. They seem to be simpler in the
U-gauge than in the @xmath -gauge because there are less Feynman
diagrams due to the absence of unphysical fields. On the other hand, the
form of the vector-boson propagator in this gauge (which is proportional
to the zeroth instead of the inverse second power of the energy) induces
higher divergences in the single Feynman diagrams which are, however,
cancelled when summing over the different diagrams. These higher
divergences do not occur from the beginning if one uses the @xmath
-gauge. Furthermore, calculations within the U-gauge suffer from
ambiguities in the determination of the finite part of an @xmath -matrix
element [ 30 , 37 ] . Thus, the @xmath -gauge seems to be more adequate
for loop calculations than the U-gauge.

Therefore, for practical purposes it is not so useful to remove the
unphysical degrees of freedom from an SBGT. Instead, one should go the
reverse way, i.e., when dealing with a gauge noninvariant Lagrangian,
one should introduce unphysical fields in order to rewrite this theory
as an SBGT, which enables the choice of the @xmath -gauge and simplifies
loop calculations. Actually, the third of the abovementioned procedures
can be reversed, i.e. an SBGT can be “reconstructed” from its (gauge
noninvariant) U-gauge Lagrangian. To do this, scalar fields, which are
initially completely decoupled, are introduced into the theory by
multiplying an (infinite) constant to the generating functional which
contains the functional integration over these fields. The unphysical
scalars are then coupled to the physical fields by an appropriate field
transformation. In the next step unphysical and physical scalar fields
together are rewritten in a linearized form. In [ 21 ] a formal proof
was given that this way each tree unitary Lagrangian can be written as
an SBGT. I will explicitly carry out this procedure for the case of the
electroweak standard model taking into account the (Lagrangian) PI
formalism. This method of constructing SBGTs by such “field-enlarging
transformations” represents the non-Abelian version of the Stueckelberg
formalism [ 18 , 19 , 38 , 39 ] , which in its original form was studied
only for theories without physical Higgs bosons where it leads to the
problem of nonpolynomial interactions and nonrenormalizability (in
non-Abelian theories). The existence of physical scalars, however,
enables a linearization of the scalar sector, so that renormalizable
Stueckelberg models can be constructed.

By applying a Stueckelberg transformation to a simple massive Yang–Mills
theory (without physical scalars) one obtains a gauged nonlinear @xmath
-model. I will briefly review and summarize the three different
approaches to such a model discussed in the literature, namely the
Stueckelberg formalism [ 19 ] , gauging a nonlinear @xmath -model [ 40 ]
(i.e. a model with a global nonlinearly realized spontaneously broken
symmetry) and taking the limit @xmath of a Higgs model [ 41 ] .

In the electroweak phenomenology effective Lagrangians with extra
non–Yang Mills vector-boson self-interactions are considered (see e.g. [
1 ] ) in order to parametrize possible deviations from the standard
model. Applying a Stueckelbeg transformation to such an effective
Lagrangian allows to rewrite it as an SBGT. This result has already been
obtained in [ 22 ] , however without identifying the corresponding
transformation as a Stueckelberg transformation. Within the resulting
SBGT the gauge group acts nonlinearly on the unphysical fields, there
are nonpolynomial interactions and they are nonrenormalizable. However,
the gauge freedom enables the choice of the @xmath -gauge (where the
vector-boson propagators have a good high-energy behaviour) in order to
carry out loop calculations within an effective theory, which shows that
the loops in such a theory do not diverge as severely as one would
expect by naive power counting. Furthermore I will show that each
effective Lagrangian with massive vector bosons can even be extended to
an SBGT with linearly realized symmetry by introducing a physical Higgs
boson. This makes the loop corrections even smaller.

Within this chapter renormalizable SBGTs are discussed by taking the
example of the @xmath standard model (SM) of the electroweak interaction
[ 42 ] since it is of greatest phenomenological interest. Similarly, in
the discussion of effective Lagrangians I restrict myself to theories
containing the electroweak vector bosons, which leads again to @xmath
gauge invariance. However, the results obtained in this chapter can
easily be generalized to an arbitrary gauge group.

The results of this chapter were obtained in collaboration with
R. Kögerler. They have first been published in [ 43 ] .

### 2.1 Preliminaries and Notation

In this section I introduce my notation of the electroweak standard
model and of the Faddeev–Popov formalism. For a systematic treatment of
these subjects, the reader is referred to the original literature [ 7 ,
42 ] and, especially, to textbooks on quantum field theory and particle
physics (e.g. [ 8 ] ).

The SM gauge fields corresponding to the gauge groups SU(2) and U(1) are
@xmath @xmath and @xmath , respectively. For practical purposes the
@xmath field is parametrized in terms of a @xmath matrix:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrix-valued field strength tensors are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The scalar fields @xmath and @xmath are parametrized by means of as a
@xmath matrix as well:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore I consider one fermionic doublet @xmath (the generalization
to more doubletts works as usual) consisting of an up-type field @xmath
and a down-type field @xmath (quark or lepton)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the fermion mass matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

With the appropriate covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

(with @xmath and @xmath being the baryon and lepton number of @xmath ),
the SM Lagrangian takes the well known form [ 8 , 42 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

(with @xmath and @xmath ). @xmath is invariant under the local @xmath
gauge transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

(where @xmath and @xmath are the SU(2) and U(1) coupling constants,
respectively). @xmath and @xmath denote the four gauge parameters. The
nonvanishing vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the scalar field @xmath (
2.3 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath have a vanishing VEV. @xmath is the Higgs field and @xmath
are the pseudo-Goldstone fields. The physical gauge-boson fields @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath (photon) are the well known combinations of @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath being the Weinberg angle defined by @xmath ).

In order to quantize the theory one usually starts from the Lagrangian
PI ansatz [ 6 , 8 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath contains an infinite constant due to the gauge freedom. This is
removed within the Faddeev–Popov (FP) formalism [ 7 , 8 ] by imposing
the general gauge-fixing conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath are arbitrary funcions) and then rewriting @xmath (after
dropping the infinite constant) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath ). Since ( 2.15 ) is independent of the @xmath [ 20 ] , one can
construct the weighted average over them (with the weight functions
@xmath , @xmath being a set of free parameters ¹ ¹ 1 Usually all @xmath
are taken to be equal, but for my purposes I allow also different @xmath
. ). Then one expresses the FP determinant through the ghost fields
@xmath , @xmath by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result, ( 2.15 ) can be written as [ 8 , 20 , 23 , 30 , 31 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the quantized Lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which contains an additional gauge-fixing term a ghost term ² ² 2 Note
that @xmath is a convenient shorthand notation for @xmath (which is a
local expression because @xmath is proportional to @xmath or its
derivatives). This notation will be used throughout this thesis. .
Finally, source terms for all (physical and unphysical) fields have to
be introduced.

Later in this thesis I will also consider effective Lagrangians with an
additional arbitrary @xmath -invariant interaction term @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, the g.f. term and the ghost term in ( 2.18 ), which only
depend on the choice of the g.f. conditions ( 2.14 ), remain unchanged
if, instead of @xmath ( 2.7 ), such a Lagrangian is quantized;
i.e. these terms are independent of the form of @xmath .

### 2.2 Derivation of the U-Gauge by Gauge Fixing

In this section I explain the “direct way” of constructing the U-gauge
within the FP formalism by setting the unphysical pseudo-Goldstone
fields equal to zero from the beginning. This is done by imposing the
gauge-fixing conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This is a possible choice of g.f. conditions since the @xmath can be
transformed to zero by means of a gauge transformation. The fourth
g.f. condition is necessary because the unbroken symmetry @xmath has to
be fixed as well. ( 2.15 ) now takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the second @xmath -function is treated in the way explained above,
yielding an appropriate @xmath . The other one enables to carry out the
@xmath integration with the result that all terms with pseudo-Goldstone
fields in the SM Lagrangian and in the ghost term become equal to zero.
Thus, the unphysical pseudo-Goldstone bosons are removed from the
theory. The quantized Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 2.18 ). Except for @xmath this is identical
to the classical U-gauge Lagrangian with fixed @xmath .

Let me now consider the ghost term and show that in this gauge also the
ghost fields can be removed from the theory. Corresponding to the gauge
boson mixing ( 2.12 ) I define the parameters

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.8 ) one finds the changes of the @xmath ( 2.20 ) under
infinitesimal gauge transformations.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

First, one can see that all terms which are proportional to the
pseudo-Goldstone fields @xmath (denoted as @xmath ) yield vanishing
contributions to the ghost terms after integrating out the @xmath
-function, as explained above. Second, @xmath (the ghost belonging to
the electromagnetic gauge freedom) is a physically inert field: it is
not possible to construct a Feynman diagram with internal @xmath -lines,
because ( 2.24 ) only yields (besides a kinetic term for @xmath )
vertices with outgoing @xmath -lines (and incoming @xmath -lines coupled
to @xmath ) but no vertices with an incoming @xmath . Thus, the field
@xmath can be integrated out.

After removing all redundant terms, one can express the resulting FP
determinant as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the argument of the determinant has the simple form @xmath , one
can express the functional determinant (“Det”) in terms of the ordinary
one (“det”) by using the relation [ 33 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that in this case (in contrast to the @xmath gauge, where the
argument of the FP determinant contains derivatives of the @xmath
-function and thus ( 2.26 ) cannot be applied) the FP determinant can be
written as an exponential function without introducing unphysical ghost
fields. As a result one finds (neglecting a constant and using @xmath )
the ghostless FP term to the Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 2.22 ) with ( 2.28 ) shows that @xmath (in the gauge defined by ( 2.20
)) contains no unphysical fields, neither pseudo-Goldstone nor ghost
fields ³ ³ 3 If the unbroken subgroup is non-Abelian the ghost fields
belonging to this subgroup are still present. These can be removed by
choosing the axial gauge @xmath for the massless gauge bosons instead of
the Lorentz gauge as in ( 2.20 ). . Instead, there is the extra term (
2.28 ) describing a quartically divergent nonpolynomial Higgs
self-interaction.

The extra term ( 2.28 ) can alternatively be derived from the Feynman
diagrams obtained by applying ( 2.16 ) in order to express the
determinant ( 2.25 ) in terms of usual ghost fields. I am going now to
present also this derivation, since it makes the role of the new
interaction term more transparent. In this procedure the ghost term is
(with @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

There are no kinetic terms of the ghost fields, only mass terms and
couplings to the Higgs boson. This means that the ghost propagators are
static ones, i.e. inverse masses. Figure 2.1 shows the Feynman rules
derived from ( 2.29 ).

Since the ghost fields exclusively couple to the Higgs boson, they only
contribute to Feynman diagrams with ghost loops connected to an
arbitrary number of Higgs lines (Figure 2.2 ), which can be internal or
external ones.

The Feynman rules (Fig. 2.1 ) imply that the contribution of such a loop
with @xmath ghost propagators coupled to @xmath Higgs bosons to the
amplitude is (with a factor @xmath for the loop and one @xmath due to
the Fermi statistics of the ghosts)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for an internal @xmath as well as for an internal @xmath . One can see
that such a ghost loop effectively provides for a quartically divergent
@xmath -Higgs self-coupling. Let me for a moment go to the one-loop
level (where the Higgs lines connected to the ghost loop are “tree
lines”) and consider all subdiagrams like Fig. 2.2 with a fixed number
@xmath of Higgs lines. The sum of their contributions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath is due to the three types of internal ghosts and the
factor @xmath is due to the @xmath different possibilities to attach the
@xmath Higgs lines to such a loop (as one can easily verify by
induction). Thus all the ghost loops with @xmath Higgs lines together
can be replaced by an extra @xmath -Higgs vertex (Figure 2.3 ) with the
quartically divergent vertex factor ( 2.31 ).

Considering a combinatorical factor of @xmath due to the @xmath
different possibilities to attach @xmath Higgs lines to the such a
vertex, all the extra @xmath -Higgs vertices (with all possible values
of @xmath ) can be derived from the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is identical to ( 2.28 ).

This one-loop derivation can easily be generalized to all loop orders
without changing the result: If the Higgs lines in Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 are
not “tree lines” but connected to loops among themselves or to other
ghost loops or extra vertices of this type, the only thing in the above
discussion that changes is the combinatorics. However, the
combinatorical factors of @xmath for the @xmath -Higgs ghost-loop and of
@xmath for the @xmath -Higgs vertex change by the same extra factor so
that this cancels. One can easily see that, no matter how the Higgs
lines are connected, for each way to attach @xmath Higgs lines to a loop
like Fig. 2.2 there are @xmath ways to attach them to a vertex like Fig.
2.3 , corresponding to the @xmath cyclic permutations.

This alternative derivation of the extra term ( 2.28 ) to the quantized
Lagrangian (although it is more elaborate) shows explicitly the meaning
of ( 2.28 ): @xmath has to be interpreted as a quartically divergent
integral stemming from ( 2.30 ) and can be expressed in terms of a
cut-off ⁴ ⁴ 4 Remember that @xmath vanishes in dimensional
regularization [ 10 , 29 ] . @xmath as @xmath and the logarithm has to
be evaluated in a power series as in ( 2.32 ) which yields a
(nonpolynomial) self-interaction of an arbitrary number of Higgs bosons.
One can see that the unphysical ghost fields can effectively be removed
from the theory by taking the U-gauge but they do not completely
decouple (as the pseudo-Goldstone fields do): there remains the
additional interaction term ( 2.28 ) as a remnant. However there are no
more explicit ghost fields in this term.

Remembering the last paragraph of the preceding section, one can easily
generalize this result to the quantization of an effective Lagrangian
with an additional arbitrary (but gauge invariant) interaction term (
2.19 ). The quantized U-gauge Lagrangian turns out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the same @xmath ( 2.28 ) as in the SM case (due to the independence
of the ghost term from the effective interaction term). This result will
be used when deriving the HLE theorem for effective SBGTs later in this
thesis.

### 2.3 R@xmath-Limiting Procedure

The second approach to the unitary gauge is to start from the SM
quantized in the @xmath -gauge and then to take the limit @xmath . To
construct this limit, one has to modify the @xmath -gauge a bit because
the photon propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

would become infinite for @xmath , while the propagator of the massive
gauge bosons

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath or @xmath ) remains finite in this limit. I impose the usual
@xmath gauge-fixing conditions [ 8 , 20 , 23 , 30 , 31 ] and express
them in terms of the mass eigenstates @xmath and @xmath of the neutral
sector (instead of @xmath and @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain the corresponding @xmath I make use of the
possibility to introduce different parameters @xmath for each @xmath (
@xmath ) in the g.f. term in ( 2.18 ) (see footnote 1 of this chapter).
The @xmath most convenient for my purposes is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with two free parameters @xmath and @xmath . The ghost term depends only
on @xmath since ( 2.36 ) depends only on @xmath , thus the sole
difference between this gauge and the usual @xmath -gauge is that @xmath
in the photon propagator is replaced by @xmath . Now one can take the
limit @xmath [ 31 , 32 ] (which does not affect physical observables
since these do not depend on @xmath [ 20 , 23 ] ) while the unbroken
subgroup @xmath is fixed in an arbitrary gauge specified by a finite
@xmath so that the photon propagator remains finite.

A complete list of Feynman rules for the @xmath -gauged SM is, e.g.,
given in the book of Bailin and Love [ 8 ] . The @xmath -dependent
propagators and vertices are:

-   The propagators of the massive gauge bosons ( 2.35 ), which become
    Proca propagators of massive spin-one particles for infinite @xmath
    . Thus, the contribution of those parts of the g.f. term, which are
    quadratic in the massive gauge fields, vanishes in this limit.

-   The propagators of the pseudo-Goldstone bosons and of the ghost
    fields (except for @xmath , which is massless)

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    For @xmath , these particles acquire infinite mass and their
    propagators become zero. If there would be no @xmath -dependent
    vertices these particles would completely decouple.

-   All couplings of a (physical or unphysical) scalar to a ghost pair.
    These are proportional to @xmath and become infinite for @xmath .

Now I examine which Feynman diagrams with lines corresponding to
unphysical fields do not vanish for @xmath . Since the pseudo-Goldstone
and the @xmath propagators behave as @xmath for large @xmath their
number has to equal the number of scalar–ghost–ghost vertices ( @xmath )
in such diagrams. This means:

-   All propagators @xmath have to be coupled to @xmath -dependent
    vertices at both ends, i.e., couplings of unphysical fields to gauge
    fields or to fermion fields (which are independent of @xmath ) do
    not contribute in this limit.

-   Only those @xmath -dependent vertices yield nonvanishing
    contributions which couple to two @xmath -dependent and one @xmath
    -independent propagator. These are the @xmath and the @xmath
    vertices. However, the latter do not contribute, since they exist
    only with an incoming @xmath but not with an outgoing one, thus it
    is not possible to construct ghost loops with them.

As a consequence, all graphs with pseudo-Goldstone lines or with @xmath
-lines vanish for @xmath . Thus, the @xmath -fields and the ghost field
@xmath can be neglected altogether in this limit. This means that the
only nonvanishing diagrams containing unphysical particles are those
with ghost loops that are exclusively coupled to Higgs bosons (Fig. 2.2
), i.e. the same diagrams which contribute within the alternative
derivation of the U-gauge in the previous section. The corresponding
Feynman rules in the @xmath -gauge are given in Fig. 2.4 .

The contribution of such a loop with @xmath external Higgs lines for
@xmath is (for internal @xmath as for @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

(The momenta @xmath of the internal ghosts do not have to be specified
to construct the limit.) This is identical to ( 2.30 ); therefore one
can transfer the discussion of the previous section and finds for the
limit of the ghost term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is again the extra term ( 2.28 ).

Thus in the @xmath -gauge, after taking the limit @xmath , the
pseudo-Goldstone fields and even the massless ghost field @xmath (which
has a @xmath -independent propagator) decouple completely, while the
effects of the massive ghosts can be expressed through the (ghostless)
extra interaction term ( 2.28 ). Therefore I obtain the same result for
the U-gauge Lagrangian as in the previous section ⁵ ⁵ 5 Actually, it is
a priori not clear that the limit @xmath can be taken before the loop
integration in ( 2.39 ). The fact that the obtained result is identical
to that of the alternative derivations justifies this treatment. .

### 2.4 Decoupling the Unphysical Scalars

In this section I derive the U-gauge of the SM by applying appropriate
field transformations to the gauge invariant Lagrangian ( 2.7 ). I start
with reparametrizing (point transforming) the scalar sector of the
theory, ( 2.3 ) with ( 2.11 ), nonlinearly as [ 20 , 44 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the new Higgs field and the @xmath are the new
pseudo-Goldstone fields. One can see that in this parametrization the
Lagrangian ( 2.7 ) contains nonpolynomial interactions of the @xmath to
the gauge bosons and to the fermions, which stem from expanding the
exponential in the kinetic term of @xmath and in the Yukawa term. At the
quantum level this is not the whole story: The basis of quantization is
not the Lagrangian ( 2.7 ) but the PI ( 2.13 ). Therefore one has to
transform the integration measure in the PI, too, which yields a
functional Jacobian determinant [ 20 , 33 ] according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The explicit form of the field transformation ( 2.41 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). One can again use ( 2.26 ) in order
to express the functional Jacobian determinant in terms of the ordinary
one, wich is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

With ( 2.26 ) one finds that the change of the functional intergration
measure yields the following extra term to the Lagrangian (after
dropping a constant)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term is again the quartically divergent nonpolynomial Higgs
self-coupling term ( 2.28 ), but there is also a quartically divergent
nonpolynomial self-interaction term of the nonlinearly realized
pseudo-Goldstone fields.

Introducing the field combination

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can deduce from ( 2.8 ) the behaviour of @xmath and @xmath under
@xmath gauge transformations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e., the physical scalar @xmath is a singlet. Consequently, the first
term in ( 2.45 ) is gauge invariant while the second is not. However,
this is no serious problem since gauge invariance is not really
destroyed, it is just not completely obvious due to the nonlinear
parametrization ⁶ ⁶ 6 This can easily be visualized with the help of an
example from quantum mechanics: If one studies a translational invariant
Lagrangian and transforms the functional intergration measure to polar
coordinates, one finds a translational noninvariant extra term to the
Lagrangian although physics is still translational invariant. .

In order to remove the unphysical scalar fields @xmath from the theory
one could apply one of the methods described in the previous two
sections. I do not explain this in detail here but only mention the main
features. If one imposes the gauge-fixing conditions ( 2.20 ) (U-gauge)
or ( 2.36 ) ( @xmath -gauge) with @xmath replaced by @xmath one finds
expressions for the ghost term analogous to those obtained in sections
2.2 and 2.3, except that there are additional interactions of more than
one pseudo-Golstone boson with the ghost fields (which do not affect the
discussion) and that there are no couplings of the Higgs boson to the
ghosts, because from ( 2.47 ) it is obvious that the changes of the
@xmath ( 2.47 ), and therefore also those of the @xmath ( 2.20 ) or (
2.36 ), under infinitesimal gauge transformations do not depend on
@xmath . Thus no ghost loops as in Figure 2.2 can be constructed.
Remembering the discussion of the previous sections, one can see that
the ghost term vanishes completely after integrating out @xmath in the
first case and after taking the limit @xmath in the second case.

Here I choose another possibility and apply one further field
transformation, which affects the vector and the fermion fields. It is
just a reversed (non-Abelian) Stueckelberg transformation [ 19 , 20 , 21
, 39 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Jacobian of this transformation is independent of the physical
fields since ( 2.48 ) is linear in them. With ( 2.26 ) it yields the
(gauge noninvariant) extra term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

to the Lagrangian.

Applying ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.48 ) to the SM Lagrangian ( 2.7 ), one can
easily convince oneself that the @xmath decouple from the physical
fields. The resulting Lagrangian turns out to be the one obtained by
removing all pseudo-Goldstone fields from ( 2.7 ) and by replacing the
fields ( @xmath ) by ( @xmath ). Therefore one can integrate out the
pseudo-Goldstone fields in the PI, which yields a constant factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath contains the self couplings of the @xmath in ( 2.45 ) and (
2.49 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression ( 2.50 ) can be removed by multiplying the PI with the
compensating factor.

In summary one can see that the unphysical fields @xmath have decoupled
and one obtains the same result for the quantized U-gauge Lagrangian as
in the previous two sections; in particular the extra term ( 2.28 ) is
again recovered.

Next I study the behaviour of the new fields under gauge
transformations. With ( 2.8 ), ( 2.47 ), and ( 2.48 ) one finds that all
physical fields are invariant under the action of SU(2) and transform
under U(1) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Introducing, in analogy to ( 2.12 ), the mass and charge eigenstates
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and rescaling the gauge parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath being the electromagnetic coupling constant @xmath ) one
finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fermion charge matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is just an electromagnetic gauge transformation ⁷ ⁷ 7 On the first
look this result seems surprising since I made a @xmath transformation
to derive ( 2.54 ). However, due to the field transformation ( 2.48 ),
this acts differently on the transformed fields than on the original
ones; so it becomes a @xmath transformation. . Thus, after the fields
have been parametrized such that all pseudo-Goldstone bosons decouple,
the action of the whole gauge group on the physical fields reduces to a
gauge transformation belonging to the unbroken subgroup. The remaining
gauge freedom is only connected to the unphysical scalars and has been
“removed” by dropping ( 2.50 ). Finally, the @xmath gauge freedom has to
be fixed by adding the g.f. term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the corresponding ghost field decouples. Thus, one finally finds
the same quantized Lagrangian as in the previous two sections.

This derivation of the U-gauge is similar to the classical procedure,
i.e. the removal of the pseudo-Goldstone scalars by a means of a gauge
transformation. In fact the Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48 )
formally acts as an SU(2) gauge transformation on the vector and fermion
fields with the gauge parameters @xmath being replaced by the the
pseudo-Goldstone fields @xmath . But there remains a principal
difference between a gauge transformation and a Stueckelberg
transformation; namely the gauge transformation which maps the @xmath
identically to zero depends on the numerical values of these fields at
the various space-time points and thus it is not the same transformation
for different functions @xmath . The Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48
), however, decouples the pseudo-Goldstone fields independently of their
functional form from the physical fields and thus it can be applied to
the PI, where an integration over the @xmath at each space-time point
@xmath is carried out. The only effect of quantum physics on the above
discussion is the need of transforming the functional integration
measure, too. The corresponding Jacobian determinant gives rise to the
extra term ( 2.28 ).

### 2.5 The Stueckelberg Formalism

The procedure of the last section can be reversed: one can start from
the U-gauge Lagrangian and construct the corresponding SBGT by
subsequent field transformations. Although it is clear from the previous
section what do to, I explain this procedure a bit more in detail, since
it is a “derivation” of an SBGT (e.g. of the SM), which illustrates some
features of such a model quite well. Furthermore, the U-gauge Lagrangian
of an SBGT can be motivated on a rather intuitive basis: it only
involves “physical” fields (i.e. all the fields corresponding to
observable particles) and it is the most general Lagrangian without
unphysical fields which guarantees tree-unitarity (i.e., @xmath
-particle @xmath -matrix elements calculated at the tree level decrease
at least as @xmath for high energy @xmath ) [ 21 , 36 , 45 ] .
Therefore, it seems interesting to look whether and how the general
(gauge invariant) structure of an SBGT can be reconstructed from its
U-gauge Lagrangian. Tree unitarity implies, in particular, the need of
physical scalars (Higgs bosons) with appropriate couplings to the other
particles and to itself in order to ensure good high-energy behaviour.
It is clear that the extra term ( 2.28 ), which genuinely reflects
quantum effects, is not obtained from tree-level arguments, but it is
inferred from the requirement of vanishing quartically divergent @xmath
-Higgs self-couplings (which was shown for @xmath at the one-loop level
in [ 35 , 36 ] ). In the following I take the term ( 2.28 ) as a given
part of the U-gauge Lagrangian.

Starting from this full U-gauge Lagrangian (containing the fields @xmath
and @xmath as in the previous section) one first recognizes the local
@xmath symmetry ( 2.54 ). Applying the FP procedure reversely to the
unbroken subgroup, one can remove the corresponding g. f. term ( 2.56 )
(and the ghost term if the unbroken subgroup is non-Abelian). Next, one
can see that the Lagrangian is gauge invariant also under the larger
group @xmath except for the mass terms of the vector bosons and the
fermions and the couplings of the physical scalar to these fields. In
order to obtain a gauge invariant Lagrangian, one can now use the
Stueckelberg formalism. The purpose of the Stueckelberg formalism is to
introduce, by field-enlarging transformations, unphysical degrees of
freedom with an appropriate behaviour under @xmath gauge transformations
that compensate the effect of the transformations of the physical fields
in the gauge noninvariant terms of the U-gauge Lagrangian [ 18 , 19 , 21
, 38 , 39 ] .

In the Lagrangian PI formalism, the field-enlarging transformation is
constructed as follows: First one introduces the completely decoupled
fields @xmath by formally multiplying the (infinite) constant ( 2.50 )
to the PI. This contains the functional integration over the unphysical
fields @xmath (Stueckelberg scalars) and an exponential function, which
is needed to remove the Jacobian determinant of the subsequent field
transformations. Then the @xmath , parametrized in terms of the unitary
matrix @xmath ( 2.46 ), are coupled to the physical fields by the
transformations ( 2.48 ). The resulting Lagrangian is invariant under
@xmath gauge transformations, ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.47 ), (except for the
extra term ( 2.51 )), because the fields in the U-gauge Lagrangian have
been replaced by the combinations ( 2.48 ) and the effect of an
arbitrary gauge transformation on these is just an electromagnetic one (
2.54 ) which leaves the U-gauge Lagrangian unchanged. Since the
Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48 ) has the form of an SU(2) gauge
transformation ⁸ ⁸ 8 In [ 38 ] one can find an alternative formulation
of the Stueckelberg formalism for the case of @xmath symmetry. There the
Stueckelberg transformation does not look like an SU(2) gauge
transformation, as in my treatment, but like a full @xmath
transformation with the gauge parameters being replaced by unphysical
scalar fields; thus four unphysical fields are introduced. However, one
can show that there exists a reparametrization of the scalar fields
(i.e. one more field transformation) that decouples one of these, so
that one finally obtains the same result as I do. , its effect on the
kinetic terms, the vector-boson self-interaction terms and the
vector-boson–fermion interaction terms is just to replace @xmath by
@xmath , etc. (because these terms are already gauge invariant), while
the mass and Higgs coupling terms give rise to a kinetic term of the
@xmath (stemming from the gauge-boson mass-term) and to nonpolynomial
couplings of the Stueckelberg scalars to the physical particles. Thereby
these terms have become replaced by gauge invariant expressions.

Two important points should be mentioned here.

-   In the Stueckelberg formalism spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) is
    implied by the parametrization of the unphysical scalar fields in
    terms of the unitary matrix @xmath ( 2.46 ). This yields the
    constraint

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.57)
      -- -------- -- --------

    in the scalar sector, which implies the nonvanishing VEV

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.58)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This VEV does not follow from a scalar self-interaction potential
    with a minimum for nonvanishing fields as in the Higgs mechanism.

-   In the Stueckelberg formalism the origin of the (seemingly) bad
    high-energy behaviour of the U-gauge Lagrangian is shifted from the
    massive-vector-boson propagator, which can now be expressed within
    to the @xmath -gauge as ( 2.35 ), to the nonpolynomial interactions
    of the unphysical scalars.

In the original Stueckelberg formalism this is the end of the story
because field transformations like ( 2.48 ) are not applied to the
U-gauge of a (linearly realized) SBGT but to a Yang–Mills theory with
mass terms added by hand. The Stueckelberg formalism transforms such a
model to a gauged nonlinear @xmath -model, which is in fact
nonrenormalizable [ 41 , 46 ] , since it is not possible to
reparametrize the unphycal scalars ( 2.46 ) in a linear form in order to
avoid nonpolynomial interactions [ 47 ] . However, in this case the
primordial Lagrangian contains an extra Higgs field (or several Higgs
fields in the case of more extended theories). This has been introduced
in order to ensure good high-energy behaviour at the tree level and, in
fact, it makes the model renormalizable, too, since physical and
unphysical scalar fields together can be rewritten as a linear
expression by means of the field transformation ( 2.41 ). (The Jacobian
determinant of ( 2.41 ) removes the extra term ( 2.28 ).) Thus, in the
linear parametrization ( 2.3 ) with ( 2.11 ) the nonpolynomial
interactions have been removed. It was shown in [ 21 ] that for each
tree unitary theory such a linearizing transformation exists, although
this transformation has not explicitly been constructed there.

Let me briefly discuss the origin of the scalar self-interaction term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the SM Lagrangian ( 2.7 ) (which implies the nonvanishing VEV and
thus the SSB) within this derivation of the SM. The self interactions of
the physical Higgs field @xmath are already present in the U-gauge
Lagrangian, they are necessary to ensure tree unitarity [ 45 ] .
However, the VEV of @xmath is zero. The nonvanishing VEV and the
unphysical scalar fields become introduced in the Stueckelberg formalism
(i.e. by rewriting the theory in a gauge invariant form which implies
SSB through the constraint ( 2.57 )). In the linear parametrization of
the scalar sector, the Higgs scalar becomes “coupled” to the VEV and to
the Stueckelberg scalars, so that one finally obtains @xmath ( 2.59 ).
One can see that is this derivation of a Higgs model, the Higgs boson
with its self-interactions and the SSB become introduced at different
stages of the procedure.

So finally one has “recovered” the SM from its unitary gauge by applying
appropriate transformations to the physical fields. At the level of the
classical Lagrangian, this has originally been done in [ 21 ] . At the
quantum level one has to consider the PI ( 2.13 ), so that two new
features arise:

-   Field enlarging is easily achieved by multiplying an infinite
    constant (as ( 2.50 )) to the PI.

-   The (quantized) U-gauge Lagrangian has to contain the extra term (
    2.28 ). This cancels against the Jacobian determinant which arises
    as a consequence of the transformation of the functional integration
    measure.

As the result of this section one can see that a Higgs model can be
derived from the requirement of good high-energy behaviour of tree-level
amplitudes and of loops without explicitly using the Higgs mechanism
(although SSB is implicitly included in this derivation). Thus, the
physical sector of an SBGT “contains” the entire model. Non-Abelian
Stueckelberg models are renormalizable if, in addition to the unphysical
Stueckelberg scalars, also physical scalars with appropriate couplings
to the other particles and themselves are present.

### 2.6 The Gauged Nonlinear @xmath-Model

As mentioned before, the original purpose of the Stueckelberg formalism
was to construct gauge theories with massive gauge bosons but without
physical scalars [ 18 , 19 , 38 , 39 , 47 ] . To construct a
(non-Abelian) Stueckelberg model one starts from a Yang-Mills theory,
adds a mass term by hand, thereby breaking gauge invariance explicitly,
and then makes a field-enlarging Stueckelberg transformation as ( 2.48 )
in order to restore gauge invariance. As pointed out in the previous
sections, the Stueckelberg transformation only affects the mass term in
a nontrivial way thereby yielding, besides a kinetic term for the
Stueckelberg scalars, nonpolynomial interactions of the unphysical
fields with the physical fields. In the Yang–Mills part of the
Lagrangian the original physical fields are simply replaced by the
transformed fields. Thus, the addition of unphysical scalar fields with
suitable nonpolynomial couplings to the physical fields (in the
non-Abelian case) embeds the original massive Yang–Mills theory in an
equivalent gauge theory. The resulting model is a gauged nonlinear
@xmath -model. As it is well known, such a model can be constructed in
three alternative ways (explained here for the case of @xmath symmetry):

-   By applying a Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48 ) to a massive
    Yang–Mills theory [ 19 ] as explained above.

-   By gauging a nonlinear @xmath -model [ 40 ] , i.e. a model which
    contains scalar fields parametrized in terms of a unitary matrix
    @xmath ( 2.46 ) and is symmetric with respect to global
    transformation such as ( 2.47 ). This global symmetry is
    spontaneously broken due to the constraint ( 2.57 ). The gauged
    nonlinear @xmath -model is obtained by coupling @xmath minimally to
    gauge fields so that the global symmetry becomes a local one.

-   By formally taking the limit @xmath of a Higgs model [ 41 ] . In
    this limit the linearly realized scalar fields @xmath become
    substituted by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.60)
      -- -------- -- --------

    (with @xmath and @xmath given by ( 2.3 ). ( 2.11 ) and ( 2.46 )).
    This automatically removes the scalar self-interaction term ( 2.59 )
    and implies the constraint ( 2.57 ).

Although the gauged nonlinear @xmath -model is nonrenormalizable due to
the nonpolynomial interactions, the gauge freedom enables perturbative
calculations in the @xmath -gauge and so one finds that the loops do not
diverge as severely as one would expect from naive power counting. In
fact, the one-loop divergences of the gauged nonlinear @xmath -model are
only logarithmically cut-off dependent [ 41 ] .

### 2.7 Effective Lagrangians

During the last years effective electroweak Lagrangians describing
non–Yang–Mills self-interactions of massive vector bosons have been
studied in order to parametrize possible deviations of the electroweak
interaction from the SM (e.g. [ 1 ] ). These are also gauge
noninvariant, because the mass terms and the nonstandard interaction
terms violate gauge invariance. However, repeating the reasoning of the
previous two sections, one can easily see, that each effective
Lagrangian with arbitrary vector-boson self-interactions (which is only
invariant under @xmath transformations) can be rewritten as an SBGT with
nonlinearly realized symmetry by applying the Stueckelberg
transformation ( 2.48 ). The original effective Lagrangian is the
U-gauge Lagrangian of this SBGT. Again, the behaviour of the gauge
noninvariant terms under gauge transformations is compensated by the
addition of appropriate couplings to unphysical scalars but, in contrary
to the case of a simple massive Yang–Mills theory, not only the mass
terms but also the nonstandard interaction terms give rise to new
nonpolynomial couplings. The resulting model is a generalized gauged
nonlinear @xmath -model (also called chiral Lagrangian) with additional
nonstandard (but gauge invariant) effective interaction terms. Because
of the gauge freedom, one can do loop calculations within such a
(nonrenormalizable) model in the @xmath -gauge and thus has better
opportunities to subdue the divergences. Furthermore one can avoid the
ambiguities [ 30 , 37 ] in calculations on the basis of the original
effective Lagrangian. This result has already been obtained in [ 22 ] ⁹
⁹ 9 For a more general and formal treatment of the relations between
gauge noninvariant Lagrangians and SBGTs see [ 48 ] . , however without
identifying the corresponding transformations as Stueckelberg
transformtions.

A method of deriving nonstandard self-couplings of electroweak vector
bosons from a gauge invariant Lagrangian with linearly realized symmetry
(Higgs model) is to add to the the SM Lagrangian extra @xmath invariant
interaction terms, which contain the nonstandard couplings [ 3 ] .
Although there are no nonpolynomial interactions, these models are
nonrenormalizable, too, because the additional interaction terms have a
(mass) dimension higher than four (while in the renormalizable SM all
terms have dimension four). However, it has recently been shown that,
within models with extra dimension-six terms, one-loop diagrams depend
(after renormalization) only logarithmically on the cut-off due to the
linearly realized gauge invariance [ 49 , 50 ] . In fact, most of the
additional terms contain extra interactions of the Higgs boson to the
gauge bosons and the Higgs boson contribution cancels the quadratic loop
divergences [ 50 ] . Thus the models discussed above, which are obtained
by applying a Stueckelberg transformation to an effective Lagrangian and
therefore contain no physical Higgs field, will yield more severely
divergent loop corrections.

It should be noted that the two applied methods to obtain nonstandard
interactions from a gauge invariant model are in principle different. In
[ 3 ] terms are added to the SM Lagrangian, most of them contain not
only vector-boson self-interaction terms but also couplings to the
physical Higgs boson. Thus the original effective Lagrangian is extended
to a gauge invariant model which is not equivalent to it, since there
are additional Higgs couplings. In contrary, the generalized
Stueckelberg formalism, i.e. the introduction of nonlinearly realized
symmetry enables one to express an effective Lagrangian in terms of an
equivalent ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The proof that Lagrangians which are related to each
other by a Stueckelberg transformation are physically equivalent will be
given in the sections 4.2 and 5.3.2. gauge theory. On the other hand,
from the above discussion it is clear how these two methods are
connected. Given an effective electroweak theory with arbitrary
vector-boson self-interactions, one first makes the Stueckelberg
transformation ( 2.48 ) and finds the equivalent generalized gauged
nonlinear @xmath -model. This can, like the usual gauged nonlinear
@xmath -model, be understood as the limit @xmath of a Higgs model with
linearly realized symmetry [ 41 ] . To recover this Higgs model one has
to substitute ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 It should be clear that ( 2.61 ) cannot be
understood as a field-enlarging transformation like ( 2.48 ), since the
matrix @xmath ( 2.3 ) cannot be expressed as a unitary matrix @xmath (
2.46 ). This shows that the step from the generalized gauged nonlinear
@xmath -model to the generalized Higgs model is indeed an extension of
the theory. , reversing ( 2.60 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with ( 2.3 ), ( 2.11 )) and to add the Higgs self-interaction potential
( 2.59 ), which implies a nonvanishing VEV of @xmath (and replaces the
constraint ( 2.57 ) in the gauged nonlinear @xmath -model). As in
section 2.5 the addition of a physical Higgs boson enables a linear
parametrization of the scalar sector and removes the nonpolynomial
interactions. Applying this simple formalism one can embed each
effective electroweak theory with arbitrary vector-boson
self-interactions in an @xmath gauge invariant theory with linearly
realized symmetry which is expected to yield a more decent loop
behaviour. The SBGT which contains the most general trilinear
vector-boson self-interactions within a gauge invariant framework is
given in [ 51 ] , however, it has not explicitly been constructed there
by applying this procedure. Here, I have given the general formalism to
understand and to carry out this extension of an effective Lagrangian to
a linear Higgs model for all types of vector-boson self-interactions ¹²
¹² 12 The investigation of this section concerning arbitrary
vector-boson self-interactions can also be applied to obtain arbitrary
fermionic interactions from a (linearly or nonlinearly realized) SBGT.
However, I do not stress this point here because this is of less
phenomenological interest since the SM fermionic interactions are very
well confirmed in experiments now. .

## Chapter 3 Constrained Hamiltonian Systems

It is well known that quantization (both canonical quantization and path
integral quantization) has to be based on the Hamiltonian formalism (and
not on the Lagrangian formalism) [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ] because
the Hamiltonian is the generator of the time evolution of a physical
system [ 52 ] . Besides, when deriving the path integral formalism from
the canonical formalism one finds a Hamiltonian path integral [ 8 ] .

Thus, to justify the use of the convenient Lagrangian PI ( 1.1 ) with (
1.2 ), one has to derive it within the Hamiltonian PI formalism. This
will be the subject of the following chapters. This chapter contains a
review of Hamiltonian dynamics and PI quantization, on which the
subsequent investigations will be based.

For the physically most interesting field theories, namely those which
contain vector or fermion fields, the Hamiltonian formalism becomes more
involved than for simple mechanical systems because these theories are
singular, i.e. they are subject to constraints . Constraints are well
known from classical mechanics [ 52 ] ; there they usually are realized
by wires or surfaces which restrict the motion of the particles. In the
most important cases these external circumstances result in holonomic
constraints, i.e. in constraints of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the usual mechanical formalism, one uses these relations in order to
reduce the number of coordinates to the number of physical degrees of
freedom; then the remaining coordinates are independent of each other
and in the subsequent Lagrangian and Hamiltonian procedure one does not
have to care for the constraints anymore [ 52 ] . In field theory ¹ ¹ 1
In fact, the formalism explained in this chapter can be developed within
a mechanical framework; however its physically most important
applications are in field theory. the concept of constraints becomes
more abstract, because there the constraints are not induced by wires
and surfaces. Instead, one often introduces unphysical degrees of
freedom in order to obtain a manifestly Lorentz or gauge invariant
formulation of a theory [ 8 ] . For example, a spinor (fermion) field
contains eight real components at each space-time point, although it has
only four physical degrees of freedom; a real vector field has four
components but only two (in the massless case) or three (in the massive
case) physical degrees of freedom; furthermore SBGTs contain unphysical
scalar fields. In fact, the presence of these unphysical degrees of
freedom leads to constraints; in most cases, however, these are not
holonomic constraints of the type ( 3.1 ), but they have the more
general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This form of the constraints, which also involves the momenta, strongly
suggests a Hamiltonian treatment. Besides, even in this case it is
possible to eliminate the constraints by reducing the number of
variables to the number of physical degrees of freedom (as it is usually
done when dealing with holonomic constraints ( 3.1 )), however in
general such a procedure is not desired because it would make it more
difficult to find a manifestly Lorentz or gauge invariant formulation of
the theory. Instead, one considers the constraints within the
Hamiltonian formalism instead of eliminating them from the beginning.

Another feature not known from classical mechanics arises: in some cases
(but not in all) constraints are connected with a gauge freedom. For
example, a massive vector field involves constraints, but it has no
gauge freedom (except if it is embedded in an SBGT), while a massless
vector field implies constraints and a gauge freedom. Actually, these
different features are also reflected within the Hamiltonian formalism
because there are two types of constraints, namely: first-class
constraints, which are connected with a gauge freedom, and second-class
constraints, which are not. Actually, the first-class constraints are
the generators of the gauge transformations. The gauge freedom can be
removed from a first-class constrained system by introducing
gauge-fixing conditions; constraints and g.f. conditons together form a
set of second-class constraints and the resulting second-class
constrained system is physically equivalent to the original first-class
constrained system.

Another classification stems from the distinction between primary,
secondary, etc. constraints. It refers to the stage of the formalism at
which these constraints appear. The requirement that the primary
constraints have to be consistent with the EOM yields the secondary
constraints, and so on.

The Hamiltonian PI for a constrained system can easily be derived
because one can find a canonical transformation, such that one part of
the resulting pairs of canonical variables are completely unconstrained,
while the remaining ones are completely fixed by the constraints and the
g.f. conditions. The Hamiltonian PI is then essentially given by the PI
for the unconstrained system corresponding to the free variables. Then,
by doing the above canonical transformation inversly, one finds the
general expression for the Hamiltonian PI.

In this chapter I will first explain the classical dynamics and then the
PI quantization of constrained Hamiltonian systems. I will restrict
myself to the case of a finite number of degrees of freedom; the
generaliztion to field theory works as usual. This chapter is a pure
review; the reader who is interested in more details is referred to the
original literature [ 9 , 11 , 14 ] or to textbooks on this subject ² ²
2 In particular, I will omit all involved proofs here because they can
be found in the literature. [ 12 , 13 ] . The basic concepts of the
Hamiltonian formalism can be found in textbooks on classical mechanics
(e.g. [ 52 ] ).

### 3.1 Dynamics of Constrained Systems

Consider a physical system given by the Lagrangian @xmath which is a
function of the coordinates @xmath ( @xmath ) and their first time
derivatives. (Lagrangians with higher time derivatives will be
considered in section 5.1.) This Lagrangian is singular if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case not all of the equations that define the momenta @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be solved for the velocities @xmath . Instead, some of these
relations yield the primary constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now one can construct the Hamiltonian ³ ³ 3 Note that @xmath is not
unique because any expression proportional the constraints can be added
to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath have to be expressed in terms of the @xmath and @xmath
by applying ( 3.4 ). Although ( 3.4 ) cannot be solved for all @xmath ,
one can easily show that, due to the presence of the constraints ( 3.5
), nevertheless all the @xmath can be eliminated from @xmath , i.e.
@xmath only depends on @xmath and @xmath . (See the analogous argument
for Lagrangians with higher derivatives in section 5.1.)

As in the unconstrained case, the Hamiltonian equations of motion follow
from Hamilton’s priciple

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

however in this case, the variations @xmath and @xmath are not
independent of each other but they are restricted by the constraints (
3.5 ). This yields the EOM

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

( @xmath stands for @xmath , @xmath or any other function of these
variables) with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are (a priori undetermined) Lagrange multipliers.

The primary constraints have to be consistent with the EOM, i.e., the
time derivative of ( 3.5 ) also has to vanish:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.10)
  -- -- -- --------

For a (physically meaningful) theory, the equations ( 3.10 ) can take
three possible forms, viz.

-   They are fulfilled automatically;

-   They serve to determine the Lagrange multipliers @xmath ;

-   They can be written in the form

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In this case, the constraints ( 3.11 ) also have to be satisfied in
    order to ensure consistency with the EOM. They are called secondary
    constraints .

This procedure has to be iterated, i.e., the demand that the time
derivatives of the secondary constraints have to vanish may imply
tertiary constraints, and so on, until one finally obtains a set of
constraints which is consistent with the EOM. Although the various
constraints are obtained at different stages of the procedure, there is
no principle difference between them; actually they can be treated on
the same level. It has been shown in [ 13 ] that one obtains an
equivalent physical formulation of a constrained theory if one rewrites
( 3.8 ) and ( 3.9 ) as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.12)
  -- -- -- --------

with the total Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes all constraints.

Next one wants to determine the Lagrange multipliers in ( 3.13 ).
Actually, if the matrix

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.14)
  -- -- -- --------

in nonsingular, the constraints are called second-class ; in this case
the relations (analogous to ( 3.10 ))

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.15)
  -- -- -- --------

can be solved for the @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.16)
  -- -- -- --------

Inserting this into ( 3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ), the EOM can be written in
the simple form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Dirac bracket [ 14 ] @xmath is defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.18)
  -- -- -- --------

By replacing the Poisson brackets by Dirac brackets the dynamics of a
second-class constrained system can now be formulated analogously to the
dynamics of an unconstrained system.

A different situation arises if the matrix ( 3.14 ) is singular.
Assuming that ( 3.14 ) has the rank @xmath , one orders the constraints
such that the upper left @xmath submatrix of ( 3.14 ) has a nonvanishing
determinant. Then only the first @xmath constraints are second-class and
the remaining ones are first-class . The Lagrange multipliers
corresponding to the first-class constraints cannot be determined from (
3.15 ) ⁴ ⁴ 4 In fact, they cannot be determined from the complete EOM, (
3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ), either [ 13 ] . . Thus the equations of motion (
3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ) contain undetermined Lagrange multipliers and
therefore their solution (for given initial conditions) is not unique. (
3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ) imply that two solutions @xmath and @xmath of the
EOM with the same initial condition at @xmath (but with distinct choices
of the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the first-class
constraints) differ after an infinitesimal time interval @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath denotes only the first-class constraints). A
transformation of the canonical variables, which relates different
solutions of the EOM is called a gauge transformation . Equation ( 3.19
) implies that the first-class constraints are the generators of
(infinitesimal) gauge transformations ⁵ ⁵ 5 In distinction from Dirac’s
original statement, not only the primary first-class constraints but all
first-class constraints generate gauge transformations because @xmath (
3.9 ) in the EOM can be replaced by @xmath ( 3.13 ) [ 13 ] . . Thus, a
first-class constrained theory has a gauge freedom; it is called
degenerate . All solutions of the EOM with the same initial conditions
describe the same physical process; in other words, all points in the
phase space, which are related by gauge transformations describe the
same physical state of the system.

Given a degenerate theory, one can find a physically equivalent
nondegenerate theory. In that theory, the unique solution of the EOM for
given initial conditions turns out to be one of the various solutions of
the EOM in the degenerate theory. The corresponding nondegenerate theory
is constructed by imposing a gauge on the original theory, i.e. by
introducing additional gauge-fixing conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the number of g.f. conditions is equal to the number of
first-class constraints and that the g.f. condtions and the constraints
together form a set of second-class constraints which is consistent with
the EOM ⁶ ⁶ 6 Faddeev also required that @xmath [ 9 ] . This condition
is unnecessary [ 12 , 13 , 53 ] . Actually, later in this thesis I will
use g.f. conditions that do not satisfy this relation. . In fact, the
relations analogous to ( 3.15 ) with @xmath replaced by @xmath determine
the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the first-class constraints
and the ambiguity in the solution of the EOM is removed; thus the gauged
first-class constrained system is a physically equivalent second-class
constrained system. A convenient way to construct g.f. conditions is
given in [ 13 ] : One starts with primary g.f. conditions @xmath and
constructs secondary g.f. conditions @xmath by demanding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which ensures the consistency with the EOM. Finally, if one considers a
gauged first-class constrained system, @xmath ( 3.13 ) in the EOM ( 3.12
) can be replaced by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 3.22 ) it is obvious that the constraints and the g.f. conditions
can be applied in order to convert the Hamiltonian and each other
because this corresponds to a redefinition of the Lagrange multipliers.

The standard examples of a first- and a second-class constrained system
are the massless and the massive vector field, which will be discussed
later in this thesis (within the treatment of effective Lagrangians). It
turns out that a massive vector field is subject to two second-class
constraints. This means that among the four field components and the
four conjugate fields there are only six independent degrees of freedom
(three fields and three generalized momenta). In the Hamiltonian
treatment of a massless vector field, two first-class constraints arise
and therefore two gauge-fixing conditions have to be introduced. Thus
there are only two physical field components and two physical momenta.
Besides, the first-class constraints are related to the gauge freedom of
a massless vector field.

All the features discussed above become very obvious if one applies a
theorem derived in [ 13 , 54 ] , which states that one can find
canonical variables (written in pairs as @xmath ) for an arbitrary
constrained system such that the second-class constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the first-class constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that the single constraints @xmath do not correspond
to the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (because, in general, the Poisson
brackets among them are not canonical ones) but all the constraints
@xmath together can be expressed as ( 3.23 ) and ( 3.24 ). With this
choice of canonical variables the fundamental Poisson brackets
immediately imply that the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the
second-class constraints ( 3.23 ) can be determined from ( 3.15 ) and
that those corresponding to the first-class constraints are
undetermined. Thus the solutions of the EOM ( 3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ) for
the @xmath and @xmath are unique, while the @xmath are completely
arbitrary. The gauge transformations are shifts of the @xmath which are
generated by the first-class constraints @xmath , while the second-class
constraints do not give rise to gauge freedom. In order to construct a
gauge of this theory, one has to fix the @xmath , i.e., one has to
impose g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are functions of the remaining variables. Equations (
3.23 ), ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.25 ) imply that the physical sector of this
constrained theory is parametrized in terms of the canonical variables
@xmath and @xmath alone. Thus, in a reduced phase space, which consists
only of these variables, one can treat this physical system as an
unconstrained one. However, as mentioned above, in general one does not
use this choice of unconstrained parameters because in the primordial
constrained parametrization it is easier to find a manifestly Lorentz or
gauge invariant formulation of the theory. Besides, it is not always
possible to find the explicit form of the abovementioned canonical
transformation [ 13 ] .

### 3.2 The Hamiltonian Path Integral for Constrained Systems

Now one can quantize a constrained physical system within the
Hamiltonian PI formalism ⁷ ⁷ 7 The derivation of the Hamiltonian PI that
is briefly reviewed in this section is the one given in [ 13 ] , which
is different from the original derivation in [ 9 , 11 ] . . To derive
the Hamiltonian PI it is sufficient to consider first only second-class
constrained systems. As explained at the end of the preceding section,
such a system is equivalent to an unconstrained one with a reduced phase
space consisting of the variables @xmath and @xmath . The Hamiltonian PI
for this unconstrained system has the well-known simple form [ 8 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the enlarged phase space that also contains the variables @xmath and
@xmath which are zero due to the second-class constraints ( 3.23 ), this
can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now one can pass to the original second-class constraints @xmath which
are independent functions of the @xmath and @xmath . This affects the
@xmath -functions in ( 3.27 ). One finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -function in the argument of the determinant is missing in [
9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] . However it necessarily has to be present, because
the factor @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath are taken at equal times) has
to be introduced for all times and @xmath is the “product” of this
expression over all times.

Inserting ( 3.28 ) into ( 3.27 ) one obtains an expression which is
invariant under canonical transformations. Thus, one can go back from
the canonical variables @xmath , @xmath to the primordial ones, @xmath ,
and finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the general form of the Hamiltonian PI for a second-class
constrained system. This result can easily be extended to the case of a
system with first- and second-class constraints because that becomes a
second-class constrained system after the introduction of g.f.
conditions. Thus, ( 3.29 ) can be applied to this case; then the @xmath
denote the second-class constraints @xmath , the first-class constraints
@xmath and the g.f. conditions @xmath . One finally finds ⁸ ⁸ 8 Remember
that I will add the source terms in the generating functional after all
manipulations will have been done, as pointed out in the introduction. [
9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is the Hamiltonian path integral for an arbitrary constrained
system. It has the following properties [ 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] :

-   It is invariant under canonical transformations;

-   It is invariant with respect to the choice of an equivalent set of
    constraints;

-   It is independent of the choice of the gauge-fixing conditions.

The investigations in the subsequent chapters will be based on this
Hamiltonian path integral (strictly speaking on its field theoretical
generalization).

## Chapter 4 Effective Lagrangians with Massive Vector Fields

Now I come to the main point of this thesis, namely the proof of the HLE
theorem, i.e. the derivation of the simple Lagrangian path integral (
1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.3 ) from the correct but more involved
Hamiltonian path integral ( 3.30 ), for effective interactions of
scalars, fermions, massless and massive vector bosons. This will be the
subject of this and the following two chapters.

In this chapter I will restrict myself to effective (non–Yang–Mills)
self interactions of massive vector fields, which is the most
interesting case, first because it is phenomenologically very important
with respect to the investigation of effective electroweak Lagrangians [
1 , 2 , 3 ] and second because it is interesting for theoretical reasons
since massive vector fields can be embedded in three types of theories
(as discussed in chapter 2), namely in gauge noninvariant models [ 1 ] ,
in gauged nonlinear @xmath -models [ 2 ] (i.e., SBGTs with a nonlinearly
realized scalar sector) and in Higgs models [ 3 ] (i.e., SBGTs with a
linearly realized scalar sector). I will first prove the HLE theorem for
gauge noninvariant models and then extend it to SBGTs by applying the
Stueckelberg formalism introduced in the chapter 2, which relates gauge
noninvariant Lagrangians to SBGTs. To this end I will reformulate the
Stueckelberg formalism within the Hamiltonian formalism as a transition
from a second-class constrained theory to a first-class constrained
theory, which is realized as follows: One first enlarges the phase space
by introducing new (unphysical) variables; in addition one has extra
constraints so that the number of physical degrees of freedom remains
unchanged. Next, one uses these additional constraints in order to
convert the Hamiltonian and the primordial constraints. Finally, one
half of the second-class constraints are considered to be first-class
constraints and the other half to be gauge-fixing conditions. This
procedure implies the equivalence of Lagrangians which are related to
each other by a Stueckelberg transformation.

The proof of the HLE theorem for (nonlinearly realized) SBGTs goes then
as follows: Using the Stueckelberg formalism I will show that the
generating functional corresponding to an SBGT can be written as a
Lagrangian PI with the quantized Lagrangian being identical to the
U-gauge Lagrangian of this SBGT (i.e., the Lagrangian which is obtained
by removing all unphysical scalar fields from the gauge invariant one).
In chapter 2 I have shown that this generating functional is the result
of the FP procedure if the g.f. conditions that all unphysical scalar
fields become equal to zero are imposed. Then I will use the equivalence
of all gauges [ 20 , 23 ] in order to generalize this result to any
other gauge.

Finally, I will prove the HLE theorem for Higgs models, i.e. for SBGTs
with linearly realized scalar fields. Because each Higgs model is
related to a nonlinear Stueckelberg model by a simple point
transformation such as ( 2.41 ) that delinearizes the scalar sector (as
discussed in chapter 2), and since within the Hamiltonian formalism a
point transformation becomes a canonical transformation which leaves the
Hamiltonian PI invariant, the result for nonlinearly realized SBGTs can
easily be extended to the case of linearly realized SBGTs. As in the
nonlinear case, the HLE theorem will first be derived for the special
case of the U-gauge and then be generalized to any other gauge.

As mentioned in the introduction, Hamiltonian PI quantization in general
yields additional @xmath -terms to the quantized Lagrangian. It is known
that in renormalizable theories (i.e. theories without effective
interaction terms) these @xmath -terms cancel against quartic divergent
loops [ 35 , 36 ] ; however, it is an open question how to interpret
divergences higher than logarithmic within an effective
(nonrenormalizable) field theory [ 55 ] . In order to prove the HLE
theorem I will, according to [ 10 ] , neglect these terms because they
become zero in dimensional regularization [ 10 , 29 ] . However, to give
an example of such a @xmath -term, I will derive the quartically
divergent Higgs self-interaction term in the quantized U-gauge
Lagrangian of a minimal Higgs model by applying the Hamiltonian PI
formalism. This term has already been obtained within the Lagrangian PI
formalism in chapter 2.

Furthermore, I will expand all quantities in powers of the effective
coupling constant ¹ ¹ 1 A different approach to the Hamiltonian PI
quantization of effective Lagrangians has recently been made in [ 56 ] .
There no expansion in powers of the effective coupling constant is done,
but instead an expansion in powers of the momenta. @xmath and neglect
@xmath -terms because I assume @xmath . The restriction to the first
order of @xmath is only a technical simplification; in their proof of
the HLE theorem for effective interactions of scalar fields Bernard and
Duncan considered also @xmath -terms and neglected @xmath -terms [ 10 ]
. They supposed that the HLE theorem can in principle be proven in any
finite order @xmath of @xmath , but that with increasing @xmath the
proof becomes technically more and more involved. However this proof of
the HLE theorem cannot be generalized to all orders of @xmath because
then it is impossible to find a closed expression for the velocities and
the Hamiltonian in terms of the momenta. Thus, this proof of the HLE
theorem can only be applied if the effective interactions are treated
perturbatively.

The investigations of this chapter will be restricted to the case of
effective Lagrangians which do not depend on higher time derivatives of
the fields and which depend on first time derivatives of the vector
fields only through the non-Abelian field strength tensor. (The latter
requirement ensures that the SBGTs corresponding to such effective
Lagrangians also do not involve higher time derivatives.) The case of
effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives will be treated in the
next chapter.

For the clearness of the representation, I will only consider massive
Yang–Mills fields (of course with extra non–Yang–Mills interactions) in
which all vector bosons have equal masses together with the
corresponding SBGTs. The results can easily be generalized to any other
effective Lagrangian with massive vector fields, e.g., to electroweak
models. In these cases the derivation becomes formally more complicated
but the physically important features remain the same.

The results of this chapter have first been published in [ 57 ] .

### 4.1 The Hamilton–Lagrange Equivalence Theorem for Gauge Noninvariant
Models

In this section I will quantize a massive (and thus gauge noninvariant)
Yang–Mills theory with additional arbitrary non–Yang–Mills interactions
[ 1 ] (which are proportional to a parameter @xmath with @xmath ) in the
Hamiltonian PI formalism in order to derive the simple Lagrangian form (
1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) of the generating functional. Some of the techniques
used in the following derivation originate from the quantization of a
massive Yang–Mills theory without effective interaction terms in [ 11 ]
and some others from the quantization of effective interactions of
scalar fields in [ 10 ] .

The effective Lagrangian has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath ) with the field strength tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the non–Yang–Mills part of the interactions, denoted as @xmath , I
make the following assumptions:

-   @xmath does not depend on higher time derivatives;

-   @xmath depends on first time derivatives of @xmath only through the
    non-Abelian field strength tensor ² ² 2 Actually, this requirement
    is equivalent to the demand that @xmath does not depend on @xmath .
    @xmath ( 4.2 ).

These conditions are fulfilled by the phenomenologically most important
effective interactions, especially by all nonstandard @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath invariant trilinear interactions of electroweak vector bosons
[ 1 ] . Effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives will be treated in
the next chapter.

From ( 4.1 ) one finds the momenta

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 4.4 ) can be solved for the @xmath (in first order ³ ³ 3
Remember that without neglecting higher powers of @xmath it would, in
general, be impossible to find closed expressions for the @xmath in
terms of the @xmath and @xmath from ( 4.4 ); however the restriction to
the first order of @xmath is a purely technical simplification. of
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 4.3 ) yields the primary constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As discussed in section 3.1, the requirement ( 3.10 ) that the primary
constraints have to be consistent with the equations of motion, in
general, implies secondary constraints. In this case one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are no further constraints. The Poisson brackets of the primary
and the secondary constraints (which are taken at equal times) are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where the @xmath denote all constraints). Thus, the constraints are
second-class. This is due to the fact that @xmath is gauge noninvariant,
since the mass term and (in general) the non–Yang–Mills interactions in
@xmath break gauge invariance explicitly.

The generating functional for a second-class constrained system is
generally given by ( 3.29 ) [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] . In this case it has the
form ⁴ ⁴ 4 It is obvious that in ( 4.12 ) one has to take the product of
the integration measure and of the @xmath -functions over all Lorentz
and gauge-group indices and that the constraints in the Poisson brackets
have to be taken at equal times, although this is not explicitly written
down there. I will use this simplified notation throughout this thesis.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The determinant in ( 4.12 ) only yields a @xmath -term which is
neglected here. This can be seen as follows: With @xmath being the part
of @xmath which is quadratic in the fields, and @xmath being the part,
which contains the cubic, quartic, etc. terms, equations ( 4.10 ) and (
4.11 ) imply that the determinant has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Due to the definition of @xmath , the second of these determinants is
constant and can thus be neglected. The first one can be rewritten as a
functional integral over Grassmann variables (in analogy to ( 2.16 ))
which yields a ghost term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ghost fields are static, i.e. ( 4.14 ) contains no kinetic terms for
them, only mass terms and couplings to the @xmath -fields. This means,
all ghost propagators are simply inverse masses and thus all ghost loops
are (at least) quartically divergent. Therefore, the ghost term can be
replaced by a @xmath -term which yields the same contribution to @xmath
-matrix elements as the ghost loops. (See the similar reasoning in
section 2.2.)

Dropping the determinant, integrating out the @xmath and using the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.16)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The substitution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obviously leaves the functional integration measure invariant,
yields (after neglecting @xmath -terms)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now one can generalize the proof of the HLE theorem for effective
interactions of scalar fields [ 10 ] to the present case. Introducing
sources @xmath and @xmath coupled to @xmath and @xmath , one can rewrite
( 4.18 ) in a form in which @xmath and @xmath occur at most
quadratically:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.20)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now one can carry out the Gaussian integrations over @xmath and @xmath
and finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.21)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the massive Yang–Mills part of the effective Lagrangian
( 4.1 ). The use of the functional identity [ 58 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The third exponential in ( 4.23 ) can be expanded in powers of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, second functional derivatives with respect to the @xmath ’s
acting on this expression yield terms which are proportional to @xmath
or to @xmath and thus neglected here. Therefore, the second and the
third exponential in ( 4.23 ) together reduce to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the definitions of @xmath ( 4.19 ) and of @xmath ( 4.7 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting ( 4.25 ) with ( 4.26 ) into ( 4.23 ) and introducing source
terms one finally obtains (apart from @xmath - and @xmath -terms)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the expected result, namely the simple Lagrangian path integral
( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ). Thus, the HLE theorem is proven for effective self
interactions of massive vector fields (within gauge noninvariant
models).

This proof can easily be extended to Lagrangians which also contain
effective interactions of massive vector fields with other fields
(scalar, fermion or additional vector fields). In order to derive this
result, one adds the kinetic and the mass terms of the extra fields as
well as their standard interactions to @xmath in ( 4.1 ) and the
nonstandard couplings to @xmath and then goes through the same procedure
as above (see, for comparison, the treatment of effective gauge theories
in section 6.1). Thus, the HLE theorem also holds for effective
vector–fermion and vector–scalar interactions. An application of this
result, which will become important in section 4.3, is to consider
@xmath as the U-gauge Lagrangian of a (minimal) Higgs model, while
@xmath contains additional effective interactions of the vector and
Higgs fields.

### 4.2 The Stueckelberg Formalism

In this section I will prove the HLE theorem for SBGTs with nonlinearly
realized symmetry which contain arbitrary gauge-boson self-interactions
within a gauge invariant framework [ 2 ] . It has been shown in [ 22 ]
and in section 2.7 that each theory given by an effective Lagrangian of
the type ( 4.1 ) can be rewritten as a (nonlinearly realized) SBGT by
applying a Stueckelberg transformation [ 18 , 19 ] . On the other hand,
each nonlinear SBGT can be obtained by applying a Stueckelberg
transformation to a gauge noninvariant Lagrangian such as ( 4.1 ). Thus,
I will reformulate the Stueckelberg formalism within the Hamiltonian
formalism in order to prove that effective Lagrangians which are related
to each other by a Stueckelberg transformation are equivalent (at the
classical and at the quantum level).

As in chapter 2, I parametrize the Yang–Mills fields and the
Stueckelberg fields in the matrix notation: With @xmath being the
generators of the gauge group, which are orthonormalized according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

one defines the matrix-valued fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath are the unphysical pseudo-Goldstone scalars.

Let me consider a massive Yang–Mills theory with non–Yang–Mills
vector-boson self-interactions given by the Lagrangian @xmath ( 4.1 ). I
apply the Stueckelberg transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

As pointed out in chapter 2, the Stueckelberg transformation ( 4.32 )
formally acts like a gauge transformation, however, with the gauge
parameters being replaced by the pseudo-Goldstone fields. Thus, it only
changes the mass term and the effective interaction term @xmath in ( 4.1
) in a nontrivial way but not the gauge invariant Yang–Mills term @xmath
. ( 4.32 ) can be written in components by multiplying with @xmath and
taking the trace. With ( 4.28 ) and ( 4.29 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the matrices @xmath and @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are nonpolynomial expressions in the pseudo-Goldstone
fields @xmath . They do not depend on the derivatives @xmath and, due to
( 4.28 ), they become unity matrices for vanishing @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The SBGT corresponding to the effective Lagrangian @xmath ( 4.1 ) is
given by the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be recovered from @xmath simply by removing all unphysical
scalar fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath describes a generalized gauged nonlinear @xmath -model (or chiral
Lagrangian) with extra non-Yang–Mills vector-boson self-interactions
contained in the gauge invariant term @xmath , which is obtained by
applying @xmath to @xmath (see section 2.7). I will show in
subsection 5.3.2 (for the more general case that also higher derivatives
occur in @xmath ) that each nonlinearly realized effective SBGT given by
a Lagrangian @xmath can be constructed by applying the Stueckelberg
transformation ( 4.32 ) to an effective Lagrangian @xmath ( 4.1 ), which
is obtained from @xmath by removing the pseudo-Goldstone fields. In this
section I prove that the Lagrangians @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
within the Hamiltonian formalism ⁵ ⁵ 5 For a simple gauged nonlinear
@xmath -model without effective interactions this equivalence was shown
in [ 59 ] (in a very formal and abstract way). and that @xmath is the
U-gauge of @xmath ; i.e. the U-gauge of a (nonlinear) effective SBGT can
simply be constructed by dropping all unphysical scalar fields (as in
the Lagrangain treatment of chapter 2). This is not obvious because the
Stueckelberg transformation ( 4.32 ) involves derivatives of the
pseudo-Goldstone fields and thus it is not a point transformation which
corresponds to a canonical transformation within the Hamiltonian
framework ⁶ ⁶ 6 Actually, within the Hamiltonian treatment of
Lagrangians with higher derivatives (Ostrogradsky formalism [ 25 ] ) a
Stueckelberg transformation becomes a canonical transformation. This
will be discussed in subsection 5.3.2. In this chapter, however, I do
not use the Ostrogradsky formalism. .

One can easily see that, if @xmath satisfies the conditions listed at
the beginning of section 4.1, @xmath also fulfils these requirements,
since the field strength tensor transforms under a Stueckelberg
transformation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath ). Written in components this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the subsequent treatment it is convenient to rewrite ( 4.39 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the following convention is used: While in ( 4.39 ) the
Stueckelberg transformation is applied to @xmath everywhere in @xmath
(which automatically implies the transformation of @xmath ( 4.41 )), in
( 4.43 ) it is applied to the @xmath -field only where this does not
occur as a part of the field strength tensor @xmath , and @xmath becomes
then transformed seperately. I will use this convention throughout this
section.

The momenta conjugate to the fields in @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In first order of @xmath one finds the velocities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The primary constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the secondary constraints, obtained from ( 3.10 ), are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are no terms proportional to @xmath in ( 4.52 ) (in first order of
@xmath ) since, due to ( 4.50 ), @xmath does not depend on @xmath
(neither directly nor through @xmath ). There are no further
constraints. The constraints are first-class due to the gauge freedom of
@xmath ( 4.39 ).

As discussed in section 3.1, such a first-class constrained sytem has to
be gauged in order to remove the ambiguities in the solutions of the
EOM. To prove the equivalence of @xmath ( 4.1 ) and @xmath ( 4.39 ) I
construct the U-gauge by imposing the primary g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The demand ( 3.21 ) yields the secondary g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the primary g.f. conditions ⁷ ⁷ 7 Remember that the constraints
and the g.f. condition may be inserted into the Hamiltonian and each
other as pointed out in sect. 3.1. ( 4.53 ), the relation ( 4.38 ) and
the defintions of @xmath ( 4.50 ) and @xmath ( 4.7 ) one can express the
Hamiltonian ( 4.49 ), the secondary constraints ( 4.52 ) and
g.f. conditions ( 4.54 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.55)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -dependent term in ( 4.57 ) can be converted by applying (
4.57 ) itself. One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the secondary g.f. condition ( 4.59 ), one can rewrite the
Hamiltonian ( 4.55 ) as ( 4.6 ) and the constraints ( 4.51 ), ( 4.56 )
as ( 4.8 ), ( 4.9 ) (in the first order of @xmath ), i.e., as the
Hamiltonian and the constraints corresponding to the gauge noninvariant
Lagrangian @xmath ( 4.1 ). Finally, the g.f. conditions ( 4.53 ) and (
4.59 ) can be omitted, since they involve the fields @xmath and @xmath
and neither the Hamiltonian nor the constraints depend on these fields
anymore. Thus, the Lagrangians @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.39 ) describe
equivalent physical sytems, @xmath being the U-gauge of @xmath .

As the Hamiltonians and the constraints corresponding to @xmath and to
@xmath are equal, the generating functional obtained when quantizing
@xmath within the Hamiltonian PI formalism is the same as the one found
in the last section by quantizing @xmath , namely ( 4.27 ). This,
however, is identical to the generating functional obtained in the
(Lagrangian) Faddeev–Popov PI formalism if one imposes the
g.f. conditions ( 4.53 ), as one can see in analogy to the treatment of
section 2.2. Due to the equivalence of all gauges [ 20 , 23 ] , ( 4.27 )
yields the same @xmath -matrix elements as the Faddeev–Popov PI
corresponding to @xmath in any other gauge (e.g. @xmath gauge, Lorentz
gauge, etc.). Thus, after the introduction of a source term, the result
( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ) is obtained in an arbitrary gauge.

As mentioned in the introduction, this result cannot be directly derived
in the @xmath -gauge (which is the most adequate for loop calculations
within an SBGT), because the corresponding g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

are not g.f. conditions within the Hamiltonian formalism. This is
because ( 4.60 ) cannot be written as relations among the fields and the
conjugate fields alone (such as ( 3.20 )), due to the presence of the
velocities @xmath in ( 4.60 ) that are not expressable through the
momenta (remember the constraint ( 4.51 )). Therefore, when quantizing
@xmath within the @xmath -gauge, one has to proceed indirectly as
described above by first constructing the U-gauge and then using the
equivalence of all gauges (i.e., the invariance of the @xmath -matrix
elements under a change of the gauge in the FP formalism ⁸ ⁸ 8 Actually,
loop calculations within the U-gauge suffer from ambiguities in the
determination of the finite part of an @xmath -matrix element [ 30 , 37
] ; they yield the same @xmath -matrix elements as loop calculations
within the @xmath -gauge, but only if the correct renormalization
prescription is used [ 30 ] ; other renormalization prescriptions yield
distinct results. In the @xmath -gauge these ambiguities are absent. ) [
20 , 23 ] in order to rewrite this result in the @xmath -gauge.

The above procedure demonstrates how to interpret the Stueckelberg
formalism at the Hamiltonian level. While the gauge noninvariant
Lagrangian @xmath is related to the gauge invariant Lagrangian @xmath by
a Stueckelberg transformation ( 4.32 ), one can pass from the
second-class constrained Hamiltonian sytem corresponding to @xmath to
the first-class constrained Hamiltonian system corresponding to @xmath
by the following procedure: One enlarges the phase space by introducing
the unphysical variables @xmath and @xmath and the extra constraints
@xmath and ( 4.54 ), which make the new variables dependent on the
others so that the number of physical degrees of freedom remains
unchanged. Next, one applies the additional constraints ( 4.53 ) and (
4.54 ), in order to rewrite the Hamiltonian as ( 4.49 ) and the
primordial constraints as ( 4.51 ) and ( 4.52 ). Finally, half of the
constraints, namely the new ones, are considered to be g.f. conditions.

A similar transition from a second- to a first-class constrained system
has recently been investigated in several works [ 60 ] . However, in [
60 ] no phase space enlargement is made with the outcome, that the
resulting model contains only half as many first-class constraints as
the original model has second-class constraints (the other half has
become g.f. conditions.) In my treatment the number of constraints
remains unchanged, since, due to the phase space enlargement, new
constraints are introduced. The method of connecting first- and
second-class constrained systems by a phase space enlargement was first
considered in [ 61 ] (however without referring to the Stueckelberg
formalism).

### 4.3 Higgs Models

Finally the HLE theorem has to be proven for SBGTs with linearly
realized symmetry (Higgs models) which contain effective
(non–Yang–Mills) gauge-boson self-interactions [ 3 ] . This result will
simply be obtained by showing the equivalence of a linear Higgs model to
a nonlinear Stueckelberg model (with (an) additional physical
scalar(s)).

Unlike in the case of a gauged nonlinear @xmath -model discussed in the
previous section it is not possible to write down the Lagrangian of a
Higgs model in a general form without specifying the gauge group.
Therefore I consider the case of SU(2) symmetry (i.e. @xmath , @xmath ).
The extension to other gauge groups is straightforward.

As shown in section 2.7, any effective Lagrangian ( 4.1 ) can be
extended to a Higgs model by constructing the corresponding Stueckelberg
Lagrangian ( 4.39 ) and then introducing a physical scalar field @xmath
and linearizing the scalar sector of the theory by means of the
replacement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the VEV of @xmath , @xmath . The Lagrangian of the
Higgs model corresponding to ( 4.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the scalar self-interaction potential @xmath which implies the
nonvanishing vacuum expectation value. Remember that, in distinction
from @xmath ( 4.39 ), @xmath is not equivalent to the effective
Lagrangian @xmath , since there is an additional physical degree of
freedom but that @xmath contains the same effective vector-boson
self-interactions as @xmath and @xmath . Each effective Higgs model can
be constructed this way from a Lagrangian of type ( 4.1 ).

In order to extend the results of the previous two sections to
Lagrangians of the type ( 4.62 ), one uses the fact that even within a
linaerly realized SBGT the scalar fields can be parametrized nonlinearly
by means of the point transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by ( 4.61 ) (see [ 20 , 21 , 44 ] and
sect. 2.4). The Lagrangian of a Higgs model in which the scalar sector
is nonlinearly realized,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

describes a Stueckelberg model with an additional physical scalar @xmath
. The equivalence between @xmath and @xmath can easily be established
since a point transformation such as ( 4.63 ) becomes a canonical
transformation within the Hamiltonian formalism, i.e. the Hamiltonians
and also the constraints corresponding to @xmath and to @xmath are
related by a canonical transformation ⁹ ⁹ 9 For the Hamiltonian and the
primary constraints this statement is obvious and the secondary
constraints are obtained from the Poisson brackets ( 3.10 ) which are
invariant under canonical transformations. . Using the result of the
previous section one finds that the U-gauge Lagrangian of @xmath (and
thus also of @xmath ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., also for a linearly realized Higgs model the U-gauge is obtained
simply by removing all unphysical scalar fields.

Remembering the last paragraph of section 4.1, the HLE theorem for
Stueckelberg models (section 4.2) can be applied in order to quantize
the nonlinear Lagrangian @xmath ; the resulting generating functional
has the form ( 1.1 ) with the quantized Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the invariance of the Hamiltonian PI under canonical
transformations [ 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] , the generating functional
obtained when quantizing the linear Lagrangian @xmath is the same. As
shown in sect. 2.2, this is identical to the result of the Faddeev–Popov
procedure (apart from a @xmath -term) if the g.f. conditions ( 4.53 )
are imposed. As in the previous section, this result can be generalized
to any other gauge, which yields ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ). This completes
the proof of the HLE theorem for any effective Lagrangian with arbitrary
interactions of massive vector fields which fulfils the requirements
listed at the beginning of section 4.1.

The treatment of this section shows that the Stueckelberg formalism,
which was originally introduced in order to construct Higgs-less SBGTs [
18 , 19 , 22 ] , also represents a powerful tool when dealing with Higgs
models.

### 4.4 The Quartically Divergent Higgs Self-Interaction

When proving the HLE theorem in the previous sections of this chapter, I
have neglected quartically divergent @xmath -terms. In this section I
want to present a simple example of such a term. Therefore I will
quantize the SU(2) Higgs model (without effective non–Yang–Mills
interactions) in the U-gauge while taking fully into account @xmath
-terms in order to derive the well-known quartically divergent Higgs
self-coupling term [ 20 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 62 , 63 ] . In chapter 2 this
term has been derived within the Lagrangian PI formalism; in this
section I will find the same term within the Hamiltonian PI formalism.

From the discussion of the previous two sections it is clear that it
makes no difference whether one quantizes the gauge invariant Lagrangian
of an SBGT or the corresponding U-gauge Lagrangian ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 When
establishing this equivalence, no @xmath -terms have been neglected,
thus, even concerning the quartically divergent extra terms,
quantization of both Lagrangians yields the same result. . Thus, for
simplicity, I start from the U-gauge Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The momenta are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.71)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The constraints turn out to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.72)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Poisson brackets of the primary and the secondary constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are no further constraints. The constraints are second-class.

To quantize this model, one starts from the Hamiltonian PI ( 4.12 ),
integrates out the @xmath , uses ( 4.15 ) in order to rewrite @xmath ,
substitutes ( 4.17 ) and rewrites the deteminant using ( 4.11 ) and (
4.74 ). The generating functional becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.75)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now one can carry out the Gaussian integrations over @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Integrating out @xmath yields an extra factor @xmath . One
finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally one applies ( 2.26 ) in order to rewrite the determinant as an
exponential function and introduces the source terms; @xmath becomes
then a Lagrangian PI ( 1.1 ) with the quantized U-gauge Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

(after dropping a constant). Thus, the quantized U-gauge Lagrangian
contains, in addition to the classical Lagrangian ( 4.67 ), an extra
quartically divergent Higgs self-interaction term ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 From the
proof in section 4.1 it is obvious, that the Hamiltonian PI quantization
of Lagrangains with additional effective interaction terms in general
yields further @xmath -terms. These may also contain other fields than
the Higgs field. which is identical to the one obtained in chapter 2
within the Lagrangian PI formalism ( 2.28 ).

## Chapter 5 Effective Lagrangians with Higher Derivatives

In this chapter I will generalize the results obtained in the last one
to effective Lagrangians which also depend on higher derivatives of the
fields [ 24 ] .

Actually, the proof of the HLE theorem for first-order Lagrangians can
be extended to the higher-order case by applying the results of [ 27 ,
28 ] , where it has been shown that each effective higher-order
Lagrangian can be reduced to a first-order one by applying the equations
of motion to the effective interaction term (upon neglecting higher
powers of the effective coupling constant @xmath ) since one can find
field transformations which effectively result in applications of the
EOM. However, the treatment of [ 27 , 28 ] is incomplete because it has
not been shown there that two Lagrangians which are related to each
other by such field transformations are physically equivalent. In fact,
this is not trivial since these transformations, in general, involve
derivatives of the fields. I will show that within the Hamiltonian
formalism for Lagrangians with higher derivatives (Ostrogradsky
formalism [ 25 ] ) even a field transformation which involves
derivatives becomes a canonical transformation; this establishes the
equivalence of Lagrangians that are related to each other by an
arbitrary local field transformation and thus justifies the use the EOM
in order to convert the effective interaction term. Since the
Ostrogradsky formalism is not very well-known, I will first give a short
introduction to it before deriving these results.

Making use of the abovementioned procedure of reducing effective
higher-order Lagrangians to first-order ones and of the results of the
last chapter, I will then prove the HLE theorem for the case of
effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives ¹ ¹ 1 The Lagrangian PI (
1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ) or ( 1.3 ) has been derived for some special examples
of higher-order Lagrangians in [ 10 , 13 , 64 ] , but a general theorem
has not been proven. . I will derive this result first for the simple
case of effective interactions of scalar fields and then for effective
interactions of massive vector fields. In the latter case I will, as in
the previous chapter, first consider gauge noninvariant models and then
extend the results to SBGTs by aplying the Stueckelberg formalism.
Actually, within the Ostrogradsky formalism a Stueckelberg
transformation becomes a canonical transformation (see above) and thus
the proof in section 4.2 that Lagrangians which are related to each
other by a Stueckelberg transformation are physically equivalent can be
simplified very much.

The results of this chapter have first been published in [ 65 ] .

### 5.1 The Ostrogradsky Formalism

The Hamiltonian formalism for Lagrangians with higher derivatives was
formulated one and a half century ago by Ostrogradsky [ 25 ] . Since
this formalism is not as well-known as the Hamiltonian formalism for
Lagrangians with at most first derivatives, I will first briefly review
it in this section taking also into account the case of singular
higher-order Lagrangians [ 13 , 66 , 67 ] , i.e. of Lagrangians which
involve constraints. Furthermore, I will consider the quantization of
higher-order Lagrangians within the Hamiltonian PI formalism. Then,
using the Ostrogradsky formalism, I will show that Lagrangians which
related to each other by field transformations involving derivatives are
equivalent (at the classical and at the quantum level). For
simplification I will restrict myself to the case of finitely many
degrees of freedom; the generalization to field theory works as in the
treatment of Lagrangians without higher derivatives.

Consider a Lagrangian of order @xmath , i.e. a Lagrangian which depends
on the coordinates @xmath , (with @xmath ) and their derivatives up to
the order @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Within in the Ostrogradsky formalism one defines the coordinates as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

( @xmath ), i.e. the @xmath with @xmath are formally treated as
independent coordinates and only @xmath is treated as a derivative. The
momenta are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ( 5.4 ), the @xmath ( @xmath ) have to be expressed in terms of the
@xmath by using ( 5.3 ) with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In analogy to the treatment of first-order Lagrangians discussed in
sect. 3.1, the theory is called nonsingular if the @xmath -matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is nonsingular. In this case ( 5.5 ) can be solved for all @xmath .

For singular Lagrangians one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The indices @xmath can be ordered such that the upper left @xmath
-submatrix of @xmath has the rank @xmath . In this case, the first
@xmath of the relations ( 5.5 ) can be solved for @xmath with @xmath ,
while the remaining ones are the primary constraints. Nevertheless,
@xmath ( 5.4 ) does not depend on @xmath with @xmath because

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the constraints ( 5.5 ) with @xmath have been used. Furthermore, (
5.7 ) implies that the first @xmath of the relations ( 5.5 ) can be used
to rewrite the remaining ones in a form which does not involve the
@xmath . Thus the Hamiltonian and the primary constraints are functions
of the @xmath and the @xmath , @xmath , alone. As in the first-order
case, the Hamiltonian EOM have the form ( 3.12 ) with ( 3.13 ), where
@xmath may be @xmath , @xmath or an arbitrary function of these
variables.

A higher-order Lagrangian can be quantized within the Hamilitonian PI
formalism [ 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] in analogy to a first-order Lagrangian.
The Hamiltonian PI ( 3.30 ) turns out to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the @xmath are the primary constraints ( 5.5 ) with @xmath , the
secondary, tertiary, etc. constraints and the gauge-fixing conditions if
there are first-class constraints.

For the following investigations it is important, that the Ostrogradsky
formalism is not affected by changing the (formal) order @xmath of the
Lagrangian as long as @xmath is greater or equal to the order of the
highest derivative actually occurring in @xmath . In other words, two
physical systems, which are both given in terms of the same Lagrangian
@xmath , but in the one @xmath is formally treated as an @xmath -th
order Lagrangian (within the Ostrogradsky formalism) and in the other as
an @xmath -th order one, are equivalent. This theorem was proven in [ 13
] . I repeat this short proof here and, in addition, I show that also
the Hamiltonian PIs corresponding to the two systems are identical.

In order to prove this theorem, it is sufficient to assume that @xmath .
(The result for an arbitrary @xmath follows then by induction.) Thus I
treat the Lagrangian ( 5.1 ) (which does not depend on the @xmath )
formally as an @xmath st-order Lagrangian. One finds the canonical
variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With @xmath , these equations become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., these variables are identical to the corresponding ones obtained
in the @xmath th-order formalism, ( 5.2 ) and ( 5.3 ). With @xmath one
finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is identical to @xmath ( 5.4 ), except that in @xmath the @xmath
are expressed in terms of the remaining variables by using ( 5.5 ), but
in @xmath they are still present (because, due to ( 5.13 ), they are
independent coordinates in the @xmath st-order formalism). The @xmath
st-order system is singular; the relations ( 5.14 ) are the primary
constaints. The requirement ( 3.10 ) that these constraints have to be
consistent with the EOM yields the secondary constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is identical to the relation ( 5.5 ). Applying the constaints (
5.16 ) with @xmath in order to eliminate all @xmath from the Hamiltonian
@xmath and from the remaining constraints ( 5.16 ) (in analogy to the
procedure outlined above) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the constraints ( 5.16 )
with @xmath , which can be solved for @xmath , i.e. that can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

become zero in order to ensure @xmath (because @xmath and the other
constraints do not depend on the @xmath anymore). The remaining
constraints in the @xmath st-order formalism are identical to those
obtained in the @xmath th-order formalism (because ( 5.5 ) and ( 5.16 )
are identical). Therefore, also the total Hamiltonians ( 3.13 ) which
imply the EOM are identical ² ² 2 Actually, @xmath contains an
additional term @xmath due to the presence of the primary constraints (
5.14 ). This however does not affect the EOM ( 3.12 ) for the variables
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 5.12 ) and ( 5.19 ) follows the equivalence of the @xmath th- and
the @xmath st-order Ostrogradsky formalism, i.e. the independence of the
Ostrogradsky formalism from the choice of the (formal) order @xmath of
the Lagrangian @xmath .

To extend this classical result to quantum physics, one has to show that
the Hamiltonian PIs obtained within the @xmath th and the @xmath
st-order formalism are identical. In the @xmath st-order formalism the
Hamiltonian PI has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The constraints and g.f. conditions @xmath include all the constraints
and g.f. conditions @xmath obtained in the @xmath th-order formalism
and, in addition, the constraints ( 5.14 ) and ( 5.18 ). The fundamental
Poisson brackets imply that ( 5.14 ) with @xmath and ( 5.18 ) represent
a system of second-class constraints, while the constraints ( 5.14 )
with @xmath , which have vanishing Poisson brackets with all other
constraints, are first-class. Therefore one has to include gauge-fixing
conditions corresponding to these first-class constraints into the
@xmath . A possible and suitable choice is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the fundamental Poisson brackets and remembering that the @xmath
do not depend on the @xmath and the @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the presence of the @xmath -functions corresponding to the
constraints ( 5.14 ) and ( 5.18 ) and to the g.f. conditions ( 5.21 ) in
the PI one can carry out the functional integrations over the @xmath and
the @xmath . Equations ( 5.12 ) and ( 5.17 ) imply then that the
Hamiltonian PI ( 5.20 ) is identical to the one obtained in the @xmath
th-order formalism ( 5.9 ). Thus, the Hamiltonian PI is also independent
of the formal order @xmath .

The conclusion of this section, which is most important for the
subsequent investigations is the following: In the @xmath th-order
formalism all derivatives up to the order @xmath are treated as
independent coordinates and not as derivatives. Furthermore, the order
@xmath can be chosen arbitrarily high without affecting the physical
content of the theory. This implies that each local coordinate
transformation which involves derivatives of the coordinates (up to a
finite order) can be considered to be a point transformation, i.e. a
transformation which formally only depends on the coordinates but not on
the derivatives. If one wants to apply a coordinate transformation
involving derivatives up to the order @xmath , one simply has to treat
the Lagrangian as an @xmath st-order one (even if no @xmath st
derivatives occur in @xmath ) so that this transformation can be
identified as a point transformation. Such a transformation becomes a
canonical transformation within the Hamiltonian framework because the
fact that two Lagrangians are related to each other by a point
transformation implies that the corresponding Hamiltonians and
constraints are related to each other by a canonical transformation (if
the order @xmath is chosen sufficiently high); namely the canonical
transformation corresponding to the point transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is (in analogy to the first-order formalism [ 52 ] ) given by ³ ³ 3 This
can easily be seen if the order @xmath is chosen so high that the two
Lagrangians related by the transformation ( 5.23 ) only depend on @xmath
with @xmath and that the transformations of the @xmath which occur in
the Lagrangians do not involve the @xmath . In analogy to the treatment
of first-order Lagrangians one finds then that the Hamiltonians ( 5.4 )
and the primary constraints ( @xmath in this case) are related to each
other by the canonical transformation ( 5.23 ), ( 5.24 ). The secondary,
tertiary, etc. constraints follow from the Poisson brackets ( 3.10 )
which are invariant under canonical transformations. ( 5.23 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the physical content of a theory is not affected by a canonical
transformation, one finds that Lagrangians, which are related to each
other by a local coordinate transformation are physically equivalent
even if this transformation involves derivatives.

The Hamiltonian PIs corresponding to Lagrangians that are related by
such a field transformation are identical because of the invariance of
the Hamiltonian PI under canonical transformations ⁴ ⁴ 4 Within the
canonical quantization formalism the invariance of the @xmath -Matrix
elements with respect to a point transformation of the Lagrangian was
shown in [ 68 ] . [ 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] and its independence of the
(formal) order @xmath (see above). Therefore, this equivalence is also
valid in quantum physics.

### 5.2 Reduction of Higher-Order Effective Lagrangians and the
Hamilton–Lagrange Equivalence Theorem

In this section I will show that a higher-order effective Lagrangian can
be reduced to a first-order one by applying the equations of motion to
the effective interaction term. Using this reduction, I will prove the
HLE theorem for effective Lagrangians with higher derivatives. For
simplicity I will first only consider effective interactions of a scalar
field.

I consider a Lagrangian of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath contains effective interactions of the scalar field @xmath which
depend on the derivatives of @xmath up to the order @xmath . These
interactions are governed by the coupling constant @xmath with @xmath .

Now I want to remove all higher time derivatives from the effective
interaction term by applying the EOM (upon neglecting higher powers of
@xmath ). This procedure must be carefully justified since, in general,
the EOM must not be applied in order to convert the Lagrangian.
Therefore, I use the results of [ 27 , 28 ] where it was shown that it
is always possible to find field transformations which effectively
result in applying the EOM following from @xmath to @xmath (in first
order of @xmath ).

This can be seen as follows: Assume that @xmath contains a term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath is an arbitrary expression in @xmath and its derivatives),
i.e. that ( 5.25 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath ). Making the field transformation [ 27 , 28 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

(and the corresponding transformations of the derivatives of @xmath )
one finds (in first order of @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(after dropping a total derivative term ⁵ ⁵ 5 In general, only total
derivatives of expressions that depend on nothing but the coordinates
can be dropped. However, since the derivatives are treated as
coordinates within the Ostrogradsky formalism if the order @xmath is
chosen sufficiently high (as discussed in the previous section), all
total derivative terms can be neglected [ 13 ] . ). This means that
effectively the second time derivative has been removed from the term (
5.26 ) by applying the free EOM (i.e.  the EOM implied by @xmath alone)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

If there are terms with higher than second time derivatives in @xmath ,
they can be put into the form ( 5.26 ) by applying product
differentiation and dropping total derivative terms. Repeating the above
procedure, one can remove all higher time derivatives from the effective
Lagrangian.

To prove that a higher-order effective Lagrangian and the first-order
Lagrangian obtained from it by applying the above procedure are
physically equivalent, I use the results of the previous section. The
Lagrangians are connected by field transformations of the type ( 5.28 )
which, in general, involve derivatives of @xmath (contained in @xmath ).
However, within the Ostrogradsky formalism these transformations are
point (i.e. canonical) transformations (if the formal order of @xmath is
choosen sufficiently high) which establishes the equivalence of both
Lagrangians. To be strictly correct, one must remember that, within the
Ostrogradsky formalism, the time derivatives of @xmath are fields that
are formally independent of @xmath . Therefore, the transformation (
5.28 ) is completely specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the order of the highest time derivative occurring in
@xmath ( 5.25 ). Now one can easily see that, if @xmath contains at most
@xmath th time derivatives, the Lagrangian formally has to be treated as
an @xmath nd-order one so that ( 5.31 ) becomes a canonical
transformation. The result of this procedure is that the equations of
motion imlied by @xmath may be applied to convert the effective
interaction term @xmath in order to eliminate all higher time
derivatives (by neglecting higher powers of @xmath ).

Now it is easy to quantize the effective Lagrangian ( 5.25 ) and to
prove the HLE theorem, i.e. to derive the Lagrangian PI ( 1.1 ) with (
1.2 ). The proof goes as follows:

1.  Given an effective higher-order Lagrangian @xmath ( 5.25 ), it can
    be reduced to an equivalent first-order ⁶ ⁶ 6 Formally, the reduced
    Lagrangian @xmath still has to be treated as an @xmath th-order one
    although it contains no more higher derivatives. But, as shown in
    section 5.1, it does not affect the physical content of the theory
    to treat it as a first-order Lagrangian. Lagrangian @xmath by
    applying field transformations such as ( 5.28 ). As discussed in
    section 5.1 this does not affect the Hamiltonian PI.

2.  @xmath can be quantized by applying the HLE theorem for first-order
    Lagrangians [ 10 ] . The resulting generating functional can be
    written as a Lagrangian PI

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  In the Lagrangian PI ( 5.32 ), the field transformations ( 5.28 )
    are done inversely in order to reconstruct the primordial
    higher-order Lagrangian @xmath ( 5.25 ). After the introduction of a
    source term this finally yields ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ).

The last step needs some additional clarification because a field
transformation like ( 5.28 ), if it is made in the PI ( 5.32 ), does not
only affect the quantized Lagrangian, but also the integration measure.
However, it was shown in [ 28 ] that the transformation of the measure
only yields an extra @xmath -term which is neglected here. I briefly
repeat here the derivation of this result in the second ref. in [ 28 ]
because it is very similar to an argument that I have used several times
in chapters 2 and 4: The functional Jacobian determinant corresponding
to the transformation ( 5.28 ) which arises due to the change of the
functional integration measure has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath being the part of @xmath which is linear in @xmath and with
@xmath being the part, which contains the quadratic, cubic, etc. terms,
one can rewrite ( 5.33 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the definition of @xmath , the second determinant in ( 5.34 ) is
constant and can thus be neglected. Applying ( 2.16 ), the first one
yields a ghost term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath contains a mass term for the ghosts and couplings to the scalar
field but no kinetic term. Therefore, using a similar argumentation as
in section 2.2 one finds that all ghost loops are (at least) quartically
divergent and thus the term ( 5.35 ) can be replaced by a @xmath -term.

The HLE theorem implies, that an effective higher-order Lagrangian can
be quantized in the same way as a first-order one without worrying about
the unphysical effects [ 26 ] that are normally connected with
higher-order Lagrangians. In particular, the Feynman rules can be
obtained in the standard manner from the effective interaction term.

Closing this section, I want to add several remarks:

-   By repeating the above procedure, one can iteratively eleminate the
    higher derivatives in any finite order of @xmath [ 27 , 28 ] . Thus,
    remembering the discussion at the beginning of chapter 4, one can
    see that also in the higher-order case the HLE theorem can in
    principle be proven in an arbitrary order of @xmath . However, by
    this iterative procedure one cannot eliminate the higher derivatives
    in all orders of @xmath .

-   The procedure described in this section can only be applied to
    effective Lagrangians, since then the supposed existence of
    well-behaved “new physics” beyond the theory described by the
    effective Lagrangian justifies the omission of all unphysical
    effects. The above proof rests on the fact that higher derivative
    terms proportional to higher powers of @xmath are neglected (see the
    previous item). The assumption @xmath alone is not sufficient for
    neglecting these terms since theories with higher derivatives have
    no analytic limit for @xmath . Thus, the effects of a term with
    higher derivatives are not small even if the coupling constant of
    this term is extremely small [ 26 ] . However, as mentioned in the
    introduction, the neglect of these terms is justified when
    considering an effective Lagrangian because effects implied by
    @xmath -terms with @xmath are assumed to be cancelled by other
    effects of (well-behaved) “new physics”. This means that the
    unphysical features cannot be eliminated within models with higher
    derivatives that are not considered to be effective ones.

-   In principle, the Ostrogradsky formalism itself is a reduction of a
    higher-order Lagrangian to a first-order one ⁷ ⁷ 7 For a formal
    proof of this see [ 67 ] . because the higher derivatives are
    considered to be independent coordinates; however, this means that
    new degrees of freedom are introduced. These additional degrees of
    freedom involve the unphysical effects [ 26 ] . Here, an effective
    higher-order Lagrangian is reduced to a first-order one without
    introducing extra degrees of freedom and thus the unphysical effects
    are eliminated.

-   The use of the EOM ( 5.30 ) may, in general, yield expressions in
    @xmath which are not manifestly Lorentz invariant (see especially
    the treatment of vector fields in the following section). Also the
    Hamiltonian PI quantization procedure implies such terms (see [ 9 ,
    10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] and chapter 4). However, these expressions only
    occur in intermediate steps of the derivation but not in the
    resulting PI ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2 ). Actually, the HLE theorem enables
    calculations based on the manifestly Lorentz invariant Lagrangian
    PI.

-   Since each effective Lagrangian with higher derivatives can be
    reduced to a first-order one, it is in principle sufficient to
    consider only effective Lagrangians with at most first derivatives [
    27 , 28 , 49 , 69 ] . However, the reduction of a quite simple
    higher-order effective interaction term to a first-order term by
    applying the equations of motion, in general, yields a lengthy and
    awkward expression, which is a linear combination of several terms;
    each one alone of these terms yields effects that are not implied by
    the primordial term but among them complicated cancellations take
    place [ 49 , 70 ] . This means the physical effects of such a
    higher-order term are quite untransparent after the application of
    the EOM. Thus, for practical calculations it is much more convenient
    to use the Feynman rules deriving from the the primordial
    higher-order Lagrangian instead of those implied by the reduced
    first-order Lagrangian. Therefore, I have used this reduction only
    for technical purposes in order to apply the HLE theorem for
    first-order Lagrangians, but in the final result ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.2
    ) I have reconstructed the original higher-order Lagrangian.
    Actually, this result enables calculations based on a higher-order
    effective Lagrangian without doing this reduction.

### 5.3 Higher-Order Effective Interactions of Massive Vector Fields

In this section I will extend the results of the preceding one to
higher-order effective (non Yang–Mills) self-interactions of massive
vector fields. I will again examine the three different types of
effective Lagrangians which are found in the literature, namely gauge
noninvariant Lagrangians, gauged nonlinear @xmath -models and Higgs
models. As in chapter 4 I will for simplicity only consider massive
Yang–Mills theories (with additional effective interactions) in which
all vector bosons have equal masses and the corresponding SBGTs.

#### 5.3.1 Gauge Noninvariant Models

I consider the effective Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath represents a massive Yang–Mills theory and the effective
interaction term @xmath contains the deviations from the Yang–Mills
interactions which involve derivatives up to the order @xmath and which
are proportional to @xmath with @xmath .

By applying the procedure described in section 5.2 one can now use the
EOM following from @xmath in order to eliminate the higher time
derivatives in @xmath . The EOM are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath ( 5.37 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation serves to eliminate all higher time derivatives of the
@xmath . Next one has to get rid of the time derivatives of the @xmath .
To be able to apply the HLE theorem for first-order Lagrangians derived
in section 4.1, one even has to remove the first time derivatives of the
@xmath because in section 4.1 it is assumed that @xmath does not depend
on @xmath (see footnote 2 there). For @xmath ( 5.37 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiation yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be written (using ( 5.39 )) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

By repeated application of ( 5.39 ), ( 5.41 ) and ( 5.42 ) one can
reduce the effective Lagrangian ( 5.36 ) to an equivalent Lagrangian
@xmath which contains neither higher time derivatives of the fields nor
first time derivatives of the @xmath .

Now the HLE theorem can be proven as in the previous section. The
effective higher-order Lagrangian becomes reduced to a first-order
Lagrangian @xmath as described above, this gets quantized by applying
the HLE theorem for effective first-order interactions of massive vector
fields (sect. 4.1) and finally one can reconstruct the primordial
Lagrangian @xmath by making the appropriate field transformations in the
Lagrangian PI.

#### 5.3.2 Gauged Nonlinear @xmath-Models

Now I consider SBGTs with additional effective interaction terms. First
I restrict myself to gauged nonlinear @xmath -models; in these the
unphysical pseudo-Goldstone fields @xmath are nonlinearly parametrized
as ( 4.31 ) with ( 4.30 ).

Each effective gauged nonlinear @xmath -model can be rewritten in the
gauge noninvariant form ( 5.36 ) by applying the inverse of the
Stueckelberg transformation ( 4.32 ). This can be seen as follows: Due
to the gauge invariance of the effective interaction term, the fields
only occur there in the gauge invariant combinations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

(The higher covariant derivatives of @xmath and @xmath are defined in
analogy to the first-order ones, ( 4.33 ) and ( 5.38 ).) Each effective
interaction term can be constructed from the expressions ( 5.43 ), (
5.44 ) and constants like @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by taking products,
sums, derivatives and traces [ 41 ] . The term ( 5.43 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

after an inverse Stueckelberg transformation. By using the unitarity of
@xmath (( 4.31 ) with ( 4.30 )) and by product differentiation, the term
( 5.44 ) can be expressed through terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and their derivatives. E.g. for @xmath it can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Similar formulas can be found for @xmath ). ( 5.46 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

after an inverse Stueckelberg transformation. This means that, by
applying the inverse of the Stueckelberg transformation ( 4.32 ) (and of
the corresponding transformations of the derivatives of @xmath ), an
arbitrary nonlinear gauge invariant Lagrangian @xmath becomes a gauge
noninvariant Lagrangian @xmath (U-gauge Lagrangian) which is obtained by
simply dropping all unphysical scalar fields in @xmath , i.e., @xmath is
given by ( 4.40 ).

In section 4.2 I have proven that Lagrangians (without higher
derivatives) which are related to each other by a Stueckelberg
transformation are equivalent within the Hamiltonian formalism. Using
the Ostrogradsky formalism this result can be generalized to
higher-order Lagrangians and besides it can be derived more easily.
Since a Stueckelberg transformation is a field transformation that
depends on the derivatives of the fields, it is a canonical
transformation within this formalism ⁸ ⁸ 8 One may wonder why a gauge
invariant (i.e. first-class constrained) system can be related to a
gauge noninvariant (i.e. second-class constrained) system by a canonical
transformation, because the number of second-class constraints is given
by @xmath which is invariant under canonical transformations. One should
remember that these systems are only related by a canonical
transformation if their order is artificially increased. This procedure
yields additional constraints (see section 5.1). In fact, @xmath and
@xmath imply equal numbers of first-class and of second-class
constraints if their order is chosen sufficiently high. (if the formal
order of @xmath is chosen sufficiently high) as discussed in
section 5.1. Since the time derivatives of @xmath are formally
considered to be independent fields, the inverse Stueckelberg
transformation is completely specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath being the order of the highest time derivative occurring in
@xmath ). The Lagrangian @xmath has thus formally to be treated as an
@xmath rd-order one to establish the equivalence of @xmath and @xmath .

The HLE theorem for effective gauged nonlinear @xmath -models with
higher derivatives can now be proven as follows: Given a nonlinear gauge
invariant Lagrangian @xmath , it can be converted into the equivalent
gauge noninvariant U-gauge Lagrangian @xmath ( 4.40 ) as described
above. This does not affect the Hamiltonian path integral (see
section 5.1). Since @xmath is of the type ( 5.36 ), the results of the
previous subsection can be applied to quantize it. In analogy to the
treatment of section 4.2, this yields a generating functional which is
equal to the one obtained in the (Lagrangian) Faddeev–Popov formalism if
the g.f. conditions ( 4.53 ) are imposed. Due to the equivalence of all
gauges [ 20 , 23 ] , this result can be rewritten in any other gauge.
This yields ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ).

#### 5.3.3 Higgs Models

Finally let me consider effective SBGTs with linearly realized symmetry.
As in sect. 4.3 I restrict myself to the case of SU(2) symmetry (i.e.
@xmath , @xmath ).

With the same arguments as in sections 4.3 and 5.3.2 one finds that,
like in the first-order case, the Lagrangian @xmath of an effective
Higgs model is equivalent to its U-gauge Lagrangian @xmath given by (
4.65 ). @xmath is a gauge noninvariant Lagrangian such as ( 5.36 ) but
it contains the additional physical scalar field @xmath . Therefore it
has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

( @xmath is the U-gauge Lagrangian of the Higgs model without effective
interaction terms.) The EOM corresponding to ( 5.39 ), ( 5.41 ), ( 5.42
) and the EOM for the Higgs field implied by @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These EOM can be used in order to eliminate all higher time derivatives
of the @xmath and of @xmath and also the first time derivatives of the
@xmath in @xmath ( 5.50 ).

On the basis of this result, one can easily prove the HLE theorem for
effective Higgs models by using the same arguments as in sections 4.3
and 5.3.2.

It should be mentioned that the transformation ( 4.63 ) and the EOM (
5.52 ) involve nonpolynomial interactions, which are not present in the
primordial Lagrangian. This, however, is no serious problem, since these
expressions only occur in intermediate steps of the derivation and not
in the resulting Faddeev-Popov PI ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ). The application
of the HLE theorem for first-order Lagrangians is not affected by these
terms, since the treatment of chapter 4 does not necessarily require
polynomial interactions.

The derivation in this subsection illustrates that the above proof can
be extended to the case of Lagrangians with matter fields which have
been negelcted here for simplicity (also see the treatment of
chapter 6). The additional couplings in @xmath alter the EOM, but the
general statement that each effective higher-order Lagrangian can be
reduced to a first-order one by using the EOM remains unaffected.
Therefore, the HLE theorem holds for any Lagrangian with arbitrary
interactions of massive vector fields.

## Chapter 6 Effective Gauge Theories

After the derivation of the HLE theorem for effective interactions of
massive vector fields in the preceding two chapters, I will now also
consider massless vector fields and fermion fields, which completes the
proof of the HLE theorem for the physically most important types of
particles.

As pointed out in the introduction, massless vector fields necessarily
have to be understood as gauge fields; therefore I will give a general
proof of the HLE theorem for gauge theories with effective (but still
gauge invariant) gauge-boson self-interactions and with effective
couplings to fermion and scalar fields. The result ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 )
will first be derived within the Coulomb gauge and then be generalized
to any other gauge by using the equivalence of all gauges [ 20 , 23 ] .
This proof is also valid for SBGTs (both with linearly and with
nonlinearly realized symmetry) i.e., gauge theories in which the gauge
bosons are massive. Thus, this thesis contains two alternative proofs of
the HLE theorem for effective SBGTs, the one given in the previous two
chapters and the one presented in this chapter. Both are conceptionally
different; in the first proof an SBGT is related to a gauge noninvariant
Lagrangian (U-gauge Lagrangian) by applying the Stueckelberg formalism
(actually, the reformulation of the Stueckelberg formalism and the
construction of the U-gauge within the Hamiltonian framework is an
important result by itsself) while the proof in this chapter is more
direct and does not use the Stueckelberg formalism. This proof also
applies to SBGTs in which not all gauge bosons are massive (like
effective electroweak models [ 2 , 3 ] ) and, of course, to gauge
theories without spontaneous symmetry breaking (like theories with
effective gluon self-interactions [ 4 ] ).

As in the previous two chapters, I will first consider effective
Lagrangians without higher time derivatives and then I will generalize
the HLE theorem to the higher-order case by using the EOM in order to
eleminate the higher time derivatives from the effective interaction
term. Actually, this simplifies the treatment of fermion fields very
much, because, by applying the EOM, one can eliminate not only higher
but also first time derivatives of these fields from the effective
interaction term and therefore it is sufficient to prove the HLE theorem
for effective interactions that do not involve time derivatives of the
fermion fields.

The results of this chapter have first been published in [ 71 ] .

### 6.1 The Hamilton–Lagrange Equivalence Theorem for Effective Gauge
Theories

In this section I quantize an effective gauge theory (including fermion
and scalar fields) without higher derivatives in the Hamiltonian PI
formalism in order to derive the Faddeev–Popov PI ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ).
Some of the techniques used in the following derivation originate from
the quantization of a Yang–Mills theory without effective interaction
terms in [ 13 ] and some others from the quantization of gauge
noninvariant effective Lagrangians in [ 10 ] and in section 4.1.

The effective Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The field strength tensor @xmath is given by ( 4.2 ) and its covariant
derivative by ( 5.38 ). The covariant derivatives of the @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

(Higher covariant derivatives are defined analogously.) @xmath is the
gauge coupling constant, @xmath are the structure constants and @xmath
and @xmath are the generators of the gauge group in its representation
in the fermion sector and in the scalar sector respectively. @xmath
contains derivative-free interactions of the fermion and scalar fields,
viz. Yukawa couplings and scalar self-interactions.

The effective interaction term @xmath , which parametrizes the
deviations from the minimal gauge theory (given by @xmath ), contains
arbitrary interactions of the fields which are governed by the effective
coupling constant @xmath with @xmath . As pointed out in the
introduction, an effective Lagrangian like ( 6.1 ) only has a physical
meaning if the effective interaction term is gauge invariant. The gauge
invariance implies that the gauge fields @xmath do not occur arbitrarily
in @xmath but only through the field strength tensor and through
covariant derivatives. Furthermore, in this section I assume that @xmath
does neither depend on higher time derivatives of the fields nor on
first time derivatives of the @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Actually, the absence of
@xmath already follows from the gauge invariance and the requirement
that no higher time derivatives occur in @xmath . and of the fermion
fields @xmath and @xmath . The case of interactions with higher
derivatives will be treated in the next section.

From ( 6.1 ) one finds the conjugate fields (generalized momenta):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The relations ( 6.6 ), ( 6.8 ) and ( 6.9 ) do not contain @xmath -terms
due to the assumption that @xmath does not depend on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . These relations cannot be solved for the velocities; they are
constraints. The remaining of the above equations can be solved for the
velocities, they become (in first order of @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (6.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One finds the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can use the identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(and the corresponding relations for @xmath and @xmath ) in order to
rewrite those expressions in @xmath , in which time and spatial
covariant derivatives act on the fields, such that the time derivatives
are applied first. Remembering the discussion of the paragraph preceding
equation ( 6.6 ) one can then easily see that @xmath depends on the
fields @xmath only through the expressions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the definition ( 6.16 ) one finds that @xmath does not depend on the
@xmath . Thus, the gauge invariance and the absence of higher time
derivatives (and of first time derivatives of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
) in @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As mentioned above, the relations ( 6.6 ), ( 6.8 ) and ( 6.9 ) imply the
primary constraints

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The requirement ( 3.10 ) in general yields secondary constraints (see
sect. 3.1). Actually, ( 6.25 ) and ( 6.26 ) do not imply secondary
constraints, since the demand ( 3.10 ) only determines the Lagrange
multipliers corresponding to these constraints [ 13 ] . The constraints
( 6.24 ) imply the secondary constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to ( 6.23 ), these secondary constraints do not contain @xmath
-terms, i.e.  they are independent of the form of the effective
interaction term @xmath (in first order of @xmath ). There are no
tertiary, etc. constraints. The Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

imply that the constraints @xmath ( 6.25 ) and @xmath ( 6.26 ) are
second-class and the Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

imply that the constraints @xmath ( 6.24 ) and @xmath ( 6.27 ) are
first-class (see sect. 3.1).

Due to the presence of the first-class constraints one has to introduce
an equal number of gauge-fixing conditions (as discussed in
section 3.1). Following the reasoning of section 4.2, one finds that the
usual Lorentz g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

(and also the @xmath -g.f. conditions for SBGTs) are not g.f. conditions
within the Hamiltonian formalism [ 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] because they are
not relations among the fields and the conjugate fields alone. Therefore
I quantize the effective gauge theory ( 6.1 ) within the Coulomb gauge,
i.e. by choosing the primary g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Instead of the Coulomb gauge, one can alternatively choose the axial
gauge or, for SBGTs, the U-gauge as in section 4.2). The demand ( 3.21 )
yields the secondary g.f. conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian path intergral ( 3.30 ) for this system is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote all second-class constraints,
first-class constraints and g.f. conditions respectively). First let me
consider the determinants occurring in ( 6.37 ). Equations ( 6.28 ) and
( 6.29 ) imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, this term can be neglected in the PI. Furthermore, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The absence of @xmath -terms in ( 6.40 ) is again a consequence of (
6.23 ). This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, one observes that @xmath ( 6.15 ) contains a term @xmath . Due to
the presence of @xmath in the PI this term can be omitted. Then one
integrates over @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.42)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

After rewriting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath is the solution of the differential equation ( 6.36 ) ² ²
2 One should not be confused by the occurrence of the nonlocal
expression @xmath . Since the integrand of the PI ( 6.42 ) is
independent of @xmath except for the factor @xmath , the @xmath become
eliminated from the PI after the integration over @xmath . with the
boundary condition that @xmath vanishes for @xmath ) one can also
integrate over @xmath . Due to ( 6.23 ), the argument of the determinant
in ( 6.44 ) does not contain @xmath -terms and, besides, the integration
over @xmath does not affect @xmath . Next one reintroduces the variables
@xmath by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.46)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to obtain expressions quadratic in the momenta, one rewrites
this as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.47)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now one can carry out the Gaussian integrations over the momenta. With
@xmath given in ( 6.1 ) one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.48)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This expression can be simplified in complete analogy to the procedure
described in section 4.1. One finds (by neglecting @xmath - and @xmath
-terms)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.49)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath turns out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 6.49 ) with ( 6.50 ) is identical to the result obtained within the
(Lagrangian) Faddeev–Popov formalism by choosing the (Coulomb)
g.f. conditions @xmath ( 6.35 ) because the change of @xmath under
variations of the gauge parameters @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

To derive the form ( 1.1 ) of the generating functional (with ( 1.3 ))
one has to construct a g.f. term by using the @xmath -fuction and to
write the determinant as an exponential function by introducing ghost
fields, as discussed in section 2.1. Finally the source terms have to be
added. It is essential for the derivation of this result that, due to (
6.23 ), no @xmath -terms occur in the argument of the determinant in (
6.49 ). Thus the ghost term is independent of the form of the effective
interaction term @xmath as in the Faddeev–Popov formalism (see
section 2.1). Because of the equivalence of all gauges [ 20 , 23 ] the
result ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 ) can be rewritten in any other gauge which
can be derived within the Faddeev–Popov formalism.

The gauge theory given by ( 6.1 ) is spontaneously broken if the vacuum
expectation value of the scalar fields (implied by the scalar
self-interactions contained in @xmath ) is nonzero; this does not affect
the above proof. Actually, this proof holds for both, SBGTs with a
linearly realized scalar sector [ 3 ] , and gauged nonlinear @xmath
-models [ 2 ] , because the latter ones can be obtained from the first
ones by making a point transformation (as in ( 4.64 )) in order to
rewrite the scalar sector nonlinearly (this does not effect the
Hamiltonion PI and yields only @xmath -terms in the Lagrangian PI (see
sections 2.4, 2.7 and 4.3)) and then removing all Higgs contributions
from the Lagrangian. Thus for an arbitrary effective gauge theory
(without higher derivatives) the convenient Faddeev–Popov PI can be
derived within the correct Hamiltonian PI formalism.

### 6.2 Effective Gauge Theories with Higher Derivatives

In this section I will generalize the HLE theorem to effective gauge
theories with higher time derivatives by applying the result of
section 5.2 that the equations of motion following from @xmath in ( 6.1
) can be applied in order to convert the effective interaction term
@xmath (by neglecting higher powers of @xmath ) because the use of the
EOM corresponds to a field transformation ( 5.28 ) (in this case @xmath
may represent any field occurring in @xmath ( 6.1 )) which becomes a
canonical transformation within the Ostrogradsky formalism and thus does
not affect the Hamiltonian PI.

On the basis of this result, an arbitrary effective gauge theory can be
reduced to one of the type considered in the previous section as
follows: Due to the gauge invariance, derivatives of the fields occur in
the effective interaction term only as covariant derivatives or through
the field strength tensor. Using the identities ( 6.17 ), ( 6.18 ) and (
6.19 ) (and the corresponding relations for @xmath and @xmath ) one
again rewrites all expressions in @xmath such that the covariant time
derivatives are applied to the fields before the covariant spatial
derivatives. Then, higher time derivatives (and first time derivatives
of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) occur in @xmath only through the
expressions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and even higher derivatives of these terms. After using ( 6.19 ) and (
6.21 ) in order to rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can convert all the terms ( 6.52 ) to terms without higher time
derivatives (and without first time derivatives of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ) by using the EOM following from @xmath , viz.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(and the corresponding equations for @xmath and @xmath ). By repeated
application of the EOM one can eliminate all higher time derivatives
from @xmath . The fact that the EOM do not contain second time
derivatives of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath makes it possible to eliminate
not only higher but also first time derivatives of these fields. The
reduced first-order Lagrangian obtained by this procedure is gauge
invariant, too, because the form of the EOM is invariant under gauge
transformations and thus the use of the EOM does not affect the gauge
freedom.

Now the HLE theorem for effective gauge theories with higher time
derivatives can be proven as follows:

1.  Given an arbitrary gauge invariant effective Lagrangian @xmath ( 6.1
    ), this can be reduced to an equivalent gauge invariant Lagrangian
    @xmath without higher time derivatives (and without first time
    derivatives of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) by applying the EOM,
    i.e., actually by making field transformations such as ( 5.28 ).
    This does not affect the Hamiltonian PI (see chapter 5).

2.  @xmath can be quantized within the Hamiltonian PI formalism by
    applying the HLE theorem for first-order Lagrangians derived in
    section 6.1. This yields the Lagrangian PI

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.57)
      -- -------- -- --------

    in an arbitrary gauge.

3.  Going reversely through the Faddeev–Popov procedure one can rewrite
    ( 6.57 ) (after introducing an infinite constant into the PI) as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.58)
      -- -------- -- --------

4.  In the Lagrangian PI ( 6.58 ) the field transformations ( 5.28 )
    applied in step 1 are done inversely in order to reconstruct the
    primordial effective Lagrangian ³ ³ 3 Note that the use of the
    transformations ( 5.28 ) in ( 6.57 ) would result in an application
    of the EOM following from @xmath (and not from @xmath alone) which
    would not yield the desired result. . This yields

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.59)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The Jacobian determinant implied by change of the functional
    integration measure corresponding to these transformations only
    yields extra @xmath -terms (see [ 28 ] and section 5.2) which are
    neglected here.

5.  Applying the Faddeev--Popov formalism ⁴ ⁴ 4 In distiction from naive
    Lagrangian PI quantization, ( 6.59 ) is not taken as an ansatz here
    but it has been derived from the correct Hamiltonian PI. to ( 6.59 )
    and adding the source terms one finally finds ( 1.1 ) with ( 1.3 )
    in an arbitrary gauge.

This completes the proof of the HLE theorem for effective gauge
theories.

## Chapter 7 Summary

In this thesis I have proven the Hamilton–Lagrange equivalence theorem
(Matthews’s theorem) for effective Lagrangians with arbitrary
interactions of the physically most important types of particles, namely
scalars, fermions, massless and massive and vector bosons. This theorem
states that the convenient Lagrangian path integral can be derived from
the correct (but more involved) Hamiltonian path intergral. This means
that the Feynman rules, which are the basis for calculations of @xmath
-Matrix elements and cross sections, can directly be obtained from the
Lagrangian in the usual way.

In particular, this theorem is valid for all types of gauge theories
with arbitrary (but gauge invariant) interaction terms, namely for gauge
theories without spontaneous symmetry breaking, for spontaneously broken
gauge theories with a nonlinearly realized scalar sector (gauged
nonlinear @xmath -models, chiral Lagrangians) and for sponteneously
broken gauge theories with a linearly realized scalar sector (Higgs
models). This means that an arbitrary gauge theory can be quantized
within the (Lagrangian) Faddeev–Popov formalism.

I have paid specific attention to the investigation of effective
Lagrangians with massive vector fields (both with and without a
spontaneously broken gauge symmetry). Each spontaneously broken gauge
theory can be related to its unitary gauge by applying a Stueckelberg
transformation (after making a point transformation that delinearizes
the scalar sector in the case of a Higgs model); the U-gauge Lagrangian
is obtained by simply removing all unphysical scalar fields from the
gauge invariant Lagrangian. On the other hand, by using the Stueckelberg
formalism one can rewrite an arbitrary gauge noninvariant Lagrangian as
a (nonlinearly realized) spontaneously broken gauge theory and extend
it, by introducing (a) physical Higgs boson(s), to a (linearly realized)
Higgs model. I have reformulated the Stueckelberg formalism within the
Hamiltonian formalism, thereby establishing the equivalence of
Lagrangians which are related to each other by a Stueckelberg
transformation.

The Hamilton–Lagrange equivalence theorem even applies to effective
Lagrangians with higher derivatives of the fields. Each effective
higher-order Lagrangian can be reduced to a first-order one by applying
the equations of motion to the effective interaction term in order to
remove all higher time derivatives. This use of the equations of motion
is correct because it can be realized by making field transformations
that involve derivatives of the fields. I have shown that Lagrangians
which are related to each other by local field transformations are
physically equivalent (at the classical and at the quantum level) even
if these transformations depend on derivatives, because they become
canonical transformations within the Hamiltonian treatment of
higher-order Lagrangians (Ostrogradsky formalism). Thus, an effective
higher-order Lagrangian can formally be treated in the same way as a
first-order one; all unphysical effects, which normally occur when
dealing with higher-order Lagrangians, are absent because an effective
Lagrangian is assumed to parametrize the low-energy effects of
well-behaved “new physics”.

Many of the above statements are obvious within the naive Lagrangian
path integral formalism. However, one has to apply the more elaborate
Hamiltonian procedure of this thesis to derive them correctly. Indeed,
the results obtained in this thesis justify the straightforward
treatment of effective Lagrangians in the phenomenological literature.
