### Acknowledgments

My “Esteemed Advisor”, Ansar Fayyazuddin, took considerable time off
from contemplating ’the logic of late capitalism’ to tend to his
advisory duties. Regardless of the nature of the problem I pose him
with, Ansar always manages to rise to the occasion. He has taught me
much, but more than that I owe him gratitude for giving me back my
confidence at a time when Grad School was beating it down. I feel
privileged to know him both as a student and as a friend.

It has been great fun having Fawad Hassan around. This thesis owes a lot
to his endless supply of patience, chocolates and encouragement. He is
always on hand when questions need to be answered and, together with
Ioanna Pappa, is an excellent partner in crime when some crazy scheme is
being hatched.

The String Theory group here is rather like a library of friendly human
encyclopedias. All queries can be addressed by walking down the corridor
and knocking on the doors of Ulf Lindstrom, Bo Sundborg and earlier,
Alberto Guijosa, and Subir Mukhopadhyay.

Our all-girl group of students has to be a first – on this planet at
least! I count on Cecilia Albertsson and Teresia Mansson for various
things, from bailing me out of trouble with the printer, to a friendly
chat in the middle of the day; when panic hits and reassurance is
needed, Cecilia can be found at the desk next to mine. But before it was
just us girls, Bjorn Brinne and Maxim Zabzine were around as well. I
learnt a lot from both of them and still count on Bjorn for assorted
help and advice.

Were it not for Britta Schmidt, I would be buried somewhere under piles
of paper-work, with my Swedish dictionary in hand. She is truly the
Guardian Angel of the Physics Department and I don’t know what I would
have done without her smiling face to turn to.

Thanks are also due to the Theory Group at UT-Austin for their
hospitality during my visit there. In particular, Jan Duffy for her
welcoming warmth, Julie Blum for many useful discussions and Amer Iqbal
for several fascinating conversations about Physics and everything else.

I couldn’t go without expressing my heartfelt gratitude to Ishrat
Phophi, who never let me feel the lack of family in Sweden and to Khalu
Jan who got me started on my journey here.

It’s amazing what friends can pull you through. Over the course of this
PhD, many potential therapy sessions were averted by phone calls, emails
and visits to Annie, Aisha, Afi, Sabir, Sidra, Erej, Hajira, Mahrukh,
Aneeka, Roshani, Stella, Nicole, Saleha, Sherezade, Cristine and the
HEPlons.

Never has the world known kids more precious than Manni and Ali. They
are the best cheer-upers on Earth with their undying faith in me and
their unconditional love. Amir and Zaib have been adorable specially
during my time in Austin. Despite their firm conviction that I really do
nothing and this whole PhD thing is just an elaborate hoax they have
been rather indulgent of it all.

Shabeeb has suffered more than his fair share at the hands of my PhD –
he has borne it well, with unwavering love and support. Maybe, now that
the thesis is done, his suffering will be over as well …. no promises
though! ;)

Most of all, my love and my deepest gratitude is for Abbu and Ammi, who
gave me the roots which steady me and wings with which to fly. Between
them, they have created such a haven that no matter where I go “ there’s
no place like home” .

###### Contents

-    1 Over The Rainbow
    -    1.1 The Rainbow
    -    1.2 um … M?
    -    1.3 aheM!
    -    1.4 Building Blocks
    -    1.5 Landmarks
-    2 The Yellow Brick Road
    -    2.1 The Rule of the Harmonic Functions
    -    2.2 The Cycles we Turn To
    -    2.3 Killing (some) Spinors
    -    2.4 Pushing the Boundaries
    -    2.5 The Kingdom is larger than it seems..
    -    2.6 Charging forth.
-    3 The Emerald City
    -    3.1 The Gate-Keeper
    -    3.2 An Audience with the Wizard
    -    3.3 The Great and Powerful Oz has Spoken!!
    -    3.4 Lifting the curtain.
-    4 The Ruby Slippers
    -    4.1 Click the Heels …
    -    4.2 Count to Three….
    -    4.3 … and You’re Home!

## Chapter 1 Over The Rainbow

Anyone stumbling onto M-Theory by chance would experience an
overwhelming feeling that they are certainly ’not in Kansas anymore’. It
takes some getting used to, the idea that we live in 11 dimensions; I
suspect it has a lot to do with a slight resentment that all our lives,
so much has been going on that we were unaware of, but I’ll leave that
analysis for my dissertation in Psychology! For now, the point is to
realise that while it might seem a little overpowering initially, when
Munchkins in colourful costumes jump at you from all angles, ’Over the
Rainbow’ is a wonderful place to be.

### 1.1 The Rainbow

String theories have been around long enough that we are now more or
less used to them. They are beautiful, but to the despair of many a
string theorist a decade ago, there are almost as many consistent
theories as colours in the rainbow! The theories looked lovely and were
enjoyed for their ’decorative’ appeal but for a while it seemed that the
promise of unification which had resulted in so much excitement was not
a promise that would be kept.

Hope dawned anew in the mid-nineties when dualities were discovered and
it was found that the string theories merely appear to be different but
in fact are all linked! We can move around from one to the other in a
continuous circle and no one theory is any more fundamental than the
rest. So it was conjectured that perhaps there is something deeper,
something which draws all the string theories into its folds and unifies
them. This something was given the name M-Theory [ 1 ] .

In the history of string theory, we stand now at the moment of the
prism; all evidence points to the fact that the rainbow of string
theories results from a single ray of light which is diffracted into the
multi-coloured richness we see by the prism we unwittingly put in its
path. However, for the time being, the white light of M-Theory is so
bright that we are almost blinded. It will take a while before our eyes
get accustomed to the light and we can see our way clearly in this new
land over the rainbow.

### 1.2 um … M?

Irreducible representations of a SUSY algebra dictate the possible
particle content of the corresponding supersymmetric field theory.
States in massless irreducible representations are labelled by helicity.
Using the SUSY generators, we can define fermionic creation and
annihilation operators which raise or lower helicity. Given the number
of supersymmetry generators @xmath in the algebra and the maximal
helicity @xmath we want in a particular theory, we can then work out its
possible particle content.

Supergravity [ 2 ] is a theory of massless particles with helicity
@xmath . Maximally extended supergravity in 4 dimensions has @xmath
supersymmetry generators. Since these generators are Majorana spinors,
they have 4 components (supercharges) each which means that the maximum
number of supercharges in a supergravity theory is 32. It takes all
these supercharges to form a single 11-dimensional Majorana spinor.
Consequently, @xmath is the highest dimension in which a supergravity
theory can exist.

11-d Supergravity

The particle content of 11-dimensional supergravity [ 3 ] can be
obtained by studying irreducible representations of the algebra:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Majorana spinor, @xmath is the momentum operator and
the @xmath are central charges. We find that the spectrum contains a
graviton @xmath , a rank three anti-symmetric tensor @xmath and a
gravitino @xmath . The existence of all these fields can be intuitively
justified: the graviton is needed for invariance under local coordinate
transformations and the gravitino is needed for invariance under local
supersymmetric transformations. However, the gravitino has 128 fermionic
degrees of freedom whereas the graviton has only 44 bosonic degrees of
freedom, so an additional 84 bosonic degrees of freedom are needed to
make the counting come out right ¹ ¹ 1 All the counting of the degrees
of freedom is done on shell – these are provided by the 3 form @xmath .

Just as a point particle is an electric source for a gauge field (also
known as a one-form) @xmath through the coupling @xmath , a @xmath
-brane is an electric source for a @xmath -form @xmath through the
coupling:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the charge of the @xmath -brane under the @xmath -form.
Moreover, a @xmath -brane is also a magnetic source for the @xmath -form
whose field strength is the Hodge dual in D dimensions of the @xmath
-form @xmath

We can hence see that the three-form @xmath in 11 dimensions couples
electrically to a two-brane and magnetically to a five-brane.
Accordingly, 11-dimensional supergravity has two types of branes, which
are known as the M2-brane (or membrane) and the M5-brane or fivebrane.

Dimensional Reduction

Now consider what happens when the @xmath coordinate is a circle of
radius R. Since @xmath is compact, we can Fourier expand 11-dimensional
fields as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each field @xmath in 11 dimensions leads to an infinite tower of states
@xmath in 10 dimensions, with masses that go like @xmath . This can be
seen by writing out the Klein-Gordon equation for the scalar field
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

At low energies or large distance scales, we do not see the eleventh
direction. From our ten-dimensional point of view, the momentum in this
@xmath direction hence seems like a mass. In the @xmath limit where the
circle shrinks, all the states @xmath for @xmath become infinitely
massive so we are left with a ten dimensional theory in which only the
massless zero mode @xmath survives.

Concentrating on just the bosonic fields, we find:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The 11-dimensional metric gives rise to a metric @xmath , a gauge field
@xmath and a dilaton @xmath in ten dimensions, whereas the 3-form in
eleven dimensions reduces to a 2-form @xmath and a 3-form @xmath in ten
dimensions.

IIA Supergravity

In ten dimensions, we can arrange 32 supercharges to form two
Majorana-Weyl spinors. If these spinors have the same chirality we get
IIB supergravity and if they have opposite chiralities, we end up with
IIA supergravity. The particle content of IIA supergravity can be
obtained by looking at irreducible representations of the following
algebra:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The bosonic fields in this theory are a dilaton @xmath , a metric @xmath
a NS-NS 2-form @xmath , and R-R one and three forms, @xmath and @xmath .
Notice that this is precisely the spectrum obtained in the @xmath limit
of dimensional reduction of 11-dimensional supergravity on a circle.

### 1.3 aheM!

We have seen that IIA supergravity is a supersymmetric field theory in
its own right. However, it can also be obtained as the low energy
effective action of Type IIA string theory! The @xmath or low energy
limit is a consistent truncation of string theory in which all massive
states become infinitely massive (since @xmath ) and hence decouple,
leaving behind only massless fields. The massless spectrum of IIA string
theory coincides exactly with the field content of IIA supergravity.

Recall from the previous section that IIA supergravity can be obtained
from dimensional reduction of 11-dimensional supergravity compactified
on a circle. More precisely, we have the following expression:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Once again @xmath denotes the direction which has been compactified and
@xmath is the dilaton. It can immediately be seen from the metric that
the radius R of the circular direction @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used the fact that the dilaton is related to the string
coupling constant as @xmath . Hence, small R corresponds to weak string
coupling and large R to strong coupling.

Putting all these facts together, we are lead to postulate the existence
of a theory which would fill the missing corner in this rectangle of
relations – we call this M-Theory!

Though we do not know yet what this theory is, we can deduce from the
above discussion what it reduces to in certain limits. The low energy
limit of M-Theory is 11d supergravity and the small radius limit of
M-Theory compactified on @xmath is IIA string theory! This is sometimes
turned around and stated as follows: The strong coupling limit of IIA
approaches a Lorentz invariant theory in 11 dimensions (M-Theory), whose
low energy limit is 11d supergravity.

Branes descending to IIA

We can have two types of M-branes, those transverse to @xmath and those
wrapped on it. An M @xmath -brane wrapped on the circle ’loses’ a
worldvolume direction when the circle is shrunk ( @xmath ) and has only
@xmath spatial directions remaining when it arrives in IIA. On the other
hand, the spatial extension of an M-brane transverse to the circle will
not be affected by the @xmath limit; such a brane will continue to have
a @xmath dimensional world-volume in IIA.

An M5-brane wrapped on the M-theory circle thus appears as a D4-brane in
Type IIA, whereas an M2-brane wrapped on the circle would become a
fundamental string. M5 and M2-branes transverse to the @xmath reduce to
NS5 and D2 branes respectively in IIA string theory [ 4 ] .

Supergravity as a detective.

In what follows we will be dealing exclusively with BPS states as
solutions of 11-dimensional supergravity. The term BPS refers to the
fact that these states saturate a bound which relates their mass to
their charge @xmath . Charge conservation prevents the decay of the
least massive state with charge Q; it is obvious that the least massive
state is the one which saturates the bound! It is also useful to note
that supersymmetric states are automatically BPS.

The wonderful thing about BPS states is that since they are stable, they
are expected to survive the perilous passage from supergravity to the
full quantum theory of which the supergravity is just a low energy
limit. In other words, supersymmetric M-brane configurations are present
no matter how where we slide along the energy scale in 11 dimensions,
moving from the all encompassing M-Theory to a small sector therein.
Since this small sector, supergravity, is currently the only handle we
have on M-Theory, we study M-branes in this context and hope that the
clues we find will help us build a picture of the elusive M-Theory.

### 1.4 Building Blocks

Flat M2-branes and M5-branes are supersymmetric objects in M-Theory and
can in fact be thought of as building blocks for the BPS spectrum since
a large number of supersymmetric states can be constructed from them [ 5
] .

BPS states arise for example, when flat M-branes are wrapped on
supersymmetric cycles, so-called because branes wrapped on them preserve
some spacetime supersymmetry. There are various other ways in which flat
branes can be combined to create supersymmetric configurations; a little
later on, we will discuss the rule which dictates how these branes must
be placed such that the resulting set-up is BPS.

We start by reviewing a few basic facts about M-branes. In the
expressions which follow, @xmath denotes coordinates tangent to the
brane, @xmath is used to denote transverse coordinates and @xmath is the
radial coordinate in this transverse space.

The M5-brane:

A flat M5-brane with worldvolume @xmath is a half-BPS object which
preserves 16 real supersymmetries corresponding to the components of a
spinor @xmath which satisfies the condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

When this brane is placed in a flat background, the geometry is modified
and the resulting spacetime is described by the following metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the four-form field strength

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the supergravity three-form.

Together, these equations ( 1.10 ) and ( 1.11 ) specify the full bosonic
content of the supergravity solution for the M5-brane.

The M2-brane:

A flat M2-brane spanning directions @xmath is also a half-BPS object.
Preserved spacetime supersymmetries correspond to the 16 components of a
spinor @xmath which survive the following projection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Like the M5 brane discussed above, the M2 brane is also a charged
massive object which warps the flat space-time in which it is placed.
The bosonic fields in the M2-brane supergravity solution are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now pause for a minute to discuss certain features of the landscape
which will guide us later when we try to navigate the supergravity
solutions of more complicated brane configurations.

Construction Site Rules

One way of generating BPS states from the flat M-branes described above
is to construct configurations of intersecting branes. In order for two
M-branes to have a dynamic intersection, there must exist a worldvolume
field to which this intersection can couple, either electrically or
magnetically.

Consider a @xmath -brane which has a @xmath -dimensional intersection
with another @xmath -brane. From the point of view of the worldvolume,
this intersection must couple to a @xmath -form in order to be a
dynamical object in the @xmath dimensional theory.

All @xmath -branes contain scalar fields @xmath which describe their
transverse motion. The 1-form field strength of these scalars @xmath is
the Hodge dual (on the worldvolume) of the @xmath -form field strength
@xmath of a @xmath form gauge field @xmath , i.e

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the gauge field @xmath couples to an object with @xmath spatial
directions, we see that a @xmath -brane can have a @xmath dimensional
dynamical self intersection [ 6 ] .

This rule can be derived also using the BPS @xmath no-force argument.
Orienting branes of the same type so that they exert no force on each
other, as must be the case for stable supersymmetric configurations (in
the absence of world-volume fields) it is found that each pair of branes
must share @xmath spatial directions.

Intersecting Branes

BPS states can thus be built from multiple M-branes if these are
oriented such that each pair of M @xmath -branes has a @xmath
-dimensional spatial intersection. Killing spinors of the resulting
intersecting brane system are those which survive the projection
conditions imposed by each of its flat M-brane constituents [ 5 ] .

Consider for example a system of multiple M2-branes. In order to obey
the self intersection rule, these membranes must be oriented such that
no two membranes share any spatial directions. This criterion is
satisfied by, for example, a system of four M2-branes with worldvolumes
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The Killing spinors of this
configuration are proportional to a constant spinor @xmath obeying the
following constraints:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since all the Gamma matrices ² ² 2 By Gamma matrices I mean the @xmath
etc appearing in the above expression here commute, they are
simultaneously diagonalisable and we can proceed to search for
eigenstates of the system.

To begin with, notice that every Gamma matrix above squares to one so
all the eigenvalues must be either 1 or -1. Since the trace of a matrix
is the sum of its eigenvalues, we know that each Gamma matrix has an
equal number of @xmath 1 eigenvalues, as all of the above matrices are
traceless. Using these matrices we can construct projection operators ³
³ 3 It is obvious that @xmath and @xmath are projection operators as
they obey

@xmath

for each Gamma matrix @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Acting @xmath on a spinor @xmath , we see that components for which the
@xmath eigenvalue is -1 are projected out and the ones which survive
must have eigenvalue +1; thus the oft-quoted statement that Gamma
matrices (which square to one and are traceless) project out exactly
half the spinors. Acting now a second projection operator @xmath ,
corresponding to another one of the Gamma matrices, we find the
following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the fact that the products of the Gamma matrices are also
traceless and square to one, we know that the eigenvalues of @xmath are
also +1 and -1, in equal numbers. We now have the following 4 options
corresponding to the possible eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath :

-    Both eigenvalues are -1 @xmath The spinor is projected out.

-    The eigenvalues are +1 and -1 (or -1 and +1) respectively
    @xmath Again, the spinor is projected out.

-    Both eigenvalues are +1 @xmath The spinor survives.

Hence, only 1/4 of the spinors survive the combined projections due to
two Gamma matrices.

Extending this construction, it is easy to see that for a set of @xmath
independent ⁴ ⁴ 4 By which we mean that each matrix squares to one, as
do products of the matrices; each matrix is traceless, as are the
product matrices, and further all matrices in the set commute Gamma
matrices the corresponding projection operators will project out an
independent half of the supercharges, leaving behind @xmath
supersymmetry.

Applying this to the intersecting membrane configuration described above
we see that the four projections imposed together leave behind only two
supercharges, or equally, the brane configuration preserves @xmath
supersymmetry.

When Wrappings Become Intersections..

A system of self-intersecting M @xmath -branes corresponds to the
singular limit of a single M @xmath -brane wrapping a particular kind of
smooth cycle. The cycle in question must be described by embedding
functions that factorise. Each of the factors then gives the
world-volume of a constituent brane.

In order to clarify this somewhat complicated statement, consider the
following simple example of a membrane wrapped on a holomorphic curve.
Take this curve to be @xmath in @xmath where @xmath is a constant. In
the limiting case when @xmath = 0 the curve becomes singular and the
function @xmath obviously factorises to describe a system of two
membranes spanning the @xmath and @xmath -planes respectively and
intersecting only at a point.

In general, a complex structure can be defined on the relative
transverse directions (those which are common to at least one but not
all of the constituents) of a system of intersecting branes. The
intersecting brane configuration then describes the singular limit of an
M-brane wrapping a smooth cycle embedded in this complex subspace of
spacetime. Due to the @xmath self intersection rule, a system of @xmath
orthogonally intersecting membranes has a relative transverse space
@xmath .

Since preserved supersymmetries should be invariant under changes of the
constant @xmath in the holomorphic function @xmath , the Killing spinors
of the wrapped brane configuration ( @xmath ) are the same as those for
a system of @xmath orthogonal membranes (the @xmath limit) intersecting
according to the @xmath rule.

### 1.5 Landmarks

The Munchkins have now brought you to the end of their domain. To get to
your destination though, you’ll just have to ’Follow the Yellow Brick
Road’. However, during your long walk, it might be useful to keep in
mind some of the things you have learnt in this new land Over The
Rainbow

On the world-volume of a flat M-brane, we would expect to have Poincare
invariance. Hence, a metric describing space-time in the presence of
such a brane should not have any dependence on coordinates tangent to
the M-brane. Also, we expect the effects of the brane on spacetime to
decrease as we move away from it and furthermore, the configuration is
invariant under rotations in the transverse directions. From these
considerations of isometry alone, we can conclude that the metric
depends only on the radial coordinate in the space transverse to the
flat M-brane world-volume. Notice that this is true for both the M-brane
solutions discussed previously.

Moreover, each solution can be specified completely in terms of not just
an arbitrary but in fact a harmonic function of this radial coordinate.
Tracing the origin of this condition, we are lead to the equation of
motion for the field strength @xmath . Writing this out in component
form, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the function H must be a solution to the flat space Laplacian. Both
these characteristics (i.e. the isometries and the role of the harmonic
function) will have interesting generalisations when we consider
supergravity solutions for non-trivial brane configurations.

## Chapter 2 The Yellow Brick Road

In the paper [ 7 ] where the Harmonic Function rule was proposed, before
even stating what the rule was, Tseytlin pointed out the assumptions
that went into it. We should bear these in mind so that we only apply
the rule to the configurations it was designed to describe in the first
place. For starters,

-    The harmonic function rule can be used only to construct
    supergravity solutions for intersecting @xmath -brane systems which
    are smeared along the relative transverse directions (those which
    are tangent to atleast one but not all of the constituent branes).
    As a result, the metric is then independent of these coordinates and
    is a function only of the overall transverse directions, which are
    not tangent to the world-volume of any brane in the system.

It is mentioned in passing that a class of more general solutions is
expected to exist, such that each constituent brane has a different
transverse space. As we will see later on, these are the cases covered
by the Fayyazuddin-Smith metric ansatz!

-    Secondly, since these supergravity solutions are governed by
    harmonic functions of the radial coordinate in the transverse space,
    this (overall) transverse space must be at least three dimensional
    if the harmonic functions are to decay at infinity.

This excludes from the present consideration certain intersecting
M-brane systems which are allowed by the @xmath self-intersection rule [
6 ] . As will later be seen, these missing configurations are
encompassed by the Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz.

-    Lastly, it is useful also to remember that the only configurations
    to which the rule is expected to be applicable are those for which
    the Chern-Simons contribution to the equation of motion for the
    four-form vanishes, i.e @xmath

Bosonic backgrounds constructed by combining the individual supergravity
solutions of constituent branes can still be solutions to the equations
of motion of D=11 supergravity. The basic observation is that for brane
bound states with zero binding energy, it is possible to assign an
independent harmonic function to each constituent intersecting brane.
The argument for this is sketched below.

A single brane supergravity solution can be expressed completely in
terms of one harmonic function. For an extremal (no binding energy) BPS
configuration of N branes, there is no force between the constituents
and hence no obstruction to moving one of the branes far apart from the
others. When a brane is moved sufficiently far apart from the rest,
their effects on it are negligible and it is to all intents and purposes
free. Fields near it should thus approximate the fields in the
supergravity solution of a single brane. Since any or all N of the
branes can arbitrarily be moved back and forth at no cost to the energy,
we would expect the solution describing a configuration of N branes to
be parameterized by N independent harmonic functions.

### 2.1 The Rule of the Harmonic Functions

In the presence of an intersecting M-brane configuration, the @xmath
dimensional spacetime naturally ’splits up’ into three seperate parts.
The directions common to all M-branes are referred to as the common
tangent directions . Tangent space indices here will be denoted by
@xmath , and curved space indices by @xmath . In the wrapped brane
picture, these are the worldvolume directions which are left flat. The
supersymmetric cycle which the M-brane wraps is embedded in to the
subspace spanned by the relative transverse directions , so called as
they are tangent to at least one but not all of the constituent branes.
We define complex coordinates on this space where flat and curved
indices are denoted by @xmath , and @xmath respectively. Finally there
are the overall transverse directions which span the space transverse to
all constituent branes in the intersecting brane system; in the wrapped
brane picture, these are the directions which are transverse to both the
brane worldvolume and the embedding space.

#### It is Decreed @xmath

As mentioned above, the harmonic function rule gives a recipe for
’superposing’ the individual bosonic fields in the supergravity
solutions of each of the component branes in an intersecting brane
system.

-    The Metric
    Assigning a harmonic function @xmath to each constituent M-brane, we
    proceed to construct the metric for a multi-brane configuration by
    taking our cue from the metric for a single brane. In analogy to
    that case, directions tangent to the @xmath M5-brane are multiplied
    by a factor of @xmath whereas directions transverse to it are
    multiplied by @xmath .

    Similarly, a metric describing the background created by a system of
    intersecting membranes, can be constructed by ensuring that the
    coordinates along the worldvolume of the @xmath M2-brane carry a
    factor of @xmath while transverse coordinates are multiplied by
    @xmath .

-    The Field Strength

    Since the field strength components due to each constituent M-brane
    carry different indices, the field strength of the intersecting
    brane configuration can be obtained merely by adding the individual
    field strengths corresponding to each M-brane.

This rule is made clear by its application to the following systems.

#### Two Membranes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assigning a factor of @xmath to the first membrane and @xmath to the
second, we use the harmonic function rule to write down the metric and
field strength. The metric is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the non-vanishing components of the field strength are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions only of @xmath for @xmath .

#### Three Membranes

Introducing now a third membrane, characterized by the harmonic function
@xmath , we have the following configuration

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and field strength,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of the transverse
directions @xmath where @xmath

#### Two Fivebranes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The harmonic function rule dictates the following metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and field strength components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath and @xmath depend only on the overall transverse
directions labelled by @xmath which takes values @xmath

#### Three Fivebranes

Adding now a third M5-brane in the following manner:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that spacetime is described by the metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and field strength components are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The harmonic functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath depend on @xmath where
@xmath .

### Exiled!

Under the Rule of the Harmonic Functions, the configurations described
below are banished on the charge that they do not have a sufficient
number of overall transverse directions. The minimum number of
transverse directions required for a law abiding brane configuration
living under the Harmonic Function rule is three. At least three overall
transverse directions are needed in order for the functions @xmath to be
solutions of the flat Laplacian in this subspace with the right
behaviour at infinity and thus be deserving of the title ’Harmonic’
functions.

Two Transverse Directions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

One Transverse Direction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

No Transverse Directions!

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 The Cycles we Turn To

Supersymmetric cycles have the defining property that branes wrapping
them preserve some supersymmetry. Holomorphic cycles are known to be
supersymmetric; in fact being the simplest examples of supersymmetric
cycles they are the ones considered most often. All the configurations
studied in this thesis describe M-branes wrapping holomorphic cycles, so
we now take a small detour and see how holomorphicity leads to
supersymmetry and study the conditions it imposes on the surviving
supercharges.

A wrapped @xmath -brane whose embedding into spacetime is described by
@xmath is said to be supersymmetric only if the background it gives rise
to admits at least one Killing spinor @xmath such that [ 8 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the completely anti-symmetrized product of @xmath eleven
dimensional @xmath matrices, @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
Levi-Civita symbol and @xmath denotes the determinant of the induced
metric @xmath on the brane.

For a brane embedded in a complex space with Hermitean metric @xmath ,
the induced metric on the worldvolume is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the brane is holomorphically embedded, the supersymmetric cycle it
wraps must be even-dimensional; we denote its dimension by @xmath .
Defining now a complex structure on this cycle which is compatible with
the complex structure in spacetime, the induced metric can be written in
the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hermiticity of the embedding space metric @xmath , will imply that the
induced metric on the worldvolume is Hermitean as well; as such @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Killing spinor equation ( 2.15 ) now takes the form [ 16 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Inserting the expression for @xmath from ( 2.18 ), we can read off the
projection conditions on the Killing spinor associated with an M-brane
wrapping the given @xmath -dimensional holomorphic cycle.

In particular, for a two-cycle, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for a four-cycle,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both these conditions will be used later on when we discuss holomorphic
embeddings of M-branes.

The Determinant of a Hermitean Metric. Assume that the metric @xmath in
an @xmath dimensional complex space is Hermitean. Hermiticity implies
that @xmath . Thus, in the @xmath dimensional matrix which would
conventionally be used to represent the metric, there are only @xmath
entries which are non-zero and none of these are along the diagonal.
Using then the fact that a metric must be symmetric, we find that the
degrees of freedom are reduced by a further half, leaving only @xmath
entries to determine the metric completely. These can be arranged into
an @xmath matrix which specifies the Hermitean metric. Consider a simple
example to illustrate this point: Let @xmath be the metric in a @xmath
real dimensional space.

@xmath

If a complex structure is defined on this space, the anti-symmetric
tensor @xmath splits up into a product of two tensors, with holomorphic
and anti-holomorphic indices as follows:

@xmath

If this complex structure is such that the resulting metric is
hermitean, the determinant can be written as

@xmath

where

@xmath

### 2.3 Killing (some) Spinors

The amount of supersymmetry preserved by a p-brane with worldvolume
@xmath is given by the number of spinors which satisfy ( 2.15 ).

Because we are dealing with holomorphic cycles, and a complex structure
has been defined on the embedding space, it makes sense to re-write the
Clifford algebra in complex coordinates as well. This is in fact a very
useful thing to do, as it turns out that the flat space Clifford algebra
when expressed in complex coordinates resembles the algebra of fermionic
creation and annihilation operators! We can thus express spinors on a
complex manifold as states in a Fock space [ 9 ] . Defining @xmath
matrices for a complex coordinate @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the Clifford algebra in @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Declaring @xmath to be creation operators and @xmath to be annihilation
operators, it is now clear that a Fock space can be generated by acting
the creation operators on a vacuum. Because there are @xmath creation
operators, each state in the Fock space is labelled by @xmath integers
taking values 0 or 1 which correspond to its fermionic occupation
numbers.

We illustrate the utility of this construction by considering in detail
an M5-brane wrapping a two-cycle in @xmath . Let the holomorphic
coordinates in @xmath be @xmath . The Clifford algebra can then be
explicitly written out as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

all other anti-commutators are zero. Since the Fock vacuum is the state
where none of the oscillators are excited it is denoted by @xmath and
the highest weight state where all oscillators are excited is denoted by
@xmath . Hence we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where z can take values @xmath . A generic spinor @xmath in @xmath can
then be decomposed in terms of Fock space states as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

An eleven dimensional spinor @xmath can be written as a sum of terms of
the form @xmath where @xmath is a four-dimensional spinor and @xmath are
the fermionic occupation numbers of the state. Expressing spinors in
this way and writing down the supersymmetry preservation conditions in
terms of @xmath , it becomes very easy to figure out the Killing
spinors.

Consider an M5-brane wrapping a two-cycle in @xmath . From ( 2.15 ) we
see that supersymmetry is preserved only if solutions can be found to
the equation [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the time being, we restrict ourselves to the implications of the
above condition on @xmath alone. We then find the following constraints:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Those which were Killed, Live! We pause for a minute to see what these
constraints say about the spinor. Take a simple constraint, say @xmath .
Since @xmath is a creation operator, it acts on @xmath such that all
states with @xmath are taken to @xmath but states which already had
@xmath are killed. Writing this out we find

@xmath

Since all Fock space states are independent, this implies that @xmath .
The spinor @xmath can now only have the components @xmath and @xmath
Hence, in effect what a constraint of the type @xmath does is to kill
the spinors which survive the action of @xmath and keep the spinors
which were eliminated!

Hence ( 2.28 ) eliminates all states which have the following occupation
numbers.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only components of @xmath which survive this treatment are @xmath
and @xmath . Recall that ( 2.27 ) also gives rise to constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

these constraints can be used to determine the four-dimensional
chirality of the spinors @xmath and @xmath when @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Imposing ( 2.30 ) we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### Counting

The last step is to count the number of supercharges preserved by this
configuration. As a generic spinor in 11 dimensions, @xmath starts out
life with 32 complex components: 4 complex components come from the
Dirac spinor @xmath and, as we have seen explicitly, 8 components come
from @xmath . After the constraints ( 2.28 ) are imposed, only 2 of
these 8 components survive, so the spinor @xmath is left with @xmath
complex degrees of freedom. Determining the chirality of @xmath and
@xmath cuts the degrees of freedom down by a further half. Finally we
impose the Majorana condition, which essentially states that @xmath can
be completely determined by @xmath and thus has only the 4 real degrees
of freedom of this state.

An M5-brane wrapping a holomorphic two-cycle in @xmath hence preserves 4
of the 32 possible supercharges, or @xmath of the total spacetime
supersymmetry.

### 2.4 Pushing the Boundaries

Now that we have a rule which allows us to contruct supergravity
solutions for a certain class of BPS bound states of branes, we can try
to extend the scope of this rule to a wider class of supersymmetric
configurations. A natural step in this direction would be to make the
harmonic functions depend on coordinates in the relative transverse
space so that they may describe branes which are not smeared in this
subspace. However, even if we start from this assumption it turns out
that at least one of the branes becomes delocalized because of the
translational invariance which results from smearing.

To illustrate this point consider the simplest possible example, that of
2 M2-branes, which span worldvolumes @xmath and @xmath intersecting at a
point, and are characterized by functions @xmath and @xmath
respectively. @xmath and @xmath are now allowed to depend on all spatial
coordinates, in contrast to what was acceptable previously for the
harmonic function rule.

If the membrane spanning @xmath is localized then we should have
translational invariance on its world-volume implying that the membrane
with worldvolume @xmath cannot be localized in @xmath or @xmath and must
instead be smeared. So, as far as this M2-brane is concerned, life is
just as it was previously under the harmonic function rule; @xmath still
depends only on the overall transverse directions @xmath : Moreover,
since it also obeys the flat space Laplace equation in these directions,
@xmath is a Harmonic function of the radial coordinate in this space.

However, since the M2-brane with worldvolume @xmath is localised, the
function @xmath characterising it obeys a different equation. Recall
that the origin of the Harmonic function condition was the equation of
motion for the four-form @xmath . Applying this to the case at hand, we
now find that @xmath obeys the curved space Laplace equation [ 17 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is hence called a generalised harmonic function

### 2.5 The Kingdom is larger than it seems..

The Harmonic Functions rule very successfully in their own domain, but
they never claimed to exercise absolute control over the entire kingdom
of supergravity solutions. Branes smeared over the relative transverse
directions are loyal subjects, (as long as they have three or more
overall transverse directions) but, as we have seen in the previous
section, localised intersections defy the Rule and consequently must be
described by a wider class of spacetimes.

In an attempt to address this problem, Fayyazuddin and Smith [ 13 ] came
up with a metric ansatz whose form is dictated by the isometries of the
background in the presence of a wrapped brane configuration,(which could
have an intersecting brane system as its singular limit).

The spacetimes they considered describe M-branes wrapping holomorphic
cycles so a complex structure has been described on the embedding space
in order to make holomorphicity transparent. If the supersymmetric cycle
is embedded into an @xmath dimensional subspace, then we would expect
the remaining directions of spacetime @xmath , (i.e those transverse to
the flat worldvolume directions @xmath and also to the embedding space),
to be rotationally invariant. Rotational invariance in @xmath implies
that the metric is diagonal in this subspace and that the undetermined
functions in the metric ansatz depend only on the radial coordinate
@xmath .

Isometries, however, fail to guide us when it comes to dictating the
form of the Hermitean metric @xmath in the complex space where the
holomorphic cycle is embedded. All we can say is about the Hermitean
metric is that that it too, along with @xmath and @xmath , must be
independent of @xmath since we would Lorentz symmetry to be preserved
along the un-wrapped directions of the M-brane worldvolume. This Lorentz
symmetry also implies that the metric is diagonal in @xmath .

A metric incorporating the above symmetries takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now describe some of its key features.

-    Comparing this metric to that of a flat M-brane, we see one major
    difference. The metric for a wrapped brane too, depends only on the
    radial coordinate @xmath in the space transverse to the brane but
    because of the non-trivial worldvolume of this brane the transverse
    space is not as simple to define as it was earlier. We know that the
    transverse space now is some combination of what we call the
    relative transverse (or embedding space) directions and the overall
    transverse directions, but a more exact statement is hard to make,
    unless we know explicitly the geometry of the worldvolume.

    Depending on how the supersymmetric cycle lies in the relative
    transverse/embedding manifold, it could ofcourse happen that @xmath
    does not depend on all the coordinates in this space. But in order
    to cover all possible cases and for the purposes of making a general
    ansatz, we assume @xmath is a function of all but the overall common
    directions.

-    The Hermitean metric in the above ansatz will have, in general, off
    diagonal components as well. As will be shown later in an explicit
    example, it is these components of the metric which allow us to move
    from a supergravity solution with a smeared intersection to one
    which has a localised intersection. It also allows us to incorporate
    configurations of branes intersecting at angles – a class of systems
    not encompassed by the harmonic function rule

-    Allowing @xmath to depend on the embedding space coordinates has
    another implication also. For supergravity solutions constructed via
    the harmonic function rule, the field strength @xmath consisted only
    of components obtained from the gauge potential by acting @xmath in
    the overall transverse directions, as these were the only ones on
    which the metric was allowed to depend.

    Using the Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz instead, where the fields are
    allowed to depend on the relative transverse directions as well, we
    can now apply the exterior derivative in these transverse directions
    also, leading to previously unknown components for the field
    strength!

-    Moreover, by allowing @xmath to depend on the embedding space
    coordinates, we get rid of the objection which the harmonic function
    rule levelled at brane configurations with less than three overall
    transverse directions. Such configurations too, are welcomed into
    the fold of this new ansatz.

New lands however, can not be added to the kingdom of supergravity
solutions without paying a price. The battle we must wage now is against
non-linear differential equations. Earlier, while discussing the flat
M-brane solutions, we pointed out that the functions H were harmonic due
to the fact that equations of motion for the four-form field strength
@xmath reduced to the flat space Laplace equation. With the more
complicated metric we have now, this is no longer the case. The
undetermined functions in the metric ansatz are thus harmonic no longer,
and obey a more complicated differential equation, which will in
practise be very difficult to solve.

### New Frontiers

The fact that a brane configuration preserves supersymmetry implies that
the supersymmetric variation of the gravitino @xmath vanishes in this
background if the variation parameter is a Killing spinor. If we require
this to be true for a given metric, we find a set of conditions relating
the metric to components of the field strength of the supergravity
three-form. If the resulting metric and four-form also obey the
contraints @xmath and @xmath then Einstein’s equations are guaranteed to
be satisfied and we have determined the bosonic components of a BPS
solution to 11-dimensional supergravity.

Denoting flat (tangent space) indices in 11-dimensional spacetime by
@xmath and curved indices by @xmath , the bosonic part of the action for
11d supergravity can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the supersymmetric variation of the gravitino is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the logic outlined in the previous section, we begin our
search for solutions of this theory by writing down an ansatz for the
space-time metric following Fayyazuddin and Smith.

We then enforce supersymmetry preservation by setting @xmath . This
expression involves components of the spin connection which can be
calculated from the metric ansatz using the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath can been expressed as a sum of Fock space states, the
condition @xmath amounts to a sum of linearly independent constraints
(one arising from every Fock state), each of which must be put to zero
seperately. This leads to a set of relations between various components
of the field strength and the metric.

The supergravity solution is obtained [ 18 ] when these conditions are
supplemented by the equations of motion and Bianchi identity for the
four-form field strength @xmath and @xmath . This is the method followed
in the preceeding section, to find the bosonic solutions of
11-dimensional supergravity for all M-branes wrapping holomorphic curves
such that @xmath .

### 2.6 Charging forth.

#### Membranes

The Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz for a metric describing the supergravity
background created by an M2-brane wrapping a holomorphic curve in @xmath
is [ 15 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are used to denote the @xmath complex coordinates, @xmath
span the remaining @xmath transverse directions and a factor of @xmath
is pulled out of the Hermitean metric for later convenience.

A Hermitean two-form @xmath associated with the metric is defined such
that @xmath . Supersymmetry preservation imposes a constraint on the
Hermitean metric @xmath and in addition states that ¹ ¹ 1 As pointed out
in [ 15 ] , this determines H only up to a rescaling by an arbitrary
holomorphic function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Further, a set of relations between components of the
metric and field strength is obtained. These can be solved for the
non-zero components of the four-form.

Killing spinors of this configuration being Majorana can be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if C is the charge conjugation matrix. Hence, the spinor @xmath is all
that is needed to completely specify @xmath

The Bianchi indentiy @xmath is automatically satisfied, but the equation
of motion @xmath must be imposed by hand. This leads to a complicated
non-linear differential equation involving @xmath and H which must be
satisfied by any supergravity solution.

Having thus discussed the structure of the supergravity solutions for
membranes wrapping holomorphic two-cycles in manifolds of various
dimension, we proceed to present the results.

In some cases, when the holomorphic functions describing the embedding
of the manifold are factorizable, the wrapped brane configuration has an
intersecting brane interpretation when the curve becomes singular. Along
with the components of the solution described above, we will also
present in our analysis of each configuration [ 15 ] , [ 19 ] , the
intersecting brane system which would arise in the singular limit of
this curve, if indeed such a singular limit exists.

#### M2 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Four-Form Field Strength

The non-zero components of the four-form field strength are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and their complex conjugates.

Killing Spinors

The eight Killing spinors of this configuration are specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that @xmath is a constant spinor obeying the projection condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### M2 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Four-Form Field Strength

The following expressions, together with their complex conjugates give
the non-zero components of the field strength.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Killing Spinors

The four Killing spinors of this configuration are specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant spinor such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### M2 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Since this is a configuration which has only two overall transverse
directions, note that its supergravity solution could not be obtained
using the harmonic function rule.

Metric Constraint

Supersymmetry requires the metric to obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Four-Form Field Strength

The field strength components are the same as the previous case. They
are given by the following expressions and their complex conjugates.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Killing Spinors

The two Killing spinors are specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant spinor @xmath obeys the projection conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### M2 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

This is the maximal dimensional complex manifold we can have, since it
now spans all ten spatial directions. There is hence no @xmath and
consequently no @xmath component in the field strength. Moreover, there
is no @xmath , so @xmath is defined simply as @xmath

The absence of any overall transverse directions also means that the
supergravity solution of this configuration has no counterpart which can
be obtained via the harmonic function rule.

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Four-Form Field Strength

The only non-zero contributions come from:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its complex conjugate, @xmath .

Killing Spinors

The single Killing spinor of this configuration is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant spinor @xmath is subject to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fivebranes

We now turn to supergravity solutions describing fivebranes wrapped on
holomorphic curves. The relevant ansatz for the spacetime metric is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath labels the flat coordinates of the fivebrane worldvolume,
@xmath are the holomorphic coordinates on the embedding space @xmath and
@xmath takes values in the overall transverse space.

Supersymmetry preservation has already been used here to fix the
relative coefficients @xmath and @xmath . It further dictates that,
(upto rescaling by an arbitrary holomorphic function), the function H is
related to the determinant G of the Hermitan metric in a way that
depends on the dimensions of the holomorphic curve and the complex space
into which it is embedded. The Hermitean two-form @xmath associated with
the metric in the complex subspace is defined such that @xmath .

Components of the four-form field strength can be expressed in terms of
the functions in the metric ansatz by solving a set of constraints which
arise from @xmath . Once again, the Killing spinors are Majorana and
hence of the form @xmath if C is the charge conjugation matrix. The
spinor @xmath depends on the particular configuration under study.

The non-linear differential equation involving @xmath and H now follows
from imposing the Bianchi Identity @xmath , since the four-form F
couples magnetically to the fivebranes and the roles of the equations of
motion and Bianchi Identity are consequently interchanged.

All the supergravity solutions for fivebranes wrapping holomorphic
cycles in manifolds of various dimension will be of the form outlined
above. We present the results [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] , [ 20 ]
including in addition, the intersecting brane system which arises when
the holomorphic cycle becomes singular. Note that such a limit does not
always exist.

#### M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath

Four-Form Field Strength

The non vanishing components of the supergravity four-form are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and complex conjugates.

Killing Spinors

The eight Killing spinors of this configuration are specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant spinor @xmath is subject to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath must hold.

Four-Form Field Strength

The four-form field strength is given by the expressions below, and
their complex conjugates:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Killing Spinors

The four Killing spinors of this configuration are specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant spinor @xmath obeys the projection condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Non-Kahler Metrics. A flat M5-brane can be thought of as being wrapped
on a trivial supersymmetric cycle embedded into a subspace of
11-dimensional spacetime. Take this subspace to be @xmath , spanned by
holomorphic coordinates @xmath . Two equations @xmath and @xmath are
then needed to define a holomorphic two-cycle. If these equations are
@xmath and @xmath , the two-cycle in question is simply the complex
@xmath plane. In the presence of a flat M5-brane with worldvolume @xmath
, the spacetime metric is given by:

@xmath

where

@xmath

In general, an M5-brane wrapping a Riemann surface embedded in @xmath is
expected to give rise to a metric of the form [ 14 ] :

@xmath

Comparing the two expressions and defining a re-scaled Hermitean metric
@xmath , we find

@xmath

It can trivially be seen that this metric is not Kahler; moreover since
a Kahler metric cannot be obtained even by rescaling, @xmath is not
warped Kahler either. However, the components of this blatantly
non-Kahler metric satisfy the following curious relations:

@xmath (2.80)

In terms of the Hermitean form @xmath associated with the metric, this
can be re-expressed as follows:

@xmath

#### M5 wrapping a 4-cycle in @xmath

It turns out to be convenient to define a rescaled metric in this case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Metric Constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath

Four-Form Field Strength

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Killing Spinors

This configuration has four Killing spinors specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant spinor @xmath obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intersecting Brane Limit

In the subcases for which an intersecting brane picture exists, this
would take the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Harmonic Function Rule is Safe! We now show how this new ansatz
encompasses and generalises the harmonic function rule, using the above
example to illustrate the point. The Fayyazuddin-Smith metric ansatz for
this system can be written as

@xmath

For ease of comparison, the metric dictated by the harmonic function
rule can also be written using complex coordinates on the embedding
(relative transverse) space. Defining @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , this
metric takes the form

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Comparing the two expressions, one can immediately see that

@xmath

and all other components of @xmath are zero. Since @xmath and @xmath are
only functions of the overall transverse coordinates, it follows that H
must be too, so @xmath . Substituting in ( 2.84 ), we find that this
implies @xmath and @xmath such that

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

in perfect agreement with the results obtained in ( 2.75 ). It should by
now be clear, through this explicit discussion, that the Harmonic
Function Rule is the restriction of the Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz to
cases where H is not allowed to depend on the embedding space!

## Chapter 3 The Emerald City

You might have arrived at the doors of the Emerald City, but in order to
get through the gate-keeper and set foot inside the hallowed portals,
you must know the password: calibrations.

Even if this is just another word to you right now, the reason for it
being so revered will become clear when you enter the shimmering
jewelled towers of the Emerald City; in fact once you become accquainted
with calibrations, you will wonder how you ever got along without them!

### 3.1 The Gate-Keeper

A calibration is a mathematical construction which enables us to track
down preferred (minimal) submanifolds in a given spacetime. The
minimization in question does not necessarily refer to the volume of the
submanifold; in fact it is only in purely geometric backgrounds that
this is so. As we shall soon see, when the background contains a
non-vanishing flux, calibrations pick out minimum energy submanifolds.
In general, the quantity being minimized tells us about the structure of
the ambient space-time, so essentially calibrations provide us with a
way of describing a particular background.

A useful way to discover the calibrations in a particular background [
11 ] is to use ’test branes’. The idea is similar to a test particle in
electrodynamics which is placed in an already existing electric field
merely to measure its value at a given point. In order to focus our
attention on the properties of the existing background, all possible
distractions are set to zero, i.e it is assumed that the test particle
is truly just a probe in that it gives rise to no fields of its own.
Similarly, test branes are branes which do not themselves cause any
deformations of the background in which they are placed, (i.e all such
deformations are neglected) but merely act as probes for the existing
geometry.

If a test brane is BPS, it takes on a stable shape which must by
definition, be a supersymmetric cycle in the given background. When this
background is flat space, we know what these cycles are. When the
background is a manifold of special holonomy, again we know what the
cycles are, Berger classified them for us. The problem though is to
figure out what happens when the background is one created by a charged
gravitating p-brane source! Such a background has a non-trivial flux,
and the supersymmetric cycles in these geometries have not yet been
classified. These are the cases we will attempt to study as we tour the
Emerald City.

Requiring the world-volume of a wrapped brane to be supersymmetric
determines or defines the supersymmetric cycles. In the same way,
requiring the energy of a wrapped brane to be minimal determines the
calibrations! This is like the age old chicken and egg conundrum @xmath
who knows what came first? The logic can flow either way.

#### Reduced Holonomy

In the absence of the four-form field strength, a supersymmetric
compactification of M-Theory is only possible on a manifold @xmath of
reduced holonomy. The reason for this is as follows. Supersymmetry is
only preserved if the supersymmetric variation of the gravitino
vanishes. In a background with no field strength, we can see from ( 2.37
) that setting the gravitino variation to zero is equivalent to the
statement that Killing spinors @xmath on the manifold @xmath are
covariantly constant ¹ ¹ 1 with respect to a torsion-free metric , since
[ 9 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath dim @xmath . From @xmath , it follows that @xmath is Ricci
flat. Furthermore, since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

some generators of the holonomy group @xmath annihilate the vacuum, so
the holonomy group of the manifold must be a subgroup of the maximal
SO(dim @xmath ) .

In other words, for backgrounds where there is no field strength flux,
supersymmetry preservation implies the existence of covariantly constant
spinors on the compactification manifold. These exist only if @xmath has
reduced holonomy and is Ricci flat, ensuring that Einstein’s field
equations are automatically satisfied by the internal manifold ² ² 2 A
covariantly constant spinor is always a signal for reduced holonomy, but
the converse is true for Ricci flat manifolds only .

For compactifications of string theory down to four dimensions, these
conditions imply that the manifold @xmath should be a Calabi-Yau, ie, a
3 complex dimensional Ricci flat manifolds with SU(3), rather than
SO(6), holonomy; for 4-dimensional compactifications of M-theory, we
find instead that @xmath is a seven dimensional manifold with @xmath
holonomy.

#### Introducing Calibrations

Calibrations @xmath are @xmath -forms, which enable us to classify
minimal p-dimensional submanifolds in a particular background space-time
[ 10 ] . The (standard) calibration @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath . In every homology class
there is a manifold @xmath which minimizes the volume, saturating the
above inequality. Since any other manifold @xmath in the same homology
class can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Stokes’ Theorem, we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be used to prove that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, integrating the calibration @xmath over any @xmath -dimensional
submanifold gives the volume of the minimal manifold in that particular
homology class; this minimal manifold is known as a calibrated manifold.

Since we will mostly be dealing with branes of infinite spatial extent,
their volumes will obviously be infinite as well. It thus makes more
sense to express the definition of a calibrating form as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e, the pullback of the calibrating form @xmath onto any @xmath
-dimensional manifold @xmath is less than or equal to the volume form of
this manifold.

#### Berger’s Classification.

For space-times with no background field strength, we have seen that the
compactification manifold must have special holonomy. There is a
classification, due to Berger, of the calibrations which can exist on
such manifolds.

There are several different kinds of calibrations; Kahler calibrations
and special Lagrangian calibrations which exist in any Calabi-Yau space
and exceptional calibrations which exist only in exceptional holonomy
spaces.

-    In a Calabi-Yau @xmath -fold, the @xmath -forms @xmath which are
    constructed from the Kahler form @xmath are closed and are known as
    Kahler calibrations.

-    A Calabi-Yau @xmath -fold admits a unique nowhere vanishing (
    @xmath )-form, @xmath , called the Special Lagrangian calibration.

-    In seven dimensional manifolds, there is a 3-form @xmath (and its
    dual 4-form @xmath ) which is invariant under the exceptional group
    @xmath ; these give rise to three and four dimensional calibrations
    known as the Associative and Co-associative calibrations
    respectively.

-    Similarly, in eight dimensional manifolds, there is a self dual
    4-form @xmath which is invariant under @xmath and gives rise to a
    four dimensional calibration called the Cayley calibration.

#### Branes and Calibrations

In the absence of flux, stable branes are those whose world-volumes are
minimized. Given what we have learnt about calibrations, it is obvious
that the volume form on such a brane must be a calibrated form in the
ambient spacetime!

For a membrane wrapped on a holomorphic cycle in @xmath , the volume
form decomposes into a trivial one form contribution from the time
direction and the two form associated with the Hermitean metric in the
complex emdedding space of the two-cycle. In order for the volume form
to be a calibration, it turns out that the metric on @xmath should in
fact be Kahler.

It is hence easy to see why a membrane wrapping a holomorphic two-cycle
in a Calabi-Yau space gives rise to a supersymmetric configuration.

### 3.2 An Audience with the Wizard

In the presence of a charged brane, the bosonic fields needed to specify
the background are the metric and the flux of the gauge field which
couples to the brane. Killing spinors of the brane configuration are
determined by the metric as well as the field strength and are hence no
longer covariantly constant. Since the coupling of the gauge potential
to the brane must now be taken into account, it is only natural that the
criterion for brane stability also should change. In fact it turns out
that stability requires now that the energy of the brane be minimized,
where the energy is a measure of not only the volume but also the charge
[ 12 ] .

Generalised calibrations @xmath are defined such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

So, a generalised calibration @xmath is a @xmath -form whose pullback on
to any @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is less than or equal to the
(curved space) volume form of this manifold. Note that @xmath is used to
denote the volume form in curved space, as opposed to the flat space
volume form @xmath used in the definition of a standard calibration.

It is clear from the above that a generalised calibration is not closed,
but rather is gauge equivalent to the potential @xmath under which the
@xmath brane is charged. In the trivial case where the field strength
flux vanishes, generalised calibrations reduce to the standard
calibrations @xmath discussed earlier.

Recall from our ealier discussion that a calibrated manifold i.e, one
which saturates the bound, must have minimal volume. We now proceed to
show that an analogous statement holds for generalised calibrations as
well, except that calibrated manifolds now have minimum energy. As we
will show later [ 12 ] , the energy @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We start by assuming that @xmath is a calibrated manifold and thus
saturates the calibration bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is minimal, any other generic manifold @xmath in the same
homology class can be expressed as @xmath . This implies the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the definition of generalised calibrations, we have @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the manifold @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, for the calibrated manifold the inequality is saturated, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence ( 3.13 ) reduces simply to the statement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which says that the calibrated manifold is the one which minimizes its
energy in a given holonomy class.

Having seen the way things are in the Emerald City, let us now try and
understand, as far as we can, the reasons why they are so.

#### Charged Branes

The Lagrangian density for a @xmath -brane charged under a potential
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the induced metric on the world-volume, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the pullback of the spacetime (p+1)-form gauge potential onto the
brane. In what follows, we will consider only those spacetimes for which
the component @xmath of the metric vanishes, if I is a spatial index.
Seperating the purely spatial part of the induced metric by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can express @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing now the gauge @xmath , the Lagrangian density takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the the canonical momentum @xmath is given by the expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

it follows that the Hamiltonian density @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Restricting ourselves to static configurations, we can set @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For notational convinience we now introduce the @xmath -form @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This allows us to define @xmath , the worldvolume pull-back of the
space-time gauge potential, as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we are in a position to write down the energy @xmath ,
associated with the @xmath -brane as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### Spatial Isometries

Typically, only those directions along the brane worldvolume which are
wrapped on a supersymmetric curve have a non-trivial space-time
embedding; the remaining directions are flat ³ ³ 3 In the notation
adopted here, these are the @xmath . Had its entire world-volume been
flat, the brane would be a 1/2 BPS object; wrapped branes however,
generically break more than half the supersymmetry. Since the preserved
supercharges depend on the geometry of the supersymmetric cycle, it is
the wrapped directions of the brane world-volume which play a essential
role in this analysis whereas flat directions contribute trivially.

We can choose static gauge along the flat directions of the brane’s
world-volume. Assume there are @xmath such directions, we then set
@xmath for @xmath and find that as a result, the determinant of the
induced metric on the worldspace factorises such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the restriction of the determinant of the bulk
space metric to the @xmath spatial directions which are isometries of
the system, and @xmath is the determinant of the induced metric on the
Mp-brane in directions @xmath . Also, the pullback of the gauge
potential @xmath can be expressed in static gauge as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Hence the energy of this configuration is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the infinite extent of the brane, this energy too will be
infinite. It thus makes sense to define the energy per unit @xmath
-volume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Supersymmetry Preservation

In order to be a Killing spinor, @xmath must satisfy the projection
condition [ 12 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the configuration is static, this condition takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can re-write the above condition as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath since @xmath and @xmath .

#### Establishing a bound

The obvious statement that the square of a quantity is positive definite
can be used to establish a general bound on @xmath .

Consider @xmath , acting on a generic configuration. Even if the system
is not supersymmetric, the following will obviously hold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is Hermitean and the spinor @xmath has been normalised such
that @xmath , we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inserting the expression for @xmath from ( 3.31 ), we can re-write the
above as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is the (world-space dual of the) curved space volume form,
this implies that in terms of the @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the world-space dual of @xmath , the inequality ( 3.2 ) reduces
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

But this is merely the definition of a generalised calibration, ( 3.9 )!
So ( 3.32 ) is actually a way to explicitly construct generalised
calibrations from Killing spinors!

#### Supersymmetry Algebra

The supersymmetry algebra is motivated in [ 12 ] from considerations of
@xmath -symmetry. It turns out that,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So, @xmath constitues a central extension to the superalgebra; as such,
it must be a topological term. This implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which was one of the defining statements about generalised calibrations.

### 3.3 The Great and Powerful Oz has Spoken!!

The Great Oz now convinces us of his greatness by showing us a simple
and elegant way to reproduce the results we worked so hard for, in our
trek down the Yellow Brick Road. Had we never walked that road, he
argues, we could still have reached the same conclusions, if we only had
the knowledge he has. All the supergravity solutions which we found
after a long and arduous trek, the Wizard now reproduces in the comfort
of his Emerald City quarters. The trick about to be performed will
consist of a few short steps, carried out in quick succession, which
result in the construction of a supergravity solution for any M-brane
wrapped on a holomorphic curve and will replicate the expressions
obtained from the Fayyazuddin-Smith analysis employed by us during our
Yellow Brick Road travels.

“A supergravity solution”, says the Wizard, “ consists of a metric,
which may be expressed in terms of undetermined functions, as long as we
also present the equations which these functions must satisfy and in
addition the four-form field strength of the supergravity three-form”.
He will now prove to us his unquestionable superority, he says, through
a point by point comparison of our earlier slower approach to his fast
and elegant analysis.

Recall that we started out with the Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz for a
metric, and then obtained relations between the undetermined functions
@xmath and det @xmath in the ansatz by appealing to the constraints
which arose from setting @xmath The Wizard replicates these relations as
follows:

Given the Fayyazuddin-Smith ansatz for the metric in a particular
supergravity background, the functions @xmath and @xmath can be
eliminated in favour of a single function @xmath .

-    For a membrane, @xmath and @xmath ,

-    And for a fivebrane @xmath and @xmath .

Note in both cases, the analogy with the flat brane solutions.

The relation between the determinant of the Hermitean metric and H can
be obtained using the following simple relations which also follow from
comparison with the flat brane case:

-    For a membrane on a holomorphic cycle, the determinant of the full
    11-dimensional metric is always @xmath . The determinant G of the
    Hermitean metric in a manifold of complex dimension @xmath must be
    given by @xmath in order for this to hold ⁴ ⁴ 4 Bear in mind that
    all such relations hold only upto multiplication by an arbitrary
    holomorphic function .

-    For a fivebrane wrapped on a holomorphic two-cycle, the determinant
    of the full 11-dimensional metric is @xmath . The determinant G of
    the @xmath dimensional Hermitean metric must therefore be @xmath .

-    For a fivebrane wrapped on a holomorphic four-cycle, the
    determinant of the full 11-dimensional metric is still @xmath . The
    determinant G of the @xmath dimensional Hermitean metric however is
    now @xmath .

“So that”, says the Wizard, “takes care of that. True,” he adds, “the
non-linear differential equation involving the Hermitean metric and H
will have to be written out, but this follows simply from requiring
@xmath for membranes, and @xmath for fivebranes. So, once I present you
with the expressions for components of F, my work is done.”

Once again, he reminds us, where we had to wade through many different
constraints, one for each Fock state of the Killing spinor, and solve
them simultaneously to arrive at expressions for F, the Wizard will
reproduce these in the wink of an eye. “Pay attention,” he says,
“because this is where the magic really happens”. The Wizard now claims
that components of the field strength can be calculated simply by acting
the exterior derivative on the volume form of the wrapped M-brane in
question! Noticing the awe-struck expression on our faces, the gleam in
his eye deepens and he elaborates as follows:

“It is the BPS bound,” says he, “which steps in to make matters so
simple. Since this bound is saturated by a supersymmetric brane, the
mass of such a brane must be equal to its charge. Equally, one could say
that the pull-back of the space-time gauge potential on to a
supersymmetric brane is equal to the volume form of the brane, by virtue
of the BPS condition. As you doubtless remarked during your tour of the
Emerald City, the generalised calibration corresponding to a particular
stable brane is (gauge) equivalent to the spacetime gauge potential
under which the brane in charged.

“Hence, the generalised calibration for a a stable (and hence BPS) brane
is given simply by its volume form! Components of the field strength can
thus be determined by using the fact that the calibrated form
corresponding to a wrapped brane is equivalent to the gauge potential to
which the brane couples electrically”.

For our edification, and to convince us beyond a shadow of a doubt, this
procedure will now be illustrated in detail for each of the M-brane
configurations we came across earlier, at a time when we were ignorant
of calibrations.

#### M2 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

Start with writing down the Fayyazuddin-Smith metric in the background
of M2-brane wrapping a holomorphic curve in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath holomorphic coordinates are denoted by @xmath and @xmath A
factor of @xmath has been pulled out of the Hermitean metric to
facilitate comparison with the expressions found earlier.

We know from the BPS condition that the calibrating form @xmath of the
M2-brane must be identical to its volume form and can hence be read off
directly from the metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is the electric field strength for the M2-brane, it can be
calculated using @xmath to yield the expressions in ( 2.6 ) through (
2.6 ).

#### M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

When an M5-brane wraps a holomorphic 2-cycle in @xmath , the relevant
ansatz for the spacetime metric is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are coordinates on @xmath , @xmath takes values @xmath and
@xmath runs over @xmath . The harmonic function H is related to the
determinant G of the Hermitan metric by @xmath Since the calibrating
form @xmath of the BPS M5-brane is identical to its volume form, we can
read it off directly from the metric to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can now calculate @xmath and find the same expressions as in ( 2.68
).

#### M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

When the M5-brane is wrapped on a holomorphic curve embedded in @xmath ,
the metric takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath now span @xmath , @xmath is the single overall transverse
direction. and the harmonic function H is related to the determinant of
the Hermitean metric by @xmath .

In this background, the wrapped M5-brane is calibrated by the volume
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The field strength can be calculated using @xmath . This yields the same
expressions as in ( 2.75 ).

#### M5 wrapping a 4-cycle in @xmath

For an M5-brane wrapped on a 4-cycle @xmath in @xmath , the metric takes
the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath labels the unwrapped directions, @xmath are holomorphic
coordinates in @xmath and @xmath takes values 8,9, and 10. The
determinant of the Hermitean metric is given by @xmath

The generalised calibration @xmath for this wrapped M-brane is the same
as its volume form, hence the only non-vanishing component of of @xmath
is the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using the fact that @xmath we can once again calculate the components of
the four-form, obtaining the same results as in ( LABEL:fstm5c34 ).

### 3.4 Lifting the curtain.

In this awe-inspiring show where supergravity solutions of wrapped
M-branes make their appearance with such grace and speed, it is easy to
get side-tracked and ignore the one major sleight of hand; all the
information obtained via the Fayyazuddin-Smith method has been
duplicated here @xmath with the conspicuous omission of the metric
constraint!

It is with this slight over-sight that the Great Oz betrays himself as a
mere magician rather than a real Wizard. His failure to constrain the
metric in any way, leaves us with a very rich structure, but no clue
where to apply it. Having now pointed out the Wizard’s short-coming,
which doubtless he was hoping we would not catch on to, we are almost as
far away from an answer as we were before.

Without any further knowledge of the Hermitean metrics we can allow, it
seems that a journey home, or for that matter anywhere else, is
currently out of the question. As a last resort, we turn to the truly
magical Ruby Slippers to show us the way.

## Chapter 4 The Ruby Slippers

We have seen, in our journey down the Yellow Brick Road, how to
construct the supergravity solution for a wrapped M-brane by looking for
bosonic backgrounds which admit Killing spinors. Having set the
gravitino to zero, we have made sure that the supersymmetric variations
of the bosonic fields vanish identically and it is left only to impose
that the supersymmetry variation of the gravitino vanish as well. We
require this to be true for our metric ansatz, when the variation
parameter in the supersymmetry transformation is a Killing spinor. If in
addition, the Bianchi identity and equations of motion for the field
strength are also satisfied, the metric and four-form we have obtained
are guaranteed to satisfy Einstein’s equations, furnishing a bosonic
solution to 11-dimensional supergravity.

Once we arrived in the Emerald City, we learnt that there was an
alternate way in which this problem could be solved. Since the
generalised calibration corresponding to a wrapped M-brane is gauge
equivalent to the gauge potential to which the brane couples
electrically, the field strength @xmath , then immediately follows once
we are given a suitable calibration. For membranes, this field strength
is the four-form we are used to seeing in our supergravity solutions;
for five-branes, the field strength is a seven-form and we have to
dualise it in order to obtain the familiar four-form. Supersymmetry
requirements fix the undetermined functions in the metric ansatz in
terms of the Hermitean metric @xmath which obeys a non-linear
differential equation that follows from @xmath .

This procedure is by far simpler than the previous one… however there is
a catch! Since generalised calibrations which can exist in a background
with non-zero flux have not yet been classified, there is no
comprehensive (or even partial) list from which we can pick a suitable
calibration @xmath , from which to construct a supergravity solution.

### The Constraint

A persistent feature of the wrapped brane supergravity solutions we saw
along the Yellow Brick Road is a constraint on the metric in the
subspace where the supersymmetric cycle is embedded. This constraint in
turn restricts the @xmath -form potential to which the brane couples.
Since the potential is gauge equivalent to the generalised calibration,
we find that in fact the metric constraint can alternately be viewed as
a condition which determines generalised calibrations in the given
background.

This condition can be expressed as a constraint on the Hodge dual, with
respect to the embedding space, of the generalised calibration in that
space. When written this way, it shows clearly that calibrated
(supersymmetric) cycles in a particular submanifold of space-time, are
not specified completely by the submanifold and in fact have a
non-trivial dependence on the surrounding spacetime as well. This is to
be expected because unlike the case for F=0 when supersymmetric cycles
depended only on geometry, we do expect now that the field strength flux
(and through it, the remaining non-complex directions of spacetime) will
make their presence felt and play their part in determining the
calibrated cycles which can exist in a given subspace.

Expressing the results in this form also enables us to unify the M2 and
M5 brane analysis and to show that the constraint can be expressed
perfectly generally and arises for all M-branes embedded holomorphically
into a subspace of 11 dimensional spacetime, such that @xmath .

The Magic of the Ruby Slippers

In 11-dimensional backgrounds with non-zero four-form flux, a class of
generalised calibrations in the embedding space M is given by the @xmath
-forms @xmath , for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

if the following constraint holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath denotes the determinant of the metric restricted to
directions transverse to the embedding space, and the Hodge dual is
taken within the embedding space.

The Hodge Dual of the Hermitean Form. If @xmath is the two-form
associated with the Hermitean metric on a manifold @xmath of complex
dimension @xmath , and @xmath denotes the Hodge dual on this space, then
we have the following:

@xmath @xmath @xmath (4.3) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Substituting now the expression for the inverse metric

@xmath (4.4)

we find that

@xmath (4.5)

As a ’check’ of the above, note that wedging both sides with @xmath
gives the identity

@xmath (4.6)

### 4.1 Click the Heels …

#### M2-branes

Supergravity solutions for a class of BPS states corresponding to
wrapped membranes were dicussed in [ 19 ] . In keeping with the logic
that holomorphicity implies supersymmetry, the M2-branes were wrapped on
holomorphic cycles in complex subspaces of varying dimension @xmath .

We will work with the following (standard) ansatz for the spacetime
metric:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are @xmath holomorphic coordinates and @xmath span the
@xmath transverse directions.

Inorder to express the constraint on the generalised calibrations in
each case, we resort to ( 4.2 ). Since the M2-branes wrap only
two-cycles, the calibrating form in the complex space is simply the
Hermitean form associated with the metric, @xmath . The restricted
determinant @xmath is also simple to calculate and we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constraints now follow immediately. For a membrane wrapping a
holomorphic curve in @xmath , ( 4.2 ) dictates that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be explicitly written out as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that these constraints reproduce ( 2.40 ) - ( 2.58 )

#### M5-branes

The five-brane configurations do not fit this easily into a pattern, and
will just have to be considered one by one.

We start with the two M5-branes which wrap a holomorphic two-cycle in
@xmath . For both these systems, the calibrating form is the Hermitean
two-form associated with the metric, as long as it is subject to the
proper constraint. In order to work out the constraint, we need to first
calculate @xmath , where @xmath is the determinant of the metric in the
directions transverse to @xmath .

M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

From the metric ( 3.39 ) it is clear that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

so, the constraint ( 4.2 ) for this system is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which agrees with ( 2.66 ).

M5 wrapping a 2-cycle in @xmath

The metric ( 3.42 ) allows us to read off

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the constraint in this case takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which reproduces ( 2.73 ).

We now turn to the last configuration on our list, and the only one
which involves a brane wrapping a four-cycle. The calibrating form is
now the square of the Hermitean two-form, @xmath and in order to impose
the relevant constraint, we need to compute @xmath .

M5 wrapping a 4-cycle in @xmath

In this case, we can see from the metric ( 3.45 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the constraint on the calibration is thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in perfect agreement with ( 2.81 ).

Until the explicit forms of these constraints were found [ 13 ] , [ 14 ]
, [ 19 ] , [ 20 ] , the Fayyazuddin-Smith construction was assumed to
apply only to Kahler metrics. While (warped) Kahler metrics [ 15 ]
definitely solve all the above constraints they by no means exhaust the
available options, as we will show in the following section. So, by
assuming that the metric on the embedding space is Kahler, we are in
fact restricting ourselves unnecesarily and losing out on a wealth of
possibilities.

### 4.2 Count to Three….

Satisfying @xmath

Since @xmath , the above constraint can be written in component form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon contraction with the inverse metric @xmath this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the complex dimension of the manifold which has
@xmath as its Hermitean metric. Contracting again with @xmath we find
the relation ¹ ¹ 1 There is an overall factor of (n-2) multiplying this
equation, but that can be cancelled once we note that on manifolds of
complex dimension @xmath , the five-form @xmath would vanish
identically! Similar, obviously non-zero factors also occur in the
analysis of the remaining constraints.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be substituted into ( 4.15 ) to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation can be satisfied in two ways:

-    Either @xmath , in which case @xmath = 0 is a non-trivial
    requirement,

-    Or we must have a Kahler metric, so that @xmath vanishes as a
    result of @xmath

Satisfying @xmath

Employing the same procedure as in the previous case, we write the
constraint out in component form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and contract it with @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting once more with the inverse metric @xmath we arrive at the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be substituted into ( 4.19 ) to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, it is only in a four-complex dimensional manifold that the
constraint @xmath can be satisfied without having @xmath .

In particular this implies that @xmath cannot be satisfied by a
Hermitean two-form (of a non-Kahler metric) which obeys @xmath . This is
in agreement with the analysis of the previous constraint, where it was
found that @xmath is a non-trivial constraint only in three complex
dimensions.

Satisfying @xmath

Writing the constraint out in component form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and contracting with @xmath , leads to the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This, when contracted further with @xmath , yields the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the above into ( 4.23 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This statement implies that in order to satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

non-trivially, we must have a manifold with complex dimension @xmath ;
in all other dimensions, this constraint can only be satisfied by a
Kahler metric.

### 4.3 … and You’re Home!

So, to summarize, what we learnt in the Emerald City was how to
construct a supergravity solution for a wrapped M-brane by looking
simply at the isometries of the configuration and using the technology
of generalised calibrations. This analysis leads to an almost complete
picture – the one missing piece in the puzzle is a constraint on
generalised calibration. This constraint as we have now seen, can be
generated by applying a remarkably simple rule ( 4.2 ) to the spacetime
in question. We have also seen that it is solved only by two possible
classes of calibrations; those corresponding to metrics which are either
Kahler, @xmath , or co-Kahler, @xmath .

Now that you can construct the supergravity solution for an M-brane
wrapped on any holomorphic cycle with a click of your heels, perhaps it
is time to venture futher into lands as yet unknown. Countless wrapped
M-brane configurations exist which have not been considered here. The
most obvious extension would be to look at M-branes on holomorphic
cycles such that @xmath ; an example is provided by an M5 wrapping a
holomorphic four-cycle embedded in a four-complex dimensional manifold.
Branching out further, one could consider M-branes wrapping Special
Lagrangian cycles. It would be interesting to see if an analogous
constraint arises on the embedding space metric in those cases and to
explore its implications for the corresponding calibrations.

Whether or not the Ruby Slippers will be of any use to us in these new
journeys remains to be seen. Certainly they have served us well in our
little adventure here, and have provided us with plenty of material
about which we can now “ sit, and think some more ”.