##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 High school instantons
        -    1.1.1 Toy model instantons
        -    1.1.2 Zero modes and moduli space
        -    1.1.3 Valley instantons and all that
    -    1.2 Instantons in QCD
        -    1.2.1 Effective Lagrangian for gauge fields
        -    1.2.2 Fermions and t’Hooft vertex
        -    1.2.3 Dilute gas approximation
        -    1.2.4 SIA versus t’Hooft effective lagrangian
-    2 @xmath decay
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 Effective Lagrangians
    -    2.3 Scalar glueball decays
    -    2.4 Eta charm decays
    -    2.5 Chi charm decays
    -    2.6 Conclusions
-    3 Instantons and the spin of the nucleon
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Axial Charge Violation in the Field of an Instanton
    -    3.3 OZI Violation in Axial-Vector Two-Point Functions
    -    3.4 Axial Vector Coupling of a Quark
    -    3.5 Axial Structure of the Nucleon
    -    3.6 Conclusions
-    4 Group integration
    -    4.1 General remarks
    -    4.2 Properties of Haar measure
    -    4.3 The algorithm for group integration
    -    4.4 Integration over fundamental representation of SU(N)
        -    4.4.1 Case n=2
        -    4.4.2 Case n=3
    -    4.5 The integral over adjoint representation of SU(N)
        -    4.5.1 Case n=1
        -    4.5.2 Case n=2
        -    4.5.3 Case n=3
        -    4.5.4 Case n=4
    -    4.6 Conclusions
-    5 Summary and outlook
-    6 Appendix
    -    6.1 Spectral Representation
        -    6.1.1 Nucleon Two-Point Function
        -    6.1.2 Scalar Three-Point Functions
        -    6.1.3 Nucleon three-point functions
        -    6.1.4 Phenomenology
    -    6.2 Instanton contribution to quark three-point functions
        -    6.2.1 Computation of path exponent
    -    6.3 Euclidean matrices, conventions, ..

###### Acknowledgements. First of all, I am deeply indebted to my
adviser Thomas Schaefer for all his professional help and moral support
during my Ph.D. research period. I enjoyed learning under Thomas’
guidance. While steering me in the right direction Thomas gave me a lot
of freedom to broaden my knowledge and get a better perspective on and
beyond physics. The discussions with him have always been fruitful,
usually solving my problems on the spot with his characteristic style of
to-the-point remarks spiced with fine humor. I would also like to thank
Thomas for providing the numerical computations of correlation functions
in instanton liquid model. I have benefited greatly from discussions
with professors at Stony Brook, like Sasha Abanov, Gerry Brown, Madappa
Prakash, Edward Shuryak and Ismail Zahed. I would especially like to
thank Edward Shuryak for eye-opening discussions on instantons. I always
felt that talking to Edward was like getting a chance to take a bird eye
look on physics. Everything started to relate and suddenly I could see
the wood despite the trees. During the years at Stony Brook I learned a
lot from the excellent lectures of George Sterman, Edward Shuryak, Peter
van Nieuwenhuizen and Ismail Zahed. I also benefited a lot from talking
to my colleagues like Pietro Faccioli, Radu Ionas, Tibor Kucs, Peter
Langfelder, Achim Schwenk and Diyar Talbayev. Further I wish to thank my
professors and teachers from Slovakia and Romania for opening the doors
to physics for me. I am especially grateful to my high school teachers
Adrian Rau-Lehoczki and Stefan Beraczko as well as to my undergraduate
adviser at Comenius University, Bratislava, prof. Peter Presnajder.
There is no one I am more indebted to than my family. My brother Klaudy
and my parents Ondrej and Albinka have always been a supportive pillar
for my studies. I am sincerely grateful for all their help and
sacrifices that made this Ph.D. thesis possible.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The physics of fundamental interactions is dominated today by the
Standard Model(SM), the combined theory of strong, weak and
electromagnetic force. Since its development in 1970’s it has proved
extremely powerful in explaining the experimental results. The model has
been so successful that, for thirty years, physicists have been
desperately looking for a discrepancy between the model and experiment
that would point them towards new physics ”beyond the standard model”.

Quantum chromodynamics(QCD), as a part of the Standard Model describes
the gluon-mediated strong interactions between quarks. The origins of
QCD date back to early 1960’s. The myriad of observed particles and
their mass spectrum played then the same role as Mendeleev’s periodic
table of elements a century ago: it pointed to the existence of
underlying constituents, particles that represent a more elementary form
of matter.

In 1964 Gell Mann and Zweig introduced spin- @xmath particles: up, down
and strange quarks ¹ ¹ 1 charm, bottom and top were added later with
fractional charge of @xmath for @xmath quark and @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath quarks. Assigning mesons to @xmath states and baryons to @xmath
states using @xmath symmetry led to a good match of known particles and
valuable predictions of new ones. (Valuable indeed, as Gell Mann was
rewarded with Nobel Prize in 1969 for his ”Eightfold Way”).

However, the straight-forward quark model had to overcome the difficulty
of reconciling the Pauli principle and the seemingly quark-exchange
symmetric function of baryons made of 3 same-flavor quarks with the same
spin, like @xmath . The solution came with an extra quantum number:
color, that made it possible to antisymmetrize the baryonic state.
Quarks would then come in three colors: red, green and blue and the
hadrons would be composed of white combinations of quarks.
Color-anticolor pairs of quark - antiquark would form mesons while
baryons would be of type @xmath .

At this stage, the colored quarks were little more than mathematical
objects that explained the spectrum of observed hadrons. The
unsuccessful search for free spin- @xmath particles with fractional
charge presented a big obstacle for the quark model to become more than
a nice mathematical description of hadronic spectra. In late 1960’s,
SLAC-MIT deep inelastic scattering experiments discovered point-like
constituents, ”partons”, later identified with quarks. Eventually the
discovery of @xmath in 1974 in both hadroproduction and @xmath
annihilation finalized the conclusion that the quarks are real particles
but are confined to colorless combinations.

The main conclusion of DIS experiments was the asymptotic freedom of
proton constituents, which basically means that the interaction of
partons is small for high energy transfer( @xmath ). This was an extra
feature that any theory of strong interactions would need to possess.

QCD, the gauge theory of quarks based on @xmath group then emerged as
the only viable candidate that would incorporate @xmath quarks, have a
different representation for antiquarks and would feature asymptotic
freedom and confinement.

On its way to maturity, QCD underwent a long series of experimental
tests, like @xmath decay, deep inelastic scattering, @xmath and so on.
Most of the early successes were predominantly in the perturbative area
of large momentum transfer and hence small coupling. In this sector, the
methods of computation had already been known from QED and the Feynman
diagrams techniques were readily available.

A completely different view was provided by lattice gauge theory
methods, which use discretization of large but finite volume of
spacetime and evaluate the path integral using Monte Carlo techniques.
With increasing computational power the lattice QCD is becoming an
accessible laboratory for non-perturbative physics. The main drawback of
lattice QCD is the absence of analytic results from which one could get
a better insight into the physical picture.

In the non-perturbative regime different analytic approaches have been
developed that describe the physics at different energy scales. For
small momenta well below 1 GeV the energetically accessible degrees of
freedom are pions and other low-lying mesons. Therefore effective
theories like the ones based on chiral lagrangians were natural tools
successfully applied to physics of low energy pions. On the other side
of particle spectrum, one can use the fact, that low energy interactions
are less likely to create new heavy quark-antiquark pairs due to energy
gaps. Therefore heavy quarkonia are accessible through non-relativistic
quantum mechanical models similar to positronium treatment.

Instantons bridge the gap between the effective field theories and
perturbative QCD. With their origins in the heart of QCD theory, they
constitute one of the best understood non-perturbative tools. Instantons
saturate the @xmath anomaly and provide dynamical chiral symmetry
braking. However, they do not solve the problem of confinement, which
even after 30 years of work is still an open question.

The main tool for instanton computations is the instanton liquid model
(ILM) developed in 1980’s. Is is based on the assumption that the vacuum
is dominated by instantons. The parameters of the model, the mean
density of instantons @xmath and the average size of instantons @xmath
were fitted from the phenomenological values of quark and gluon
condensates.

Among the successes of ILM are calculations of hadronic correlation
functions, hadronic masses and coupling constants. A better
understanding of chiral phase transition has also been achieved by
studying instantons in finite temperature QCD.

In addition to that, we would like to identify direct instanton
contributions to hadronic processes. One possibility is to go to very
high energy, for example in DIS. In this case, instantons are very rare,
but they lead to special processes with multi-gluon and quark emission,
analogous to the baryon number violating instanton process in the
electroweak sector.

In this work we focus on another possibility. The instanton induced
interaction has very peculiar spin and flavor correlations that
distinguish instantons from perturbative forces. We study two systems in
which unusual flavor and spin effects have been observed: the decay of
@xmath and the so-called ”proton spin crisis”.

First part of this work analysis the decay of @xmath . The dominant
decay channels have a specific structure of final products in which all
pairs of constituent quarks are present. The resulting vertex is of type
@xmath which points to a possible instanton-induced mechanism behind the
process.

The experimental evidence that quarks only carry about @xmath of the
proton spin is contrary to the naive quark model predictions and it
implies a large amount of OZI violation in the flavor singlet axial
vector channel. The second part of this work studies the instanton
contribution to this process.

### 1.1 High school instantons

#### 1.1.1 Toy model instantons

Instanton is a finite-action solution of the euclidean equation of
motion. Since it’s discovery in QCD in 1975 by Belavin et al [ 1 ] it
has been enjoying considerable attention. In this section we will try to
convey a feel for instanton physics without dipping into the details of
any particular theory.

Many of the features of instanton computation can be easily explained on
trivial examples that do not require more than high school integration.
We will use the standard integral as an analog for the path integral.
This way the ideas of the computation will be unveiled in full light
without the technical difficulties blocking the view.

The single most important object in quantum field theory is the
partition function, which can be represented as the path integral ² ² 2
For simplicity we take directly the euclidean spacetime

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the field and @xmath is the action that also depends on
the source @xmath . Any correlation function can be computed once we
know the partition function. Schematically:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the sources corresponding to @xmath .

It is usually not a trivial exercise to compute @xmath . In fact, most
of the time we are forced to rely on some kind of approximation. The
standard technique is to expand the action around the trivial minimum (
@xmath ), keep the quadratic terms and treat the rest as a perturbation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, the perturbation approach usually does not, and can not, reach
all the ’dark corners’ of the theory. The reason is the possible
existence of other, non-trivial minima of the action, located in a
different sector of the configuration space.

To get a better feel about the approximations to the path integral, let
us consider the most trivial toy-model for the path integral: QFT for a
field in one point in spacetime. The configuration space is now
considerably shrunk to one single variable, and the path integral is
just a standard integral. As an example of theory with ’instanton’, let
us take a tilted double well potential shown in Fig. 1.1 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The partition function is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fig. 1.2 presents the graph of @xmath . The goal is to compute the area
under the curve.

The approach corresponding to standard perturbation theory is to keep
the quadratic terms in exponent and expand the rest:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The graphs of zeroth and first order expansions are shown in Fig. 1.3 .
It is clear that in order to capture the full integral one needs a large
order expansion. ³ ³ 3 As we will see later, in QCD the graph under the
smaller ’bump’ is not accessible at all this way, as the bump happens in
a disconnected part of configuration space. We can get a much better
approximation of partition function by including the ’bump’ from the
very beginning: just compute the additional area by repeating the
perturbation approach for the smaller bump. Mathematically, its peak is
at the minimum of the action, which is nothing else than the instanton.
This separate term is the ’instanton’ contribution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The total area under the curve would be the sum of the results of
perturbation approach under both total and local minima of the action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The zeroth order expansions under both minima are shown in Fig. 1.4 . It
is again obvious that this is a much better approximation of the
integral than what we started with. A choice of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath gives @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The numerical integration
gives @xmath .

In real models trivial fields and instantons live in separate,
disconnected parts of configuration space. Therefore one not only needs
to add instantons to get a better approximation with less computation,
but has to account for instanton part in order to achieve the right
result.

#### 1.1.2 Zero modes and moduli space

There is a long shot from the trivial toy model to real world physics
and many difficulties arise on the way. One of them, the zero modes and
the moduli space is an omni-present feature that has to be dealt with in
every instanton computation. The idea is easily explained on a
’next-to-trivial’ model of two spacetime points, i.e. a two-dimensional
integral.

Let us consider the following ’sombrero’ action, depicted in Fig. 1.5 ,
with the graph of @xmath in Fig. 1.6 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a result of the presence of rotational symmetry, we have a continuum
of minima of action. The set of all ’instantons’ is a circle with radius
1. The parameters that describe it are called collective coordinates. In
our case we can use an angle @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The parameter space of all instantons is called the moduli space and in
our case has the topology of a circle.

Suppose we did not have the err function available and decided to
compute the integral numerically in a similar way we did it in the
previous case of one-dimensional integral. We would need to expand
around the minimum of the action. But which one should we choose? Let’s
say we just pick an arbitrary minimum. The zeroth order expansion will
now have a form of a two-dimensional distorted Gaussian bell, with
different curvatures in different directions. If we press ahead and try
to compute the volume under such a bell, we quickly run into
difficulties: the result is infinite. Obviously this is not a problem of
the integral, but of the method we used: the radius in one direction of
the approximating two-dimensional Gaussian bell is infinity(the surface
is flat in one direction corresponding to the symmetry direction).
Therefore none of the minima alone is suited for an expansion.

This kind of difficulty appears every time we deal with a symmetry of
the action that is broken by instanton. For each symmetry, there is an
associated direction in the configuration space along which the action
does not change. The vector that points in this direction is the zero
mode. In our case it is the vector corresponding to a rotation, i.e.
@xmath , with @xmath being the azimuthal angle ⁴ ⁴ 4 In general one
obtains the zero mode by differentiating the instanton solution with
respect to the collective coordinate :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The solution of the problem is obvious: one needs to turn the symmetry
into an advantage, not a liability. The change of variables to polar
coordinates is in order. To use the lingo of instanton physics, we will
integrate over the direction of the zero mode non-perturbatively,
leaving the perturbation method for the modes perpendicular to this. In
other words, in one direction nothing changes, so we should just compute
the one dimensional integral in the perpendicular direction and then
multiply the result by the volume of the space in the zero mode
direction.

Let us take as a starting point of our integration an arbitrary point
@xmath . The one-dimensional space perpendicular to the zero mode in
this point is the line @xmath with @xmath - see Fig 1.7 . For every
point on the line, we only want to integrate radially, and leave the
perpendicular direction for later. This can be achieved by introducing
the following delta function in the integral:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which forces the integration points lay on the line. To obtain the
contribution over the whole plane we only need to integrate over the
angle, with a weight that makes the whole insertion a unity ⁵ ⁵ 5 This
is nothing else than the famous Faddeev-Popov unity insertion :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to compute @xmath . The whole integral then is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After a change of variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and evaluation of integral over @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The result is nothing else but the volume of moduli space multiplied by
the integral in radial direction(integral over non-zero modes). Now we
could expand the radial integral around the 2 bumps it contains in the
very same way we did it in the example from the beginning of this
section.

The main step in dealing with zero modes is their separation from
’perturbative’ direction by requiring the scalar product to be zero:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Another interesting interpretation is the following. The question is
around which of the continuum of instantons one should expand. A very
intuitive approach would be to expand different parts of space around
different instanton, mainly, the @xmath one. Let us take again the
starting point @xmath . The closest instanton is given by the
minimization of the distance

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A differentiation w.r.t. @xmath gives the same condition 1.7 . One would
then separate the configuration space into blocks, each one of them
being dominated by the closest instanton. In our case a block would be a
ray with angle @xmath and the points on the ray would be under the
’jurisdiction’ of the instanton at @xmath . Adding the contributions of
all rays would lead to the same result 1.6 .

#### 1.1.3 Valley instantons and all that

We should be on a pretty good footing now that we know how to deal with
a continuum of minima. For any integral we would find all minima and
expand around them, paying special attention to treatment of zero modes.
This kind of ’turning the crank’ could actually lead to a poor result in
some cases, when there are a lot of important points without satisfying
the condition of minimum.

The presence of an ’almost zero mode’, a direction with very low
gradient, would make the Gaussian bell around the minima a poor
approximation of the integral. To get a better understanding, let us
take again the sombrero action and slightly tilt it:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The graph of the tilted sombrero action with @xmath is shown in Fig. 1.8
. The surface now exhibits a single global minimum - the instanton -
close to the point @xmath and a saddle point close to @xmath . The
exponent of tilted action is shown in Fig. 1.9 .

If @xmath is small, the volume under the surface of @xmath of the tilted
sombrero will not differ significantly from the original one. In fact,
one could obtain an @xmath -expansion of the integral. However, our
method of expanding around minima would fail, as the single Gaussian
bell centered at the global minimum of @xmath would not describe well
the whole surface.

Since @xmath is small, we should, in principle do something similar to
@xmath case discussed in the previous section. For that reason, we first
need to identify the important points - ’valley instantons’ - that are
dominant, in some way, for @xmath in their restricted vicinity. Let us
postpone for a moment the strict definition of the valley points.
Intuitively it is clear, that in our case, the special points would form
a loop @xmath -close to the former circle of instantons. Once we have
the valley trajectory, we would integrate perturbatively in the sector
perpendicular to valley in the same way we treated the non-zero modes
before. Now the final integral along the valley trajectory would not
simply give the volume of the would-be moduli space, as the result of
integration over non-valley directions depends on the parameter of the
given point on trajectory.

We still have not defined precisely the valley trajectory. There are
actually two approaches with slightly different results: the streamline
[ 3 , 4 ] and the so-called proper valley [ 5 ] method.

The streamline method requires a starting point located on the
trajectory but different from the global minimum. In our case it could
be the saddle point. Having the starting point, the instanton valley is
constructed dynamically by following the highest slope downwards. It is
exactly the path a stream of water would follow - hence the name.

The proper valley method features more stability and does not require
any starting point. The valley is now made of points with the lowest
gradient along the contour of equal action. One should therefore draw
the contour lines (’izoactas’) and for each of them identify the point
with lowest gradient. Joining these points would give the trajectory.

Once we have the trajectory, we can start turning the crank again: at
each point of the valley integrate perturbatively over modes
perpendicular to the trajectory and then integrate over the trajectory
of the valley.

Another approach to the same problem uses so-called ’constrained
instantons’ [ 6 , 7 ] . The idea is very simple: slice the configuration
space in surfaces given by a family of functions. In our case one could
take the slices generated by the family of vertical planes @xmath , with
@xmath . For example, the slice generated by @xmath is just the standard
double well potential in @xmath direction. Each slice would feature
constrained minima which one could use to compute the integral over the
slice. At the end, one would only need to sum over the slices, i.e.
integrate over @xmath .

The ambiguity of choosing the slicing function makes this approach less
appealing. One has to have some physical intuition to use it with
success. In our case, the almost-symmetry of the graph would point to
slicing by rays @xmath .

There is a lot one can learn about the methods of path integration from
a standard 2 dimensional high-school integral. We will now take the
earned intuition and apply it to instantons in QCD.

### 1.2 Instantons in QCD

In this section we will focus on providing the main ideas for the
derivation of the effective Lagrangian as well as on setting the stage
for using the single instanton approximation for computing correlation
functions. A thorough review on instantons in QCD can be found in [ 24 ]
.

As mentioned before, instantons are finite action solutions of equation
of motion in Euclidean spacetime. For a Yang-Mills theory, the partition
function reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the field strength. Let us for simplicity consider @xmath
YM theory. The requirement of a finite action leads to fields that tend
to pure gauge at infinity: @xmath , with @xmath . The infinity is
topologically a 3-sphere. The instanton at infinity is therefore a map
from the spatial @xmath to @xmath of @xmath parameters. Every such a
mapping is characterized by a winding number, an integer that shows how
many times one sphere is wrapped around the other by the map.

The whole configuration space of finite-action gauge fields is then
separated into distinct sectors characterized by different values of
winding number. Figs. 1.11 and 1.12 show schematically the action @xmath
and @xmath in the sectors of @xmath (zero winding number), @xmath (one
instanton) and @xmath (two instantons). The sectors are completely
separated by infinite action walls, in the sense that any trajectory
from one sector to another will have points where @xmath . It is exactly
because of this separation that one has to account for instanton
contributions, as one can not retrieve them from @xmath sector.

Before plunging into any instanton computation, one has to deal first
with gauge invariance. As any other symmetry, it induces zero modes and
flat directions, derailing the perturbative approach. The way around
this difficulty was explained on the toy model of section 1.1 :
integrate over zero modes direction non-perturbatively, then compute
quantum fluctuations perpendicular to zero modes. In the case of gauge
invariance, this means fixing the space for quantum fields by requiring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the covariant derivative in a background field. After
exponentiating the Fadeev-Popov determinant, the action becomes a
functional of ghost fields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.1 Effective Lagrangian for gauge fields

The instanton solution of the equation of motion reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the instanton configuration with the center at @xmath
and orientation given by the @xmath matrix @xmath . Here @xmath is the
Pauli matrix and @xmath is the t’Hooft tensor with properties given e.g.
in [ 24 ] .

Let us now explore the semiclassical approach, i.e. perturbation theory
around the minima of the action. Expanding the action in the functional
Taylor series and keeping the terms up to second order we obtain, for
the gauge sector:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Even after fixing the gauge, we are still left with a rigid gauge
symmetry that brings @xmath zero modes, where @xmath is the number of
colors. Besides that, there are 5 flat directions corresponding to
scaling and translational invariance. The remaining @xmath rotational
symmetry does not bring any new zero modes, as any such rotation can be
undone by a gauge rotation. In other words, the @xmath rotational zero
mode points to the space unavailable to quantum fluctuations, as they
were made perpendicular to gauge zero modes by fixing the gauge.
Therefore altogether there are @xmath zero modes.

The non-perturbative integration over the zero mode directions and
subsequent computation of quantum fluctuations limited to Gaussian
approximation gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where prime on determinants means that zero eigenvalues are not
included. The computation of determinants was performed in [ 2 ] and the
full result is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For completeness, the constant is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath

Let us now push the computation one step further and obtain the
instanton-induced effective Lagrangian. We are interested in computing
the correlations of the type:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Expanding near instanton @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Instead of computing the correlations this way, we are interested in an
effective potential @xmath such that for large distance, @xmath , one
retrieves the instanton fields:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can check, that Callan Dashen and Gross (CDG) potential [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

provides exactly this. To see that this is indeed the case, let us
compute the gauge field propagator in the instanton background for large
distance. The second order expansion in @xmath gives, schematically:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Disregarding the vacuum bubbles and next order corrections in the
coupling constant, one is left with terms like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This way every @xmath field will contribute a factor of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is just the large distance limit of instanton field.

The anti-instanton fields lead to similar expressions with the
substitutions @xmath , @xmath .

#### 1.2.2 Fermions and t’Hooft vertex

We will introduce now the fermionic degrees of freedom and study how
this affects the computation in the instanton background.

t’Hooft’s discovery of left-handed zero mode of the Dirac operator in
the presence of instanton came a little bit as a surprise with huge
implications. First of all the zero mode renders the tunneling amplitude
zero in case of massless quarks, as the tunneling is proportional to the
determinant of Dirac operator. However, the instanton contribution to
some Green’s functions is non-zero and clearly distinguishable from the
perturbative contribution. In these correlations the small mass
parameter @xmath from the Dirac determinant cancels against @xmath from
the zero mode propagator, as we will show below.

The specific helicity of zero mode also pointed to chiral symmetry
braking, and in fact solved the @xmath puzzle.

Let us now dip into some details of t’Hooft’s computation. The fermionic
part of QCD action reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the source used to generate bilinear fermionic fields.

The massless Dirac operator in the instanton background has a
left-handed zero mode:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . The semiclassical result will now have an extra
determinant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that the tunneling is suppressed in the presence of light
fermions by a factor of @xmath .

To compute the Green’s functions we differentiate with respect to the
source:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath depends on @xmath through @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us take for simplicity the propagator for one flavor. Then the
determinant of Dirac operator with the source is given in terms of the
eigenvalues @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath satisfy @xmath . Expanding @xmath in powers of J we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The propagator then involves:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The final evaluation at @xmath renders all but one term zero. After
simplification with @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is nothing else but the first correction to zero energy due to
source, i.e. standard perturbation theory

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the zero mode part of the propagator reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note the @xmath factor that will cancel with @xmath from the Dirac
determinant to give finite correlation functions.

In the case of many massless quarks, the operator @xmath has @xmath
times degenerate ground state. The surviving term in a Green’s function
is then the product of perturbed eigenvalues, which can be written as
the determinant of ’perturbation matrix’:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This clearly points to the following properties of the Green’s functions
in the zero mode approximation of the instanton computation:

-   at least @xmath fermions participate (otherwise the contribution is
    of the higher order than zero modes).

-   It has a determinantal structure in flavor, all flavors must be
    there in pairs

-   Quarks propagate in the left-handed mode, while anti-quarks in the
    right-handed mode.

-   One can not have 2 fermions propagating in the same zero mode( this
    is the instantonic version of Pauli principle)

The graphical representation of the instanton vertex is shown in the
Fig. 1.13 .

Let us now construct the fermionic effective lagrangian. The idea is the
same as for the gauge field effective vertex: we need to find @xmath
such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

t’Hooft proposed a Lagrangian of the type:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with K a constant and @xmath a spinor to be determined. First order
expansion of the exponent of action gives for fermion propagator:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads to the r.h.s. of 1.9 if we choose @xmath , @xmath

To make it gauge symmetric we average over all possible orientations of
@xmath to get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining the many-flavors fermionic and gluonic effective lagrangians,
the large-distance effects of instantons can be represented by the
following lagrangian [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath with @xmath are @xmath generators, @xmath , @xmath is the
’t Hooft symbol and @xmath . The instanton is characterized by @xmath
collective coordinates, the instanton position @xmath , the instanton
size @xmath , and the color orientation @xmath . We also define the
rotation matrix @xmath by @xmath . For an anti-instanton we have to
replace @xmath and @xmath . The semi-classical instanton density @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the running coupling constant. For small @xmath we have
@xmath where @xmath is the first coefficient of the beta function.

The need for this lagrangian is not obvious from computations of
correlation functions, as one can do well without it(better actually),
since direct use of instanton solution and fermionic zero mode is
correct at any distance. However, the effective lagrangian becomes a
great tool if one tries to compute the instanton contribution to matrix
elements of type @xmath . Our inability to write pion fields in terms of
more fundamental quark creation/annihilation operators renders the
straight-forward approach of computing correlation functions
inapplicable. As we shall see in chapter 2 , there are still ways to
employ the effective lagrangian and compute the matrix element as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another great advantage of the effective lagrangian is that it displays
transparently the physical properties of the interaction. This way one
easily gains physical intuition by thinking in terms of Feynman
diagrams.

#### 1.2.3 Dilute gas approximation

The instanton is a theoretically tractable non-perturbative object.
However, the QCD vacuum proved to be much more complicated. A good
description has been achieved by constructing the vacuum from instantons
and anti-instantons. Within this framework, dilute gas approximation
leads to a manageable computation, where multiple instanton effects can
be computed from single instanton. In this section, following [ 72 ] , [
73 ] we will present the main ideas of dilute gas and single instanton
approximation.

Configuration space of finite-action gauge fields consists of disjunct
subspaces characterized by different winding numbers. The vacuum
expectation value of an operator @xmath is given as the sum over these
sectors of different homotopy number n:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Semiclassical approximation amounts to getting the minimum of action in
each sector (solution of the equations of motion) and performing the
Gaussian approximation around this solution. In each sector, a
multi-instanton configuration is the true minimum of the action.
However, it has been argued that the superposition of well separated
@xmath instantons and @xmath anti-instantons, such that @xmath has a
much higher entropy then the true minima for the sector with winding
number @xmath , therefore dominating the path integral. . The expansion
around these approximate solutions provide a very good description of
the true vacuum of QCD. Moreover, the Gaussian approximation proves to
be expressible through the measure of a single instanton, in case one
neglects the interaction between the instantons. Neglecting other
minima, the path integral ( 1.12 ) can therefore be written as a dilute
gas:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is instanton measure of moduli space. Phenomenological
estimates give the density of instantons to be of the order of @xmath
while the mean instanton size has been found to be @xmath . The
dimensionless parameter @xmath shows that the instanton liquid is dilute
and therefore one can take it as a parameter for expansion of the path
integral. The same parameters show that for distances @xmath it is
therefore reasonable to expect the one instanton to provide the dominant
contribution. One should not, however, that small distance requirement
and diluteness of the liquid are two independent aspects. The diluteness
renders the expansion in density of instantons meaningful, while the
small distance justifies the use of a single instanton approximation.

Neglecting the second and higher orders of the density, one arrives at:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above expression represents the single instanton approximation (SIA)
and we will be using it throughout the present work ⁶ ⁶ 6 Let us briefly
comment on SIA versus other first order dilute gas approximation. SIA
does not account for any correlation between instantons. This can be
achieved, simply speaking, by using an effective mass @xmath instead of
the current quark mass @xmath , with the instanton interactions being
funneled into the value of @xmath . For more details see [ 8 ] .

#### 1.2.4 SIA versus t’Hooft effective lagrangian

Before tackling correlators in the SIA approach, let us comment on some
generic features of the calculations and highlight the link to the
t’Hooft effective lagrangian.

As the name points out, the effective lagrangian induced by instantons
is only valid for large distances compared to the width of instanton:
@xmath . With the typical size of the order of @xmath , the above
condition is satisfied with @xmath accuracy already for distances of
@xmath . One is therefore endowed with an additional way of computing
large distance correlators. More importantly, the effective lagrangian
provides an intuition as to what diagrams are dominant and which ones
disappear completely. The purpose of this small section is to show how
well-known characteristics of t’Hooft lagrangian are reflected in SIA
approach.

Let us then recall the main features of effective vertex. First of all,
it is based on zero modes only, so there are always additional terms
besides the ones given by t’Hooft Lagrangian. However, once the zero
modes give a non-zero contribution, all the non-zero mode terms are
suppressed by the quark mass @xmath and can be neglected in the @xmath
limit.

One can read all the fundamental features of the zero mode propagation
from the form of the lagrangian: @xmath . All massless quarks have to
participate, they come in @xmath pairs and their helicity flips . The
determinantal structure also restrains the species of quarks from
participating with more than one pair ( Pauli principle ).

None of the above rules have to be imposed by hand in SIA - they are
already incorporated by means of chirality of the zero mode or rules of
Wick contractions. It is instructive to see how it works on some simple
examples.

Helicity of the quarks flips through the instanton vertex. A vector
insertion at point @xmath into a quark propagator from @xmath to @xmath
gives rise to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The chirality of the zero mode @xmath and anticommutation relation
@xmath renders the diagram zero since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All massless quarks participate - is just a statement that, whenever
possible, the zero mode propagation is favored to non-zero mode due to
@xmath factor.

The most interesting feature of t’Hooft Lagrangian is the Pauli
Principle: no 2 identical quarks can propagate in the same state. This
stems of course from anticommutation of fermion operators. But that is
true independent on the species. What makes it work is that whenever
there are 2 identical quarks propagating in the zero mode, there is an
additional diagram that gives exactly the same contribution with
opposite sign. To illustrate this, consider the correlation of scalar
operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For both @xmath -quarks propagating in the zero mode we get, due to
trace cyclicity:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

enforcing thus the Pauli principle.

## Chapter 2 @xmath decay

### 2.1 Introduction

The charmonium system has played an important role in shaping our
knowledge of perturbative and non-perturbative QCD. The discovery of the
@xmath as a narrow resonance in @xmath annihilation confirmed the
existence of a new quantum number, charm. The analysis of charmonium
decays in @xmath pairs, photons and hadrons established the hypothesis
that the @xmath and @xmath are, to a good approximation,
non-relativistic @xmath and @xmath bound states of heavy charm and
anti-charm quarks. However, non-perturbative dynamics does play an
important role in the charmonium system [ 9 , 10 ] . For example, an
analysis of the @xmath spectrum lead to the first determination of the
gluon condensate.

The total width of charmonium is dominated by short distance physics and
can be studied in perturbative QCD [ 11 ] . The only non-perturbative
input in these calculations is the wave function at the origin. A
systematic framework for these calculations is provided by the
non-relativistic QCD (NRQCD) factorization method [ 12 ] . NRQCD
facilitates higher order calculations and relates the decays of states
with different quantum numbers. QCD factorization can also be applied to
transitions of the type @xmath [ 13 , 14 ] .

The study of exclusive decays of charmonium into light hadrons is much
more complicated and very little work in this direction has been done.
Perturbative QCD implies some helicity selection rules, for example
@xmath and @xmath [ 15 , 16 ] , but these rules are strongly violated [
17 ] . The @xmath decays mostly into an odd number of Goldstone bosons.
The average multiplicity is @xmath , which is consistent with the
average multiplicity in @xmath annihilation away from the @xmath peak.
Many decay channels have been observed, but none of them stand out.
Consequently, we would expect the @xmath to decay mostly into an even
number of pions with similar multiplicity. However, the measured decay
rates are not in accordance with this expectation. The three main decay
channels of the @xmath are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , each with an
unusually large branching ratio of @xmath %. Bjorken observed that these
three decays correspond to a quark vertex of the form @xmath and
suggested that @xmath decays are a “smoking gun” for instanton effects
in heavy quark decays [ 18 ] .

We shall try to follow up on this idea by performing a more quantitative
estimate of the instanton contribution to @xmath and @xmath decays. In
section 2.2 we review the instanton induced effective lagrangian. In the
following sections we apply the effective lagrangian to the decays of
the scalar glueball, eta charm, and chi charm. We should note that this
investigation should be seen as part of a larger effort to identify
“direct” instanton contributions in hadronic reactions, such as deep
inelastic scattering, the @xmath rule, or @xmath production in @xmath
scattering [ 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] .

### 2.2 Effective Lagrangians

Instanton effects in hadronic physics have been studied extensively [ 23
, 24 ] . Instantons play an important role in understanding the @xmath
anomaly and the mass of the @xmath . In addition to that, there is also
evidence that instantons provide the mechanism for chiral symmetry
breaking and play an important role in determining the structure of
light hadrons. All of these phenomena are intimately related to the
presence of chiral zero modes in the spectrum of the Dirac operator in
the background field of an instanton. The situation in heavy quark
systems is quite different. Fermionic zero modes are not important and
the instanton contribution to the heavy quark potential is small [ 25 ]
.

This does not imply that instanton effects are not relevant. The
non-perturbative gluon condensate plays an important role in the
charmonium system [ 9 , 10 ] , and instantons contribute to the gluon
condensate. In general, the charmonium system provides a laboratory for
studying non-perturbative glue in QCD. The decay of a charmonium state
below the @xmath threshold involves an intermediate gluonic state. Since
the charmonium system is small, @xmath , the gluonic system is also
expected to be small. For this reason charmonium decays have long been
used for glueball searches.

Since charmonium decays produce a small gluonic system we expect that
the @xmath system mainly couples to instantons of size @xmath . In this
limit the instanton effects can be summarized in terms of an effective
lagrangian 1.10 discussed in chapter 1 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Expanding the effective lagrangian in powers of the external gluon field
gives the leading instanton contribution to different physical matrix
elements. If the instanton size is very small, @xmath , we can treat the
charm quark mass as light and there is an effective vertex of the form
@xmath which contributes to charmonium decays. Since the density of
instantons grows as a large power of @xmath the contribution from this
regime is very small. In the realistic case @xmath we treat the charm
quark as heavy and the charm contribution to the fermion determinant is
absorbed in the instanton density @xmath . The dominant contribution to
charmonium decays then arises from expanding the gluonic part of the
effective lagrangian to second order in the field strength tensor. This
provides effective vertices of the form @xmath , @xmath , etc.

We observe that the @xmath fermionic lagrangian combined with the
gluonic term expanded to second order in the field strength involves an
integral over the color orientation of the instanton which is of the
form @xmath . This integral gives @xmath terms. A more manageable result
is obtained by using the vacuum dominance approximation. We assume that
the coupling of the initial charmonium or glueball state to the
instanton proceeds via a matrix element of the form @xmath or @xmath .
In this case we can use

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in order to simplify the color average. The vacuum dominance
approximation implies that the color average of the fermionic and
gluonic parts of the interaction can be performed independently. In the
limit of massless quarks the instanton ( @xmath ) and anti-instanton (
@xmath ) lagrangian responsible for the decay of scalar and pseudoscalar
charmonium decays is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the color averaged @xmath fermionic effective lagrangian
[ 29 , 23 , 24 ] .

### 2.3 Scalar glueball decays

Since the coupling of the charmonium state to the instanton proceeds via
an intermediate gluonic system with the quantum numbers of scalar and
pseudoscalar glueballs it is natural to first consider direct instanton
contributions to glueball decays. This problem is of course important in
its own right. Experimental glueball searches have to rely on
identifying glueballs from their decay products. The successful
identification of a glueball requires theoretical calculations of
glueball mixing and decay properties. In the following we compute the
direct instanton contribution to the decay of the scalar @xmath glueball
state into @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Since the initial state is parity even only the @xmath term in equ. (
2.3 ) contributes. The relevant effective interaction is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.4)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------

Let us start with the process @xmath . In practice we have Fierz
rearranged equ. ( 2.4 ) into structures that involve the strange quark
condensate @xmath as well as operators with the quantum numbers of two
pions. In order to compute the coupling of these operators to the pions
in the final state we have used PCAC relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The values of the decay constants are @xmath MeV, @xmath MeV [ 30 ] . We
also use @xmath and @xmath as well as @xmath [ 31 ] . The coupling of
the @xmath meson is not governed by chiral symmetry. A recent analysis
of @xmath mixing and the chiral anomaly gives [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, we need the coupling of the glueball state to the gluonic
current. This quantity has been estimated using QCD spectral sum rules [
33 , 34 ] and the instanton model [ 35 ] . We use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now compute the matrix element for @xmath . The interaction
vertex is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral over the position of the instanton leads to a momentum
conserving delta function, while the vacuum dominance approximation
allows us to write the amplitude in terms of the coupling constants
introduced above. We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The instanton density @xmath is known accurately only in the limit of
small @xmath . For large @xmath higher loop corrections and
non-perturbative effects are important. The only source of information
in this regime is lattice QCD [ 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 ] . A very rough
caricature of the lattice results is provided by the parameterization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . This parameterization gives a value of @xmath .
Another way to compute @xmath is to regularize the integral over the
instanton size by replacing @xmath with @xmath . The parameter @xmath
can be adjusted in order to reproduce the size distribution measured on
the lattice. We notice, however, that whereas the instanton density
scales as @xmath , the decay amplitude scales as @xmath . This implies
that the results are very sensitive to the density of large instantons.
We note that when we study the decay of a small-size bound state the
integral over @xmath should be regularized by the overlap with the bound
state wave function. We will come back to this problem in section 2.4
below.

We begin by studying ratios of decay rates. These ratios are not
sensitive to the instanton size distribution. The decay rate @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The decay amplitude for the process @xmath is equal to the @xmath
amplitude as required by isospin symmetry. Taking into account the
indistinguishability of the two @xmath we get the total @xmath width

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar fashion we get the decay widths for the @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath channels

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath refers to the sum of the @xmath and @xmath final states. We
note that in the chiral limit the instanton vertices responsible for
@xmath and @xmath decays are identical up to quark interchange. As a
consequence, the ratio of the decay rates @xmath is given by the phase
space factor multiplied by the ratio of the coupling constants

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The main uncertainty in this estimate comes from the value of @xmath ,
which is not very accurately known. We have used @xmath . The ratio of
@xmath to @xmath decay rates is not affected by this uncertainty,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 2.1 we show the decay rates as functions of the glueball mass.
We have used @xmath and adjusted the parameter @xmath to give the
average instanton size @xmath fm. We observe that for glueball masses
@xmath GeV the @xmath phase space suppression quickly disappears and the
total decay rate is dominated by the @xmath final state. We also note
that for @xmath GeV the @xmath rate dominates over the @xmath rate.

In deriving the effective instanton vertex equ. ( 2.12 ) we have taken
all quarks to be massless. While this is a good approximation for the up
and down quarks, this it is not necessarily the case for the strange
quark. The @xmath contribution to the effective interaction for @xmath
decay is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

There is no @xmath contribution to the @xmath channel. The @xmath
correction to the other decay channels is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The decay rates with the @xmath correction to the instanton vertex taken
into account are plotted in Fig. 2.2 . We observe that effects due to
the finite strange quark mass are not negligible. We find that the
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath channels are enhanced whereas the @xmath
channel is reduced. For a typical glueball mass @xmath GeV the ratio
@xmath changes from @xmath in the case @xmath to @xmath for @xmath . In
Fig. 2.3 we show the dependence of the decay rates on the average
instanton size @xmath . We observe that using the phenomenological value
@xmath fm gives a total width @xmath MeV. We note, however, that the
decay rates are very sensitive to the value of @xmath . As a
consequence, we cannot reliably predict the total decay rate. On the
other hand, the ratio of the decay widths for different final states
does not depend on @xmath and provides a sensitive test for the
importance of direct instanton effects.

In Tab. 2.1 we show the masses and decay widths of scalar-isoscalar
mesons in the (1-2) GeV mass range. These states are presumably mixtures
of mesons and glueballs. This means that our results cannot be directly
compared to experiment without taking into account mixing effects. It
will be interesting to study this problem in the context of the
instanton model, but such a study is beyond the scope of this work. It
is nevertheless intriguing that the @xmath decays mostly into @xmath .
Indeed, a number of authors have suggested that the @xmath has a large
glueball admixture [ 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 ] .

### 2.4 Eta charm decays

The @xmath is a pseudoscalar @xmath charmonium bound state with a mass
@xmath MeV. The total decay width of the @xmath is @xmath MeV. In
perturbation theory the total width is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the @xmath ground state wave function at the origin.
Using @xmath GeV and @xmath we get @xmath , which is consistent with the
expectation from phenomenological potential models. Exclusive decays
cannot be reliably computed in perturbative QCD. As discussed in the
introduction Bjorken pointed out that @xmath decays into three
pseudoscalar Goldstone bosons suggest that instanton effects are
important [ 18 ] . The relevant decay channels and branching ratios are
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These three branching ratios are
anomalously large for a single exclusive channel, especially given the
small multiplicity. The total decay rate into these three channels is
@xmath which is still a small fraction of the total width. This implies
that the assumption that the three-Goldstone bosons channels are
instanton dominated is consistent with our expectation that the total
width is given by perturbation theory. For comparison, the next most
important decay channels are @xmath and @xmath . These channels do not
receive direct instanton contributions.

The calculation proceeds along the same lines as the glueball decay
calculation. Since the @xmath is a pseudoscalar only the @xmath term in
equ. ( 2.3 ) contributes. The relevant interaction is

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strategy is the same as in the glueball case. We Fierz-rearrange the
lagrangian ( 2.4 ) and apply the vacuum dominance and PCAC
approximations. The coupling of the @xmath bound state to the instanton
involves the matrix element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can get an estimate of this matrix element using a simple two-state
mixing scheme for the @xmath and pseudoscalar glueball. We write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The matrix element @xmath is related to the charmonium wave function at
the origin. The coupling of the topological charge density to the
pseudoscalar glueball was estimated using QCD spectral sum rules, @xmath
[ 34 ] . Using the two-state mixing scheme the two “off-diagonal” matrix
elements @xmath and @xmath are given in terms of one mixing angle @xmath
. We can estimate this mixing angle by computing the charm content of
the pseudoscalar glueball using the heavy quark expansion. Using [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get @xmath and a mixing angle @xmath . This mixing angle corresponds
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The uncertainty in this estimate is hard to assess. Below we will
discuss a perturbative estimate of the instanton coupling to @xmath . In
order to check the phenomenological consistency of the estimate equ. (
2.27 ) we have computed the @xmath contribution to the @xmath
correlation function. The results are shown in Fig. 2.4 . The
contribution of the pseudoscalar glueball is determined by the coupling
constant @xmath introduced above. The couplings of the @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath resonances can be extracted from the decays @xmath [ 45 ] .
We observe that the @xmath contribution is strongly suppressed, as one
would expect. We also show the @xmath and @xmath glueball contributions
to the @xmath correlation function. We observe that even with the small
mixing matrix elements obtained from equs. ( 2.24 - 2.26 ) the glueball
contribution starts to dominate the @xmath correlator for @xmath fm.

We now proceed to the calculation of the exclusive decay rates. There
are four final states that contribute to the @xmath channel, @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Using isospin symmetry it is sufficient to
calculate only one of the amplitudes. Fierz rearranging equ. ( 2.4 ) we
get the interaction responsible for the @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The decay rate is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in equ. ( 2.14 ). Isospin symmetry implies that the
other @xmath decay rates are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total @xmath decay rate is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar fashion we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, the first factor is the product of the isospin and final state
symmetrization factors. The second factor is the amplitude and the third
factor is the phase-space integral.

In Fig. 2.5 we show the dependence of the decay rates on the average
instanton size. We observe that the experimental @xmath rate is
reproduced for @xmath fm. This number is consistent with the
phenomenological instanton size. However, given the strong dependence on
the average instanton size it is clear that we cannot reliably predict
the decay rate. On the other hand, the following ratios are independent
of the average instanton size

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have only quoted the error due to the uncertainty in @xmath .
These numbers should be compared to the experimental results

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We note that the ratio @xmath is compatible with our results while the
ratio @xmath is not. This implies that either there are contributions
other than instantons, or that the PCAC estimate of the ratio of
coupling constants is not reliable, or that the experimental result is
not reliable. The branching ratios for @xmath and @xmath come from MARK
II/III experiments [ 46 , 47 ] . We observe that our results for @xmath
and @xmath are consistent with the experimental bounds.

Another possibility is that there is a significant contribution from a
scalar resonance that decays into @xmath . Indeed, instantons couple
strongly to the @xmath resonance, and this state is not resolved in the
experiments. We have therefore studied the direct instanton contribution
to the decay @xmath . After Fierz rearrangement we get the effective
vertex

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the integrals @xmath and @xmath are defined in equ. ( 2.14 , 2.20
). The only new matrix element we need is @xmath [ 48 ] . We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Compared to the direct decay @xmath the @xmath channel is suppressed by
a factor @xmath . Here, the first factor is due to the difference
between two and three-body phase space and the second factor is the
ratio of matrix elements. We conclude that the direct production of a
@xmath resonance from the instanton does not give a significant
contribution to @xmath . This leaves the possibility that the @xmath
channel is enhanced by final state interactions.

Finally, we present a perturbative estimate of the coupling of the
@xmath to the instanton. We follow the method used by Anselmino and
Forte in order to estimate the instanton contribution to @xmath [ 49 ] .
The idea is that the charmonium state annihilates into two gluons which
are absorbed by the instanton. The Feynman diagram for the process is
shown in Fig. 2.6 . The amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.46)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are free particle charm quark spinors and @xmath
is the Fourier transform of the instanton gauge potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The amplitude for the charmonium state to couple to an instanton is
obtained by folding equ. ( 2.46 ) with the @xmath wave function @xmath .
In the non-relativistic limit the amplitude only depends on the wave
function at the origin.

The perturbative estimate of the transition rate is easily incorporated
into the results obtained above by replacing the product @xmath in
equs. ( 2.29 - 2.36 ) according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the momentum of the charm quark in the charmonium rest
frame. We note that because of the non-perturbative nature of the
instanton field higher order corrections to equ. ( 2.48 ) are only
suppressed by @xmath .

The integral @xmath cannot be calculated analytically. We use the
parameterization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

which incorporates the correct asymptotic behavior. We find that @xmath
and @xmath provides a good representation of the integral. In Fig. 2.7
we show the results for the @xmath decay rates as a function of the
average instanton size. We observe that the results are similar to the
results obtained from the phenomenological estimate equ. ( 2.27 ). The
effective coupling @xmath differs from the estimate equ. ( 2.27 ) by
about a factor of 3. The experimental @xmath rate is reproduced for
@xmath fm.

### 2.5 Chi charm decays

Another interesting consistency check on our results is provided by the
study of instanton induced decays of the @xmath into pairs of Goldstone
bosons. The @xmath is a scalar charmonium bound state with mass @xmath
MeV and width @xmath MeV. In a potential model the @xmath corresponds to
the @xmath state. In perturbation theory the total decay rate is
dominated by @xmath . The main exclusive decay channels are @xmath and
@xmath with branching ratios @xmath and @xmath , respectively. It would
be very interesting to know whether these final states are dominated by
scalar resonances. We will concentrate on final states containing two
pseudoscalar mesons. There are two channels with significant branching
ratios, @xmath and @xmath with branching ratios @xmath and @xmath .

The calculation of these two decay rates proceeds along the same lines
as the calculation of the @xmath glueball decays. The only new
ingredient is the @xmath coupling to the gluon field strength @xmath .
We observe that the total @xmath decay rate implies that @xmath . This
suggests that a rough estimate of the @xmath coupling to @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this result we can obtain the @xmath decay rates by rescaling the
scalar glueball decay rates equ. ( 2.3 - 2.3 ) according to

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.52)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath labels the two-meson final state. In Fig. 2.8 we show the
dependence of the @xmath decay rates on the average instanton size
@xmath . We observe that the experimental @xmath decay rate is
reproduced for @xmath fm. In Fig. 2.9 we plot the ratio of decay rates
for @xmath and @xmath . Again, the experimental value is reproduced for
@xmath fm.

Finally, we can also estimate the @xmath coupling to the instanton using
the perturbative method introduced in section 2.4 . In the case of the
@xmath we use

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the derivative of the @xmath wave function at the origin
and @xmath is the loop integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 2.10 we compare the perturbative result with the
phenomenological estimate. Again, the results are comparable. The
experimental @xmath rate is reproduced for @xmath fm.

### 2.6 Conclusions

In summary we have studied the instanton contribution to the decay of a
number of “gluon rich” states in the (1.5-3.5) GeV range, the scalar
glueball, the @xmath and the @xmath . In the case of charmonium
instanton induced decays are probably a small part of the total decay
rate, but the final states are very distinctive. In the case of the
scalar glueball classical fields play an important role in determining
the structure of the bound state and instantons may well dominate the
total decay rate.

We have assumed that the gluonic system is small and that the instanton
contribution to the decay can be described in terms of an effective
local interaction. The meson coupling to the local operator was
determined using PCAC. Using this method we find that the scalar
glueball decay is dominated by the @xmath final state for glueball
masses @xmath GeV. In the physically interesting mass range @xmath the
branching ratios satisfy @xmath .

Our main focus in this work are @xmath decays into three pseudoscalar
Goldstone bosons. We find that the experimental decay rate @xmath can be
reproduced for an average instanton size @xmath , consistent with
phenomenological determinations and lattice results. This in itself is
quite remarkable, since the phenomenological determination is based on
properties of the QCD vacuum.

The ratio of decay rates @xmath is insensitive to the average instanton
size. While the ratio @xmath is consistent with experiment, the ratio
@xmath is at best marginally consistent with the experimental value
@xmath . We have also studied @xmath decays into two pseudoscalars. We
find that the absolute decay rates can be reproduced for @xmath fm.
Instantons are compatible with the measured ratio @xmath

There are many questions that remain to be answered. On the experimental
side it would be useful if additional data for the channels @xmath were
collected. One important question is whether @xmath resonances are
important. It should also be possible to identify the smaller decay
channels @xmath . In addition to that, it is interesting to study the
distribution of the final state mesons in all three-meson channels.
Instantons predict that the production mechanism is completely isotropic
and that the final state mesons are distributed according to three-body
phase space.

In addition to that, there are a number of important theoretical issues
that remain to be resolved. In the limit in which the scalar glueball is
light the decay @xmath can be studied using effective lagrangians based
on broken scale invariance [ 50 , 51 , 52 ] . Our calculation based on
direct instanton effects is valid in the opposite limit. Nevertheless,
the instanton liquid model respects Ward identities based on broken
scale invariance [ 24 ] and one should be able to recover the low energy
theorem. In the case @xmath one should also be able to study the
validity of the PCAC approximation in more detail. This could be done,
for example, using numerical simulations of the instanton liquid.
Finally we need to address the question how to properly compute the
overlap of the initial @xmath system with the instanton. This, of
course, is a more general problem that also affects calculations of
electroweak baryon number violation in high energy @xmath collisions [
53 , 54 ] and QCD multi-particle production in hadronic collisions [ 55
] .

## Chapter 3 Instantons and the spin of the nucleon

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will try to understand whether the so-called ”nucleon
spin crises” can be related to instanton effects. The current interest
in the spin structure of the nucleon dates from the 1987 discovery by
the European Muon Collaboration that only about 30% of the spin of the
proton is carried by the spin of the quarks [ 56 ] . This result is
surprising from the point of view of the naive quark model, and it
implies a large amount of OZI (Okubo-Zweig-Iizuka rule) violation in the
flavor singlet axial vector channel. The axial vector couplings of the
nucleon are related to polarized quark densities by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first linear combination is the well known axial vector coupling
measured in neutron beta decay, @xmath . The hyperon decay constant is
less well determined. A conservative estimate is @xmath . Polarized deep
inelastic scattering is sensitive to another linear combination of the
polarized quark densities and provides a measurement of the flavor
singlet axial coupling constant @xmath . Typical results are in the
range @xmath , see [ 57 ] for a recent review.

Since @xmath is related to the nucleon matrix element of the flavor
singlet axial vector current many authors have speculated that the small
value of @xmath is in some way connected to the axial anomaly, see [ 58
, 59 , 60 ] for reviews. The axial anomaly relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

implies that matrix elements of the flavor singlet axial current @xmath
are related to matrix elements of the topological charge density. The
anomaly also implies that there is a mechanism for transferring
polarization from quarks to gluons. In perturbation theory the nature of
the anomalous contribution to the polarized quark distribution depends
on the renormalization scheme. The first moment of the polarized quark
density in the modified minimal subtraction @xmath scheme is related to
the first moment in the Adler-Bardeen @xmath scheme by [ 61 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the polarized gluon density. Several authors have
suggested that @xmath is more naturally associated with the
“constituent” quark spin contribution to the nucleon spin, and that the
smallness of @xmath is due to a cancellation between @xmath and @xmath .
The disadvantage of this scheme is that @xmath is not associated with a
gauge invariant local operator [ 62 ] .

Non-perturbatively the anomaly implies that @xmath can be extracted from
nucleon matrix elements of the pseudoscalar density @xmath and the
topological charge density @xmath . The nucleon matrix element of the
topological charge density is not known, but the matrix element of the
scalar density @xmath is fixed by the trace anomaly. We have [ 63 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath where @xmath is the first coefficient of the QCD beta
function. Here, @xmath is a free nucleon spinor. Anselm suggested that
in an instanton model of the QCD vacuum the gauge field is approximately
self-dual, @xmath , and the nucleon coupling constants of the scalar and
pseudoscalar gluon density are expected to be equal, @xmath [ 64 ] , see
also [ 65 ] . Using @xmath in the chiral limit we get @xmath , which is
indeed quite small.

A different suggestion was made by Narison, Shore, and Veneziano [ 66 ]
. Narison et al. argued that the smallness of @xmath is not related to
the structure of the nucleon, but a consequence of the @xmath anomaly
and the structure of the QCD vacuum. Using certain assumptions about the
nucleon-axial-vector current three-point function they derive a relation
between the singlet and octet matrix elements,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath MeV is the pion decay constant and @xmath is the slope of
the topological charge correlator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . In QCD with massless fermions topological charge is
screened and @xmath . The slope of the topological charge correlator is
proportional to the screening length. In QCD we expect the inverse
screening length to be related to the @xmath mass. Since the @xmath is
heavy, the screening length is short and @xmath is small. Equation ( 3.7
) relates the suppression of the flavor singlet axial charge to the
large @xmath mass in QCD.

Both of these suggestions are very interesting, but the status of the
underlying assumptions is somewhat unclear. In this work we would like
to address the role of the anomaly in the nucleon spin problem, and the
more general question of OZI violation in the flavor singlet
axial-vector channel, by computing the axial charge of the nucleon and
the axial-vector two-point function in the instanton model. There are
several reasons why instantons are important in the spin problem. First
of all, instantons provide an explicit, weak coupling, realization of
the anomaly relation equ. ( 3.4 ) and the phenomenon of topological
charge screening [ 24 , 67 ] . Second, instantons provide a successful
phenomenology of OZI violation in QCD [ 68 ] . Instantons explain, in
particular, why violations of the OZI rule in scalar meson channels are
so much bigger than OZI violation in vector meson channels. And finally,
the instanton liquid model gives a very successful description of baryon
correlation functions and the mass of the nucleon [ 69 , 70 ] .

Our ideas are organized as follows. In Sect. 3.2 we review the
calculation of the anomalous contribution to the axial-vector current in
the field of an instanton. In Sect. 3.3 and 3.4 we use this result in
order to study OZI violation in the axial-vector correlation function
and the axial coupling of a constituent quark. Our strategy is to
compute the short distance behavior of the correlation functions in the
single instanton approximation and to determine the large distance
behavior using numerical simulations. In Sect. 3.5 we present numerical
calculations of the axial couplings of the nucleon and in Sect. 3.6 we
discuss our conclusions. Some results regarding the spectral
representation of nucleon three-point functions are collected in
appendix 6.1 .

### 3.2 Axial Charge Violation in the Field of an Instanton

We would like to start by showing explicitly how the axial anomaly is
realized in the field of an instanton. This discussion will be useful
for the calculation of the OZI violating part of the axial-vector
correlation function and the axial charge of the nucleon. The flavor
singlet axial-vector current in a gluon background is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the full quark propagator in the background field. The
expression on the right hand side of equ. ( 3.9 ) is singular and needs
to be defined more carefully. We will employ a gauge invariant
point-splitting regularization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we will consider an (anti) instanton in singular gauge.
The gauge potential of an instanton of size @xmath and position @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the ’t Hooft symbol and @xmath characterizes the color
orientation of the instanton. The fermion propagator in a general gauge
potential can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalized eigenvector of the Dirac operator with
eigenvalue @xmath , @xmath . We will consider the limit of small quark
masses. Expanding equ. ( 3.12 ) in powers of @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have explicitly isolated the zero mode propagator. The zero mode
@xmath was found by ’t Hooft and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a constant spinor and @xmath for an instanton/
anti-instanton. The second term in equ. ( 3.13 ) is the non-zero mode
part of the propagator in the limit @xmath [ 71 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the propagator of a scalar field in the
fundamental representation. Equ. ( 3.15 ) can be verified by checking
that @xmath satisfies the equation of motion and is orthogonal to the
zero mode. The scalar propagator can be found explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath is the free scalar propagator. The explicit
form of the non-zero mode propagator can be obtained by substituting
equ. ( 3.16 ) into equ. ( 3.15 ). We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the free quark propagator. As expected, the full
non-zero mode propagator reduces to the free propagator at short
distance. The linear mass term in equ. ( 3.13 ) can be written in terms
of the non-zero mode propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scalar propagator and @xmath is the propagator of a
scalar particle with a chromomagnetic moment. We will not need the
explicit form of @xmath in what follows. We are now in the position to
compute the regularized axial current given in equ. ( 3.10 ). We observe
that neither the free propagator nor the zero mode part will contribute.
Expanding the non-zero mode propagator and the path ordered exponential
in powers of @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that instantons act as sources and sinks for the flavor
singlet axial current. We can now compare this result to the anomaly
relation equ. ( 3.4 ). The divergence of equ. ( 3.19 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The topological charge density in the field of an (anti) instanton is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that the divergence of the axial current given in equ. ( 3.19
) does not agree with the topological charge density. The reason is that
in the field of an instanton the second term in the anomaly relation,
which is proportional to @xmath , receives a zero mode contribution and
is enhanced by a factor @xmath . In the field of an (anti) instanton we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account both equ. ( 3.21 ) and ( 3.22 ) we find that the
anomaly relation ( 3.4 ) is indeed satisfied.

### 3.3 OZI Violation in Axial-Vector Two-Point Functions

In this section we wish to study OZI violation in the axial-vector
channel due to instantons. We consider the correlation functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is one of the currents

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the brackets we have indicated the mesons with the
corresponding quantum numbers. We will work in the chiral limit @xmath .
The iso-vector correlation functions only receive contributions from
connected diagrams. The iso-vector vector ( @xmath ) correlation
function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The iso-singlet correlator receives additional, disconnected,
contributions, see Fig. 3.1 .

The iso-singlet vector ( @xmath ) correlator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axial-vector correlation functions are defined analogously. At very
short distance the correlation functions are dominated by the free quark
contribution @xmath . Perturbative corrections to the connected
correlators are @xmath , but perturbative corrections to the
disconnected correlators are very small, @xmath . In this section we
will compute the instanton contribution to the correlation functions. At
short distance, it is sufficient to consider a single instanton. For the
connected correlation functions, this calculation was first performed by
Andrei and Gross [ 72 ] , see also [ 73 ] . Disconnected correlation
function were first considered in [ 74 ] and a more recent study can be
found in [ 75 ] .

In order to make contact with our calculation of the vector and
axial-vector three-point functions in the next section, we briefly
review the calculation of Andrei and Gross, and then compute the
disconnected contribution. Using the expansion in powers of the quark
mass, equ. ( 3.13 ), we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the explicit expression for the propagators given in the previous
section we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.32)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Our result agrees with [ 72 ] up to
a color factor of @xmath , first noticed in [ 76 ] , a ’-’ sign in front
of the epsilon terms, which cancels after adding instantons and
anti-instantons, and a ’-’ sign in front of the 2nd term in @xmath .
This sign is important in order to have a conserved current, but it does
not affect the trace @xmath . Summing up the contributions from
instantons and anti-instantons we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This result has to be averaged over the position of the instanton. We
find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . The final result for the single instanton contribution to
the connected part of the vector current correlation function is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The computation of the connected part of the axial-vector correlator is
very similar. Using equs. ( 3.30 , 3.31 ) we observe that the only
difference is the sign in front of @xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in equ. ( 3.37 )

We now come to the disconnected part, see Fig. 3.2 . In the vector
channel the single instanton contribution to the disconnected correlator
vanishes [ 74 ] . In the axial-vector channel we can use the result for
@xmath derived in the previous section. The correlation function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Summing over instantons and anti-instantons and integrating over the
center of the instanton gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now summarize the results in the vector singlet ( @xmath ) and
triplet ( @xmath ), as well as axial-vector singlet ( @xmath ) and
triplet ( @xmath ) channel. The result in the @xmath and @xmath channel
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the @xmath channel we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to obtain a numerical estimate of the instanton contribution we
use a very simple model for the instanton size distribution, @xmath ,
with @xmath fm and @xmath . The results are shown in Fig. 3.3 .

We observe that the OZI rule violating difference between the singlet
and triplet axial-vector correlation functions is very small and
repulsive. We can also see this by studying the short distance behavior
of the correlation functions. The non-singlet correlators satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As explained by Dubovikov and Smilga, this result can be understood in
terms of the contribution of the dimension @xmath operators @xmath and
@xmath in the operator product expansion (OPE). The OZI violating
contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

is of @xmath and not singular at short distance. Our results show that
it remains small and repulsive even if @xmath . We also note that the
sign of the OZI-violating term at short distance is model independent.
The quark propagator in euclidean space satisfies the Weingarten
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation implies that @xmath is purely real. As a consequence we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the path integral measure in euclidean space is positive this
inequality translates into an inequality for the correlation functions.
In our convention the trace of the free correlation function is
negative, and equ. ( 3.51 ) implies that the interaction is repulsive at
short distance. The result is in agreement with the single instanton
calculation.

We can also study higher order corrections to the single instanton
result. The two-instanton (anti-instanton) contributions is of the same
form as the one-instanton result. An interesting contribution arises
from instanton-anti-instanton pairs, see Fig. 3.2 . This effect was
studied in [ 77 ] . It was shown that the instanton-anti-instanton
contribution to the disconnected meson channels can be described in
terms of an effective lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tunneling rate for an instanton-anti-instanton pair
and @xmath is the matrix element of the Dirac between the two
(approximate) zero modes. We note that this interaction is also
repulsive, and that there is no contribution to the @xmath channel.

Numerical results for the vector meson correlation functions are shown
in Figs. 3.3 and 3.4 . The correlation functions are obtained from Monte
Carlo simulations of the instanton liquid as described in [ 78 , 79 ] .
We observe that OZI violation in the vector channel is extremely small,
both in quenched and unquenched simulations. The OZI violating
contribution to the @xmath channel is repulsive. In quenched simulations
this contribution becomes sizable at large distance. Most likely this is
due to mixing with an @xmath ghost pole. We observe that the effect
disappears in unquenched simulations. The pion contribution to the
@xmath correlator is of course present in both quenched and unquenched
simulations.

Experimentally we know that the @xmath and @xmath , as well as the
@xmath and @xmath meson, are indeed almost degenerate. Both iso-singlet
states are slightly heavier than their iso-vector partners. To the best
of our knowledge there has been only one attempt to measure OZI
violating correlation functions in the vector and axial-vector channel
on the lattice, see [ 80 ] . Isgur and Thacker concluded that OZI
violation in both channels was too small to be reliably measurable in
their simulation.

### 3.4 Axial Vector Coupling of a Quark

In this section we wish to study the iso-vector and iso-singlet axial
coupling of a single quark. Our purpose is twofold. One reason is that
the calculation of the axial-vector three-point function involving a
single quark is much simpler than that of the nucleon, and that it is
closely connected to the axial-vector two-point function studied in the
previous section. The second, more important, reason is the success of
the constituent quark model in describing many properties of the
nucleon. It is clear that constituent quarks have an intrinsic
structure, and that the axial decay constant of a constituent quark need
not be close to one. Indeed, Weinberg argued that the axial coupling of
a quark is @xmath [ 81 ] . Using this value of @xmath together with the
naive @xmath wave function of the nucleon gives the nucleon axial
coupling @xmath , which is a significant improvement over the naive
quark model result @xmath . It is interesting to study whether, in a
similar fashion, the suppression of the flavor singlet axial charge
takes place on the level of a constituent quark.

In order to address this question we study three-point functions
involving both singlet and triplet vector and axial-vector currents. The
vector three-point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axial-vector function @xmath is defined analogously. We should note
that equ. ( 3.54 ) is not gauge invariant. We can define a gauge
invariant correlation function by including a gauge string. The gauge
string can be interpreted as the propagator of a heavy anti-quark, see
Fig. 3.5 . This implies that the gauge invariant quark axial-vector
three-point function is related to light quark weak transitions in
heavy-light mesons.

The spectral representation of vector and axial-vector three-point
functions is studied in some detail in the appendix 6.1 . The main
result is that in the limit that @xmath the ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

tends to the ratio of axial-vector and vector coupling constants, @xmath
. We therefore define the following Dirac traces

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As in the case of the two-point function the iso-triplet correlator only
receives quark-line connected contributions, whereas the iso-singlet
correlation function has a disconnected contribution, see Fig. 3.6 . We
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as the analogous result for the axial-vector correlator.

In the following we compute the single instanton contribution to these
correlation functions. We begin with the connected part. We again write
the propagator in the field of the instanton as @xmath where @xmath is
the zero-mode term, @xmath is the non-zero mode term, and @xmath is the
mass correction. In the three-point correlation function we get
contribution of the type @xmath , @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the only difference between the vector and axial-vector case is
the sign of ’ZMm’ and ’mZM’ terms. We have @xmath for vector (axial
vector) current insertions. The detailed evaluation of the traces is
quite tedious and we relegate the results to the appendix 6.2 .

Our main goal is the calculation of the disconnected correlation
function, which is related to OZI violation. In the single instanton
approximation only the axial-vector correlator receives a non-zero
disconnected contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Fig. 3.7 . We observe that the second trace is the axial-vector
current in the field of an instanton, see equ. ( 3.19 ). As for the
first trace, it is easy to see that neither the zero mode part of the
propagator nor the part of @xmath proportional to the free propagator
can contribute. A straight-forward computation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combined with equ. ( 3.19 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.64)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which has to be multiplied by a factor 2 in order to take into account
both instantons and anti-instantons.

Results for the vector three-point function @xmath and axial-vector
three-point function @xmath are shown in Fig. 3.8 . We observe that the
vector and axial-vector correlation functions are very close to one
another. We also note that the disconnected contribution adds to the
connected part of the axial-vector three-point function. This can be
understood from the short distance behavior of the correlation function.
The disconnected part of the gauge invariant three-point function
satisfies

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.65)
  -- -- -- --------

This expression is exactly equal to the short distance term in the
disconnected @xmath meson correlation function. The short distance
behavior of the connected three-point function, on the other hand, is
opposite in sign to the two-point function. This is related to the fact
that the two-point function involves one propagator in the forward
direction and one in the backward direction, whereas the three-point
function involves two forward propagating quarks. A similar connection
between the interaction in the @xmath meson channel and the flavor
singlet coupling of a constituent quark was found in a
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model [ 82 , 83 ] . It was observed, in particular,
that an attractive coupling in the @xmath channel is needed in order to
suppress the flavor singlet @xmath .

The same general arguments apply to the short distance contribution from
instanton-anti-instanton pairs. At long distance, on the other hand, we
expect that IA pairs reduce the flavor singlet axial current correlation
function. The idea can be understood from Fig. 3.7 , see [ 58 , 84 , 85
] . In an IA transition a left-handed valence up quark emits a right
handed down quark which acts to shield its axial charge. We have studied
this problem numerically, see Figs. 3.8 - 3.10 . We find that in
quenched simulations the flavor singlet axial three-point function is
significantly enhanced. This effect is analogous to what we observed in
the @xmath channel and disappears in unquenched simulations. We have
also studied the axial three-point function at zero three-momentum
@xmath . This correlation function is directly related to the coupling
constant, see App. 6.1 . We find that the iso-vector coupling is smaller
than one, @xmath , in agreement with Weinberg’s idea. The flavor singlet
coupling, on the other hand, is close to one. We observe no suppression
of the singlet charge of a constituent quark. We have also checked that
this result remains unchanged in unquenched simulations.

### 3.5 Axial Structure of the Nucleon

In this section we shall study the axial charge of the nucleon in the
instanton model. We consider the same correlation functions as in the
previous section, but with the quark field replaced by a nucleon
current. The vector three-point function is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a current with the quantum numbers of the nucleon.
Three-quark currents with the nucleon quantum numbers were introduced by
Ioffe [ 86 ] . He showed that there are two independent currents with no
derivatives and the minimum number of quark fields that have positive
parity and spin @xmath . In the case of the proton, the two currents are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is sometimes useful to rewrite these currents in terms of scalar and
pseudo-scalar diquark currents. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Instantons induce a strongly attractive interaction in the scalar
diquark channel @xmath [ 69 , 87 ] . As a consequence, the nucleon
mainly couples to the scalar diquark component of the Ioffe currents
@xmath . This phenomenon was also observed on the lattice [ 88 ] . This
result is suggestive of a model of the spin structure that is quite
different from the naive quark model. In this picture the nucleon
consists of a tightly bound scalar-isoscalar diquark, loosely coupled to
the third quark [ 89 ] . The quark-diquark model suggests that the spin
and isospin of the nucleon are mostly carried by a single constituent
quark, and that @xmath .

Nucleon correlation functions are defined by @xmath , where @xmath are
Dirac indices. The correlation function of the first Ioffe current is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector and axial-vector three-point functions can be constructed in
terms of vector and axial-vector insertions into the quark propagator,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The three-point function is given by all possible substitutions of
equ. ( 3.71 ) and ( 3.72 ) into the two-point function. We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
              @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.73)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the first term is the vector insertion into the @xmath quark
propagator in the proton, the second term is the insertion into the
@xmath diquark, and the third term is the disconnected contribution, see
Fig. 3.11 . The vector charges of the quarks are denoted by @xmath . In
the case of the iso-vector three-point function we have @xmath , @xmath
and in the iso-scalar case @xmath .

Vector and axial-vector three-point functions of the nucleon are shown
in Figs. 3.12 and 3.13 . In order to verify that the correlation
functions are dominated by the nucleon pole contribution we have
compared our results to the spectral representation discussed in the
appendix 6.1 , see Fig. 3.12 . The nucleon coupling constant was
determined from the nucleon two-point function. The figure shows that we
can describe the three-point functions using the phenomenological values
of the vector and axial-vector coupling constants. We have also checked
that the ratio of axial-vector and vector current three-point functions
is independent of the nucleon interpolating field for @xmath fm. The
only exception is a pure pseudo-scalar diquark current, which has
essentially no overlap with the nucleon wave function.

The main result is that the iso-vector axial-vector correlation function
is larger than the vector correlator. The corresponding ratio is shown
in Fig. 3.13 , together with the ratio of @xmath correlation functions.
We find that the iso-vector axial coupling constant is @xmath , in good
agreement with the experimental value. We also observe that the ratio of
point-to-point correlation functions is larger than this value. As
explained in the appendix, this shows that the axial radius of the
nucleon is smaller than the vector radius. Taking into account only the
connected part of the correlation function we find a singlet coupling
@xmath . The disconnected part is very small, @xmath . Assuming that
@xmath this implies that the OZI violating difference @xmath is small.
This result does not change in going from the quenched approximation to
full QCD.

We have also studied the dependence of the results on the average
instanton size, see Fig. 3.14 . We observe that there is a slight
decrease in the iso-singlet coupling and a small increase in the
iso-vector coupling as the instanton size is decreased. What is
surprising is that the disconnected term changes sign between @xmath fm
and @xmath fm. The small value @xmath obtained above is related to the
fact that the phenomenological value of the instanton size is close to
the value where @xmath changes sign. However, even for @xmath as small
as 0.2 fm the disconnected contribution to the axial coupling @xmath is
smaller in magnitude than phenomenology requires.

### 3.6 Conclusions

The main issue raised by the EMC measurement of the flavor singlet axial
coupling is not so much why @xmath is much smaller than one - except for
the naive quark model there is no particular reason to expect @xmath to
be close to one - but why the OZI violating observable @xmath is large.
Motivated by this question we have studied the contribution of
instantons to OZI violation in the axial-vector channel. We considered
the @xmath meson splitting, the flavor singlet and triplet axial
coupling of a constituent quark, and the axial coupling constant of the
nucleon. We found that instantons provide a short distance contribution
which is repulsive in the @xmath meson channel and adds to the gauge
invariant flavor singlet three-point function of a constituent quark. We
showed that the sign of this term is fixed by positivity arguments.

We computed the axial coupling constants of the constituent quark and
the nucleon using numerical simulations of the instanton liquid. We find
that the iso-vector axial coupling constant of a constituent quark is
@xmath and that of a nucleon is @xmath , in good agreement with
experiment. The result is also in qualitative agreement with the
constituent quark model relation @xmath . The flavor singlet coupling of
quark is close to one, while that of a nucleon is suppressed, @xmath .
However, this value is still significantly larger than the experimental
value @xmath . In addition to that, we find very little OZI violation,
@xmath . We observed, however, that larger values of the disconnected
contribution can be obtained if the average instanton size is smaller
than the phenomenological value of @xmath fm.

There are many questions that remain to be addressed. In order to
understand what is missing in our calculation it would clearly be useful
to perform a systematic study of OZI violation in the axial-vector
channel on the lattice. The main question is whether the small value of
@xmath is a property of the nucleon, or whether large OZI violation is
also seen in other channels. A study of the connected contributions to
the axial coupling constant in cooled as well as quenched quantum QCD
configurations was performed in [ 90 ] . These authors find @xmath in
both cooled and full configurations. The disconnected term was computed
by Dong et al. [ 91 ] . They find @xmath .

In the context of the instanton model it is important to study whether
the results for @xmath obtained from the axial-vector current
three-point function are consistent with calculations of @xmath based on
the matrix element of the topological charge density @xmath [ 92 , 93 ,
94 , 95 ] . It would also be useful to further clarify the connection of
the instanton liquid model to soliton models of the nucleon [ 96 ] . In
soliton models the spin of the nucleon is mainly due to the collective
rotation of the pion cloud, and a small value for @xmath is natural [ 97
, 98 ] . The natural parameter that can be used in order to study
whether this picture is applicable is the number of colors, @xmath .
Unfortunately, a direct calculations of nucleon properties for @xmath
would be quite involved. Finally it would be useful to study axial form
factors of the nucleon. It would be interesting to see whether there is
a significant difference between the iso-vector and iso-singlet axial
radius of the nucleon. A similar study of the vector form factors was
recently presented in [ 99 ] .

## Chapter 4 Group integration

### 4.1 General remarks

Group integration became an important tool in physics with the
development of lattice gauge theories [ 101 ] . Since then it enjoyed
more attention in other areas as well, like instantons [ 102 , 103 ] or
random matrix theory, e.g. [ 104 ] . In this chapter we elaborate on an
idea of Michael Creutz and present an algorithm for computing integrals
over elements of a compact group.

A lot of progress has been made in the direction of solving the
generating functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which enables one to express any other integral of a general function
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Different methods have been used to compute ( 4.1 ). Direct integration
over parametrized @xmath and @xmath was given in [ 105 ] , and polar
decomposition of @xmath and integration over angular variables in [ 106
] . Another approach was to construct and solve a partial differential
equation which @xmath satisfies due to its invariance w.r.t. left and
right actions of the group [ 107 , 108 ] . The author of [ 109 ]
expanded @xmath in powers of invariants and computed numerically the
coefficients up to some order using again a differential equation.
Character expansion (for recent work see [ 111 ] ) proved to be a
powerful method, used for @xmath in [ 110 ] . More recently [ 104 ] a
@xmath expansion of integrals over monomials in @xmath and @xmath matrix
elements was developed, with the leading and next-to-leading order terms
computed using a standard integral over @xmath with a modified Gaussian
measure.

The method we propose lacks the elegance of character expansion of
generating functional. Its simplicity, however, makes it a handy tool
for evaluating group integrals over any compact group and any
representation. Moreover, it is easily implementable as a computer
algorithm once the group invariants are known. The same idea may also be
applied to evaluating integrals of tensorial structure over any manifold
with a measure possessing some kind of symmetry.

The flow of ideas has the following structure: in section 4.2 we
introduce the main properties of Haar measure. We state the algorithm in
section 4.3 and exemplify it on fundamental and adjoint representations
of @xmath in section 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.

### 4.2 Properties of Haar measure

The algorithm being proposed relies heavily on the properties of the
Haar measure ¹ ¹ 1 for a more detailed discussion see e.g. [ 101 ] and
references therein. :

For any compact group there exists a unique left-right invariant
measure, normalized to unity, such that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are elements of the group and @xmath is the Haar measure.

The left-right invariance of the measure is the analog of translational
invariance of the @xmath integral and for finite groups represents the
invariability of the number of elements w.r.t. multiplication by a fixed
element of the group. The examples of group measure [ 101 ] :

for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 4.3 The algorithm for group integration

We will present here the main idea, mentioned before in [ 108 ] but, to
our knowledge, never carried out completely.

For the purpose of integration we will not need an exact expression for
the measure, like ( 4.6 ),( 4.7 ). We will only use the general
properties of the Haar measure, making the algorithm applicable to any
compact group.

We are interested in the most general integral of a monomial in group
elements:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represents @xmath for SU(N) or @xmath for SO(N) or @xmath
for a general compact group.

In order to exemplify the idea, we will consider first the simple
example of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The right invariance ( 4.4 ) implies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that @xmath has to be an invariant of the group in ’right’
indices @xmath . The same argument with left invariance of the measure
compels @xmath to be separately an invariant in ’left’ indices @xmath as
well. There is only one second rank invariant tensor with upper and
lower index for SU(N): @xmath . Therefore, the integral ( 4.9 ) has to
be of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constant @xmath is found easily by contracting with @xmath and using
@xmath and the unit normalization ( 4.3 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So the integral then is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is nothing else but the orthogonality relation for fundamental
representation. The non-existence of one-index invariant leads directly
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same steps as in the above examples can be followed for any integral
of the type ( 4.8 ). Let us summarize them in the form of the following
algorithm:

-   Generate all the independent invariant tensors with the index
    structure of ( 4.8 ). The result of integration will be take the
    form:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   Use index pairs exchange symmetry(e.g. @xmath ) to identify the
    tensors with the same numerical coefficients.

-   Compute the independent coefficients by multiplying ( 4.8 ) with the
    corresponding invariant tensors (e.g. contracting indices with
    @xmath tensor).

Throughout the this work we deal with SU(N). However, the same
philosophy is applicable to any compact group.

### 4.4 Integration over fundamental representation of SU(N)

The invariant tensors depend on the group (e.g. vary with N in SU(N)) as
well as representation. For fundamental representation of SU(N) we have
two basic invariants, out of which the rest is constructed: @xmath and
@xmath . The invariance can be seen easily from the unitarity and
unimodularity.

The result of a particular integral will depend on N, e.g. ² ² 2 the
coefficient of @xmath is determined by multiplication with the invariant
tensor itself: @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Despite of having different invariants for different N, there are many
cases the result has the same form, but coefficients depend on N. An
example is the integral with the same number of @xmath and @xmath ’s,
schematically @xmath ,on which we will focus in this paragraph.

Let us then follow the proposed algorithm and compute @xmath . First we
generate all left-right invariant terms. Using symmetries of the measure
we identify the terms with the same numeric coefficients. Finally we
multiply both sides with the very same set of invariants and solve the
obtained system of linear equations for the unknown coefficients.

So what are the possible invariants we can construct? The building
blocks are Kronecker’s @xmath and @xmath tensors.

First of all, there are @xmath terms of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. a @xmath for each up-down pair both in left and right indices.

Then, for @xmath we can use @xmath or @xmath to form terms like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath tensors must come in pairs , both with upper and
lower indices, left or right(or both). The reason is obvious: @xmath ’s
require both an upper and a lower index; if an @xmath with lower indices
is used, then the only invariant left for upper extra indices is another
@xmath . One could thus have pairs of @xmath in left and right indices,
having different structure for different N. Fortunately, this is not the
case, as products of @xmath ’s can be expanded in products of @xmath ’s.

The important observation is, that any pair of @xmath ’s in upper and
lower indices can be written as a completely antisymmetric sum of
products of Kronecker @xmath tensors:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, independently on N, the final result will only contain
products of @xmath ’s, it will be of the form of ( 4.14 ).

Having noticed this, we only need to generate all the possible ( @xmath
combinations, identify common coefficients and compute them.(the actual
values of coefficients will depend on N).

We will present the calculation up to @xmath , for the higher order
integrals one would use a computer program to generate terms and compute
the coefficients.

#### 4.4.1 Case n=2

We will treat the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

in some detail in order to unveil the ideas that are useful in the more
involving case of higher n.

The integral will contain @xmath terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we represent @xmath by a line joining the indices. ³ ³ 3 In all
the subsequent diagrams the places of indices are the same as in the
first diagram, so we omit them for the sake of simplicity Each line has
to join an upper left(right) index with a lower left(right) index. No
connections between left and right indices are allowed. The indices in
the above graphs have always the same position as in the first
parenthesis of ( 4.18 )

The @xmath and @xmath symmetry of ( 4.17 ) allows us to identify the
equal coefficients among @xmath . Under @xmath the diagrams (1 and 4) as
well as (2 and 3) interchange. Therefore @xmath and @xmath .

It is easy to identify the diagrams that have the same coefficients by
the topology of diagrams. Take pairs of 1 left and 1 right index, e.g.
lower @xmath or upper @xmath . What matters is how many of these pairs
of indices are interconnected: in @xmath and @xmath terms one only has
(1 upper pair - 1 lower pair) @xmath connections. These two diagrams are
pair-exchange equivalent. The @xmath diagram is topologically different:
there is a (2 upper pairs - 2 lower pairs) @xmath -interconnection: both
pairs of upper indices (lk) are connected to both pairs of lower (ij)
indices. This diagram is pair-exchange equivalent to @xmath and falls in
the same topological set of diagrams. This easy way to identify diagrams
with the same coefficients will prove very useful in calculating
integrals with higher n.

Computing the coefficients is straight-forward: contract with ’right’
@xmath to get on one hand, from ( 4.11 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, on the other hand ( 4.18 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Matching the two sides we get the coefficients. The result then is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.4.2 Case n=3

The number of terms in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

increases to @xmath . They will be grouped in 3 topologically different
classes having the same coefficients in the front:

-   6 terms of type (1-1,1-1,1-1), like e.g.

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    linking 1 pair of upper to 1 pair of lower indices.

-   18 terms of type (2-2, 1-1) having 2 pairs of lower and 2 pairs of
    upper indices interconnected in addition to one upper to one lower
    pair @xmath connection. Examples of diagrams from this category:

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

-   12 terms of type(3-3) having all 3 pairs of upper indices and 3
    pairs of lower indices interconnected, e.g. diagrams:

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

The coefficients can be found in a similar way to the case of @xmath .
The result is:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                          
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where different terms in @xmath are generated by interchanges of @xmath
pairs or @xmath pairs, and have the same topology as the first term in
parenthesis.

For @xmath the coefficients are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

An important requirement is, that the invariant tensors are independent.
The 3! terms of type @xmath and permutations are indeed independent for
@xmath . However, for @xmath there are ’too many’ indices and only 2
possible values for each index. This leads to the following
relationship:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case of having dependent tensors one can follow the same
strategy up to one point: after contracting the indices in order to
figure out the coefficients, one has to express everything in terms of a
basis of independent tensors, and only then compare the coefficients.
For SU(2) this leads to the same form of result ( 4.4.2 ) with the
parameter-dependent coefficients:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The parameter t cancels if one goes to the basis of 5 independent @xmath
tensors so we can as well set it to zero.

For higher @xmath one has to take this subtlety into account also for
@xmath The same idea will prove useful in the next paragraph, when we
treat the integral over adjoint representation.

### 4.5 The integral over adjoint representation of SU(N)

In a number of cases one encounters integrals of type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the adjoint representation of @xmath satisfying @xmath , with @xmath
the generators of SU(N) normalized to @xmath .

To solve this integral, one can straight-forwardly integrate over u’s
and then contract the result with @xmath ’s and perform the trace. For
example:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For higher n the number of terms of @xmath grows as @xmath and the
evaluation of the integral, although straight-forward, becomes tedious.
For this reason, we present here a more manageable way of computation,
based on the above algorithm.

First of all, let’s note some properties of @xmath matrices:

-   @xmath is the adjoint representation of @xmath group ⁴ ⁴ 4 We will
    denote by @xmath the adjoint matrix corresponding to the group
    element @xmath . When there is no ambiguity on what element the R
    corresponds to, we will skip writing u’s, usually it will mean that
    all the R matrices correspond to the same group element :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The matrices form a subgroup of @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Under the left-right action of the group, it rotates as follows:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

The main idea of the algorithm applies here as well: the left-right
invariance of the measure in ( 4.25 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, @xmath has to be of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up to now, everything is similar to what we had for integration over
fundamental representation. However, the construction of invariants will
be more involved, due to two extra ’building blocks’: @xmath and @xmath
. The SU(3) invariants up to the 5th rank can be found e.g. in [ 112 ,
114 ] . One might also find useful some @xmath relations in [ 113 ] .

The symmetries used for determining the common coefficients of
invariants are:

-   @xmath exchange symmetry

-   @xmath symmetry stemming from inversion invariance of the measure,
    as in ( 4.5 )

Following the algorithm presented above, we computed the following
integrals:

#### 4.5.1 Case n=1

The non-existence of 1 index invariant leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

as we explicitly computed in ( 4.26 ).

#### 4.5.2 Case n=2

There is only one ⁵ ⁵ 5 we need separately an invariant for left and one
for right indices second rank invariant: @xmath , and one easily gets
the orthogonality relation for the adjoint representation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.5.3 Case n=3

There are 2 third rank invariants: @xmath and @xmath and so

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For SU(2) we have @xmath and one just disregards the second term in the
result above.

#### 4.5.4 Case n=4

We will use the following diagrammatic representation:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The bracketed terms will mean invariants both in left (’a’) and right
(’b’) indices. The places of indices is always the same as in the
following examples:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so on. For SU(2) this is still a simple integral, since the only
independent invariant tensors are again products of @xmath (The
structure constants tensors reduce to product of @xmath ’s as well, due
to ( 4.16 )). The straight-forward application of the algorithm leads
for SU(2) to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --------

Following [ 114 ] , one can construct 9 independent invariants of 4th
rank for adjoint @xmath and 8 for SU(3).

In terms of diagrams, the @xmath result for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients for the case of @xmath are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subtlety for SU(3) relies on an extra, SU(3)-specific relation
between d tensor components [ 113 ] . Diagrammatically:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This reduces the basis of independent tensors to 8. One has to keep this
in mind when making contractions to get the coefficients. The system of
equations will then be under-determined and the parametric ⁶ ⁶ 6 Since
@xmath , @xmath cancel when one expresses all in terms of independent
basis, we can as well choose them to be zero. solution for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For higher @xmath one needs to take into consideration the analogous
relations of the equation ( 4.38 ) for SU(4), SU(5)…

### 4.6 Conclusions

We have presented a ’down to earth’ algorithm for evaluating group
integrals. While lacking the elegance of more group-theoretic
approaches(like character expansion), the strength of our method is in
its simplicity, allowing one to reach the result in an easy and short
way. We illustrated the method on examples of integrals over @xmath
fundamental and adjoint representation, but the algorithm is not
restricted to these particular groups. While some of the results for
@xmath we derived have already been known, the results for @xmath , to
our knowledge, have not been published.

## Chapter 5 Summary and outlook

We have studied instanton contributions to processes with unusual
spin-flavor structure. The first part of thesis focused on the decay of
scalar and pseudoscalar charmonium and glueball. We found an internally
consistent picture that agrees well with instanton phenomenology and
lattice results. The decay rates of studied processes are reproduced by
instanton computation with the average size of instanton @xmath . The
ratios of decay rates do not depend on the average size of instantons
and agree, with one exception, with the experimental values.

A better understanding of @xmath decay would come with more experimental
data. For example, it would be useful to compare our predictions with
the data on smaller decay channels @xmath . The distribution of final
state mesons would also be of interest, as we could test the prediction
of instanton-based isotropic production.

In the second part of our work we turned our attention to the problem of
nucleon spin. The experimental findings point to a large OZI violation
in the flavor singlet axial vector channel. Therefore we studied the OZI
violation in axial-vector two-point functions and axial vector coupling
of quark and nucleon. We found little reduction in the value of the
flavor singlet coupling of quark, @xmath , while some suppression was
present in the coupling of the nucleon: @xmath . However, the
experimental value @xmath is significantly lower. Since the studied
quark two and three point functions do not show large OZI violation we
conclude that the structure of nucleon spin is given by another,
possibly more complicated mechanism which does not show on the quark
level, but is specific to nucleon.

It would be interesting to study the connection to calculations of
@xmath based on the matrix element of the topological charge density
@xmath . One should also be able to get some insight from the lattice
calculations of OZI violation in the axial vector channel.

In the last part of present work we elaborated an algorithm for group
integration and exemplified it on @xmath fundamental and adjoint
representations. Although straight-forward, we hope the reader will find
it a useful gadget, handy but inexpensive, with no reason not to have it
in one’s toolbox.

## Chapter 6 Appendix {Appendix}

### 6.1 Spectral Representation

#### 6.1.1 Nucleon Two-Point Function

Consider the euclidean correlation function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a nucleon current and @xmath is a Dirac index. We can
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath have spectral representations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are spectral functions and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

are the euclidean coordinate space propagator of a scalar particle with
mass @xmath and its derivative with respect to @xmath . The contribution
to the spectral function arising from a nucleon pole is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the coupling of the nucleon to the current, @xmath , and
@xmath is the mass of the nucleon. It is often useful to consider the
point-to-plane correlation function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral over the transverse plane insures that all intermediate
states have zero three-momentum. The nucleon pole contribution to the
point-to-plane correlation function is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 6.1.2 Scalar Three-Point Functions

Next we consider three-point functions. Before we get to three-point
functions of spinor and vector currents we consider a simpler case in
which the spin structure is absent. We study the three-point function of
two scalar fields @xmath and a scalar current @xmath . We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spectral representation of the three-point function is complicated
and in the following we will concentrate on the contribution from the
lowest pole in the two-point function of the field @xmath . We define
the coupling of this state to the field @xmath and the current @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath is the scalar form factor. The pole
contribution to the three-point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scalar propagator and @xmath is the Fourier
transform of the form factor. In order to study the momentum space form
factor directly it is convenient to integrate over the location of the
endpoint in the transverse plane and Fourier transform with respect to
the midpoint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The correlation function directly provides the form factor for
space-like momenta. Maiani and Testa showed that there is no simple
procedure to obtain the time-like form factor from euclidean correlation
functions [ 100 ] .

Form factors are often parametrized in terms of monopole, dipole, or
monopole-dipole functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . For these parametrization the Fourier transform to
euclidean coordinate space can be performed analytically. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We also consider three-point functions involving a vector current @xmath
. The matrix element is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pole contribution to the vector current three-point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . For the parameterizations given above the
derivative of the coordinate space form factor can be computed
analytically. We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 6.1.3 Nucleon three-point functions

Next we consider three-point functions of the nucleon involving vector
and axial-vector currents. The vector three-point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axial-vector three-point function is defined analogously. The
nucleon pole contribution involves the nucleon coupling to the current
@xmath and the nucleon matrix element of the vector and axial vector
currents. The vector current matrix element is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the form factors @xmath are related to the electric and magnetic
form factors via

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The axial-vector current matrix element is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the axial and induced pseudo-scalar form factors.

We are interested in extracting the vector and axial-vector coupling
constants @xmath and @xmath . In order to determine the vector coupling
@xmath we study the three-point function involving the four-component of
the vector current in the euclidean time direction. For simplicity we
take @xmath . We find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The two independent structures @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are the Fourier transforms of the the Dirac form factors
@xmath , and we have defined @xmath and @xmath .

In order to extract the axial-vector coupling we study three-point
functions involving spatial components of the axial-vector current. We
choose the three-component of the current and again take @xmath with
@xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.33)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the Fourier transforms of the nucleon axial and induced
pseudo-scalar form factors.

These results are quite complicated. The situation simplifies if we
consider three-point functions in which we integrate all points over
their location in the transverse plane. The vector three-point function
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector coupling. Note that the three-point function
of the spatial components of the current vanishes when integrated over
the transverse plane. The axial-vector three-point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the axial-vector coupling. In the case of the
axial-vector current the three-point function of the time component of
the current vanishes when integrated over the transverse plane. This is
why we consider three-point function involving the spatial components of
the axial current.

#### 6.1.4 Phenomenology

In Fig. 6.1 we show the nucleon pole contribution to the vector and
axial-vector three-point functions. We have used the phenomenological
values of the iso-vector coupling constants

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have parametrized @xmath and @xmath by dipole functions with @xmath
GeV and @xmath GeV. The induced pseudoscalar form factor is parametrized
as a pion propagator multiplied by a dipole form factor with dipole mass
@xmath .

We observe that at distances that are accessible in lattice or instanton
simulations, @xmath fm, the typical momentum transfer is not small and
the correlation function is substantially reduced as compared to the
result for a point-like nucleon. We also observe that the @xmath and
@xmath form factors make substantial contributions. Fig. 6.2 shows that
the ratio of the axial-vector and vector correlation functions is
nevertheless close to the value for a point-like nucleon, @xmath . We
observe that the ratio of point-to-point correlation functions
approaches this value from above. This is related to the fact that the
axial radius of the nucleon is smaller than the vector radius. As a
consequence, the point-to-point correlation function at finite
separation @xmath “sees” a larger fraction of the axial charge as
compared to the vector charge.

{Appendix}

### 6.2 Instanton contribution to quark three-point functions

In this appendix we provide the results for the traces that appear in
the single instanton contribution to the quark three-point function. Our
starting point is the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

see equ. ( 3.61 ). Due to the Dirac structure of the non-zero mode part
of the propagator, the @xmath term is the same for both the vector and
axial-vector correlation functions. It has 4 parts stemming from
combinations of the two terms of non-zero mode propagator equ. 3.17

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.39)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.40)
                                @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.42)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Dirac trace @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is short for @xmath . The @xmath term is easily seen to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . The @xmath term is obtained similarly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For all the above formulas, we need to add instanton and anti-instanton
contribution and integrate over the position of the instanton, which was
suppressed above. As usual, for an instanton at position @xmath we have
to shift @xmath according to @xmath , etc.

#### 6.2.1 Computation of path exponent

The correlation functions of operators at different points are made
gauge invariant by introducing the connector, the Wilson line. In this
appendix we compute the Wilson line in instanton background.

In order to perform the computation, we need to evaluate the path
exponent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a general gauge configuration that is not an easy task as the path
exponent is defined as follows. Parametrize the path by @xmath . The
integral in the exponent is then a limit of a sum of matrices, which
might not commute. Expand the exponential in power series and reorder
the matrices in each term in decreasing value of parameter s. The sum
obtained this way is the well-known Wilson line.

For the path exponent along a straight line in the field of an instanton
the computation is actually much simpler. Let us parametrize the line by
@xmath , so that the end points @xmath and @xmath correspond to @xmath
and @xmath respectively. The integral then reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath Pauli matrices.

The second term in the numerator vanishes due to the anti-symmetry of
t’Hooft’s tensor @xmath . Then the integrand is in fact a constant
matrix multiplied by a function of @xmath at any point on the line. As a
result, no path-ordering is necessary since the matrices at any point
commute. Therefore we can integrate first and then expand the
exponential to get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The expansion of the exponent of Pauli matrices is then easy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.49)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the modulus of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the above formulas we took the instanton to be centered at 0. The
generalization to instanton center at z is straight-forwardly obtained
by the replacement @xmath and @xmath .

For example, for the case of an infinite line in 4-direction we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in agreement with formula (206) of [ 24 ] .

{Appendix}

### 6.3 Euclidean matrices, conventions, ..

We use the following conventions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The contractions of @xmath therefore are

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.52)
  -- -- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath

Euclidean gamma matrices are defined as @xmath . We take @xmath and
@xmath . The following relations apply: @xmath , @xmath One can easily
compute the traces:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Some useful decomposition:(for transparency we will short our notation
from @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Dirac trace @xmath was defined in 6.44 . The four vector of
@xmath matrices is @xmath while the color - rotated matrices are given
as @xmath . Here @xmath is the adjoint representation rotation matrix,
defined as @xmath , with @xmath . The following relations link the
@xmath generators to t’Hooft @xmath tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The definition and useful properties of @xmath can be found e.g. in [ 24
] . For our computations suffices to list the most often used formulas:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is @xmath ( @xmath ) for upper (lower) sign.

After tracing the color indices, all the rotation matrices cancel due to
orthogonality @xmath and unimodularity @xmath . The following traces are
therefore also valid for color-rotated matrices.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

As one can easily see, the traces of @xmath matrices @xmath can be
obtained from the traces of corresponding @xmath matrices projected to
the particular 2x2 submatrix as follows: @xmath

We also provide some useful decompositions for the multiplication of
color matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --