One of the least accurate tested sectors of the Standard Model of
elementary particles is the quark mixing mechanism. It encodes the
transitions between different quark families in weak charged–current
decays in terms of the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa–matrix @xmath . A
complex phase @xmath in this matrix is the only possible source of the
violation of the CP–symmetry in the Standard Model. This fact makes the
study of @xmath mandatory: As soon as the measurements of CP–violation
cannot be fitted with the single parameter @xmath , evidence of new laws
of physics will be found. Today the only unambiguously measured
CP–violating phenomenon is the indirect CP–violation present in the
@xmath transitions inducing the mixing of the neutral Kaon states @xmath
and @xmath . It is characterized by the well determined parameter @xmath
. Even from this single experiment on CP–violation one can test the
Standard Model, because together with the unitarity of @xmath it
constrains some parameters of the Standard Model such as the mass of the
top–quark.

On the theoretical side the study of @xmath is challenged by the
presence of the strong interaction, which may screen or enhance the weak
transition amplitudes of quarks and which binds the quarks into hadrons.
The short distance QCD effects are comprised in the parameters @xmath
and @xmath of the effective @xmath –hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

For the following outline we only have to explain that @xmath encodes
the relevant elements of @xmath and that @xmath in the absence of QCD
corrections.

Now for the investigation of @xmath the coefficient @xmath is most
important, but a precise determination of the subdominant term involving
@xmath is also required for a reliable analysis. The mass difference
between the two physical neutral K–mesons @xmath and @xmath , however,
is dominated by @xmath . When this work was begun, only the coefficient
@xmath was known beyond the leading log approximation [ 15 ] . This
approximation is unsatisfactory, as it involves large errors due to
renormalization scale ambiguities and as it does not allow for the use
of the fundamental QCD scale parameter @xmath .

The results of this thesis include the following:

-   The calculation of @xmath and @xmath in the next–to–leading order
    (NLO) is presented in detail.

-   An improved determination of @xmath , which is the key quantity for
    CP–violation, using the measurement of @xmath and the NLO values for
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is given. Results are tabulated as
    functions of the CKM–parameters @xmath and @xmath , the mass of the
    top–quark and of @xmath , which parametrizes the size of the
    hadronic matrix element.

-   The bounds on the Standard Model parameters resulting from the
    unitarity of @xmath are studied. We have found that with the new
    values for @xmath and @xmath a wider range of the parameters
    mentioned in ii) are allowed. In this sense the calculation has
    vindicated the Standard Model.

-   The NLO value of @xmath leads to an enhancement of the short
    distance contribution to the @xmath –mass difference. Now the short
    distance QCD contributions explain the dominant part of the measured
    mass difference. The old leading order result has suggested a
    long–distance dominance. This has been a puzzle, because
    long–distance effects are expected to be suppressed by a factor of
    @xmath with respect to the short distance contributions.

A new feature of the NLO calculation of @xmath and @xmath is the
presence of Green’s functions with two insertions of operators (bilocal
structures) both of which have a non–zero anomalous dimension. These
Green’s functions have required a subtle analysis of the renormalization
of effective field theories. The discussion includes the following
points:

-   The RG of bilocal structures is analyzed in detail. Different
    methods for the solution are presented. These include the framework
    of an inhomogeneous RG equation, which is best suited for formal
    proofs like those mentioned in vii). For the practical calculation a
    matrix formulation is given which in the case of @xmath only
    involves one @xmath –matrix instead of four of them as in the old LO
    calculation in [ 45 ] .

-   The structure of the reduced effective @xmath lagrangian is
    discussed. In matrix elements with single operator insertions those
    operators which vanish by the field equation of motion or which are
    BRS–exact do not contribute to the matrix elements. But one faces
    non–trivial contact terms, if the Green’s function contains two
    operator insertions. It is well–known [ 58 , 52 , 54 ] that these
    terms can be absorbed into @xmath operators. In our case the contact
    terms have been identified to correspond to operators describing
    subleading effects in @xmath .

-   Likewise @xmath evanescent operators appear in the effective
    lagrangian. Here we had to develop the correct prescription to deal
    with evanescent operators in bilocal structures. Just as in the case
    of the operators mentioned in vi) non–vanishing terms appear, which
    are also equivalent to the matrix elements of @xmath operators. But
    now they can be absorbed into a finite renormalization of the @xmath
    operators.

-   The analysis of vii) has stimulated a related investigation: The
    definition of evanescent operators is not unique, because one can
    add @xmath times any physical operator to them. We show that any
    definition of them leads to an effective lagrangian, in which the
    physical sector is unaffected by the presence of properly
    renormalized evanescent operators. Hence one can drop the latter
    from the reduced lagrangian. Yet the arbitariness in the definition
    leads to a renormalization scheme dependence in the physical sector.
    This result is important for practical NLO calculations, because the
    Wilson coefficients and the anomalous dimension matrix depend on the
    definition of the evanescents. Formulae to transform between the
    schemes are presented.

-   Last but not least there are about 40 two–loop tensor integrals up
    to rank six involved in the calculations. The calculation of @xmath
    has required to calculate their finite part. Here we present a
    compact formula for the most general integral which can appear in
    two–loop calculations of light hadron systems. This is the two–loop
    vacuum bubble diagram with arbitrary tensor structure, small
    infrared regulating masses on the lines flown through by one loop
    momentum and arbitrary heavy masses on the other lines. The formula
    holds in @xmath dimensions and is therefore a good investment into
    the future of higher order QCD corrections.
