Models of gauge field theories on noncommutative spaces are studied. In
the first chapter we consider a canonically deformed space. Its
noncommutativity is induced by means of a star product with a constant
Poisson tensor. We discuss the dependence of the established gauge field
theory on the choice of the star product itself: The dependence of the
action is derived and it is shown that in general two arbitrary star
products lead to two different actions. A large class of star products
which all correspond to equal actions is determined as well. The
Moyal-Weyl star product and the normal ordered star product are among
this set of star products.

In the second chapter we discuss noncommutative, abelian gauge field
theory on the @xmath symmetric plane. Two different approaches are
studied.

The first is the generalization of the theory established for a
canonically deformed space. We induce the noncommutativity via a star
product with a non-constant Poisson tensor. To be able to define a gauge
invariant action, we construct an integral with trace property
(considerations made here may be transfered to other noncommutative
spaces). The noncommutative fields are expressed in terms of the
ordinary, commutative fields via the Seiberg-Witten map. This allows us
to calculate explicitly the corrections to the commutative theory
predicted by the noncommutative one in orders of the deformation
parameter. We present the results up to first order, which shows that
new interactions appear. The integral we had to introduce is not
invariant with respect to @xmath transformations.

In the second approach we establish a gauge field theory which is @xmath
We construct a @xmath integral. It turns out that this integral is not
cyclic but possesses a “deformed” cyclic property. We establish an
@xmath covariant differential calculus. A frame for one-forms is found
as well. A crucial issue are gauge transformations: In order to obtain a
gauge invariant and @xmath invariant action, we introduce “deformed”
gauge transformations. The semi-classical limit @xmath of those gauge
transformations is examined.
