###### Contents

-    Notations and conventions
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The structure of matter
    -    1.2 Hadrons and deep inelastic scattering
    -    1.3 Quantum Chromodynamics and confinement
    -    1.4 Spin physics and the transversity distribution
    -    1.5 Outline of the thesis
-    2 Distribution functions and transversity
    -    2.1 Inclusive deep inelastic scattering
        -    2.1.1 Kinematics
        -    2.1.2 The hadronic tensor
        -    2.1.3 One gluon additions
        -    2.1.4 Leading twist part and connection with helicity
            formalism
    -    2.2 The correlation function @xmath
        -    2.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism
    -    2.3 The transversity distribution function
        -    2.3.1 Transversity and Thomas precession
    -    2.4 Inclusion of transverse momentum
    -    2.5 Cross section and spin asymmetries
    -    2.6 Summary
-    3 Fragmentation functions and the Collins function
    -    3.1 One-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering
        -    3.1.1 Kinematics
        -    3.1.2 The hadronic tensor
        -    3.1.3 Leading twist part and connection with helicity
            formalism
    -    3.2 The correlation function @xmath
        -    3.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism
    -    3.3 Cross section and asymmetries
        -    3.3.1 Transverse momentum measurements
        -    3.3.2 Transversity measurements
    -    3.4 Summary
-    4 Two-hadron fragmentation functions
    -    4.1 Two-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering
        -    4.1.1 Kinematics
        -    4.1.2 The hadronic tensor
    -    4.2 The correlation function @xmath
        -    4.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism
    -    4.3 Cross section and asymmetries
        -    4.3.1 Transversity measurements
    -    4.4 Partial wave expansion
        -    4.4.1 Center-of-mass parameters
        -    4.4.2 The correlation function @xmath with partial
            wave-expansion
        -    4.4.3 Positivity bounds on partial-wave fragmentation
            functions
        -    4.4.4 Cross section and asymmetries with partial-wave
            expansion
    -    4.5 The correlation function @xmath with transverse momentum
    -    4.6 Cross section and asymmetries with transverse momentum
    -    4.7 Partial-wave expansion with transverse momentum
    -    4.8 Summary
-    5 Spin one
    -    5.1 Spin-one targets
        -    5.1.1 Spin density matrix and spin tensor
        -    5.1.2 Interpretation of the components of the spin tensor
    -    5.2 The correlation function @xmath
        -    5.2.1 Correlation function in the helicity formalism
        -    5.2.2 Inclusion of transverse momentum
    -    5.3 Cross sections and asymmetries for spin-one targets
    -    5.4 Spin-one hadrons in the final state
        -    5.4.1 The decay of a spin-one hadron
    -    5.5 The correlation function @xmath
        -    5.5.1 Positivity bounds on spin-one fragmentation functions
    -    5.6 Cross section and asymmetries for spin-one production
    -    5.7 Summary
-    6 A model estimate of the Collins function
    -    6.1 Calculation of the Collins function
    -    6.2 Estimates and phenomenology
        -    6.2.1 Unpolarized fragmentation function and the choice of
            parameters
        -    6.2.2 Collins function
        -    6.2.3 Asymmetries in semi-inclusive DIS and @xmath
            annihilation
    -    6.3 Comparison with existing data
    -    6.4 Summary
-    7 Conclusions and outlook
    -    7.1 Conclusions
    -    7.2 Outlook
-    Summary

## Notations and conventions

The conventions will mainly follow the book of Peskin and Schroeder [
147 ] . We use the metric tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with Greek indices running over 0,1,2,3. Repeated indices are summed in
all cases. Light italic roman type will be used for four-vectors, while
boldface italic will be used for three-vectors.

### Light-cone vectors

Light-cone vectors will be indicated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The dot-product in light-cone components is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The two-dimensional transverse parts of the vectors will be written in
boldface with an index @xmath and Latin indices will be used to denote
the two transverse components only. Note that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

We introduce the projector on the transverse subspace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the antisymmetric tensor so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and we define the transverse part of the antisymmetric tensor as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### Dirac matrices

Dirac matrices will be often expressed in the chiral or Weyl
representation, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and we will make use of the Dirac structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 1 Introduction

In this thesis I will discuss three different ways to observe the
transverse spin of quarks inside the nucleons. Before embarking on such
an undertaking, I would like to spend a few pages on explaining what
makes this problem so interesting to justify investing years of research
on it. This introduction is meant especially for nonexperts, since I
will review notions well known to the experts in the field.

### 1.1 The structure of matter

When we talk about quarks inside nucleons we are referring to the best
paradigm we currently have to describe the elementary structure of
matter. The comprehension of this elementary structure is a question
that has allured philosophers and scientists since the historical
origins of philosophical thought. It is striking to observe that as
early as six hundred years BC, Greek philosophers were already
wondering: are there fundamental elements in nature, what are they and
how do they interact? Today, after more than two millennia, we learned a
lot about the structure of matter, but some of the most important
questions still elude our comprehension. We are still engaged in one of
the oldest quests of human mind.

Since 1803, when Dalton suggested his atomic hypothesis [ 85 ] , we have
gradually realized that almost all matter on earth is made up of atoms.
Atoms contain electrons – identified for the first time by J. J. Thomson
in 1897 [ 166 , 167 ] – and nuclei – introduced for the first time by
E. Rutherford in 1911 [ 153 , 98 ] . The efforts to explain precisely
the structure of atoms and the electromagnetic interaction binding
together electrons and nuclei lead to two of the major achievements of
physics in the last century: Quantum Mechanics and Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED).

In the meantime, more investigations were carried out to grasp the
structure of the nucleus inside atoms. The smallest known nucleus was
identified with a single particle [ 154 ] , the proton , while a second
constituent of heavier nuclei, the neutron , was eventually observed by
J. Chadwick [ 75 ] . Since they are the constituents of the nucleus,
protons and neutrons are referred to as nucleons . They are kept
together by the nuclear force, of which at the moment we have only an
incomplete understanding.

Although the electrons are responsible for the chemical properties of
atoms, they account for a very small fraction of the mass of the atom.
The mass of an electron is about 0.511 MeV, while the mass of a proton
is about 938 MeV. Therefore, nucleons make up for more than 99.9% of
ordinary atomic matter. If we want to understand matter, we cannot set
aside the problem of explaining the structure of nucleons. Nucleons
belong to the more general class of hadrons , of which they are the most
abundant specimen. At first, hadrons were classified as elementary
particles , i.e. without any internal substructure. Very soon this
appeared to be an unsatisfactory hypothesis, in particular since there
are so many of them (several dozens). Nowadays, the study of the
structure of hadrons represents a field of research on its own, often
designated with the name of hadronic physics . An up-to-date review of
the field can be found in Refs. 48 and 74 .

### 1.2 Hadrons and deep inelastic scattering

To interpret the information available on the properties of hadrons in
1964, M. Gell-Mann [ 99 ] and G. Zweig [ 172 ] independently suggested
that hadrons are composed of smaller constituents, the quarks , having
spin @xmath , a fractional electric charge and a new degree of freedom,
called flavor. This model is often referred to as constituent quark
model . Gell-Mann himself seemed not to believe in the existence of
quarks as real entities, but rather regarded them as convenient concepts
[ 99 ] . One of the reasons to be skeptical about the real existence of
quarks was that they have a charge that is just a fraction of the
electron charge, while the charge of all other elementary particles is
an integer multiple of that.

The quark model aimed at describing the mass, charge and spin of the
hadrons. For instance, the proton has a mass of about 1 GeV, a charge
@xmath (the same as the electron, but with opposite sign) and spin equal
to @xmath . According to the model, a proton with its spin, for
instance, in the up direction is made of two quarks with flavor up and
charge @xmath plus one quark with flavor down and charge @xmath . Two of
the quarks have spin @xmath in the up direction and one has spin @xmath
in the down direction. Each of the three quarks carries about one-third
of the mass of the proton.

Looking at the “extrinsic” properties of hadrons – like their mass,
charge and spin – was not enough to unravel the details of their
structure. To glance at the inside of hadrons, physicists resorted to
deep inelastic scattering (DIS) experiments, as in the pioneering
experiments led by Friedman, Kendall and Taylor at the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center (SLAC) [ 49 , 66 ] . In scattering experiments, a
focused beam of particles is dispersed by the interaction with a target.
The way this dispersion takes place yields information on the structure
of the target. For instance, the existence of the nucleus was suggested
by Rutherford as an explanation to the scattering experiments of Geiger
and Marsden [ 98 ] .

Basically, particle accelerators as the one at SLAC are exploited as
microscopes of extremely high resolution. The experiments at SLAC
scattered electrons off hydrogen. The interaction proceeds via the
exchange of a virtual photon with high energy and momentum. A measure of
the resolution of the experiment is given by the four-momentum squared
of the virtual photon, @xmath , or rather by the associated wavelength
@xmath . The SLAC experiments reached a maximum @xmath of 7.4 GeV @xmath
, corresponding to a resolution of the order of @xmath of the proton
size.

The results of the SLAC experiments indicated that the scattering data
did not exhibit a (strong) dependence on @xmath . They depended rather
on the variable that was later to be named @xmath -Bjorken, @xmath , in
honor of J. Bjorken. ¹ ¹ 1 We will properly define @xmath in Chap. 2 .
This property, called scaling , was predicted by Bjorken himself [ 46 ]
and explained by R. Feynman [ 95 , 47 ] , who introduced the parton
model : the proton was pictured to be a collection of almost free
point-like constituents off which the electrons scatter incoherently.
The constituents of the proton were initially called partons , but it
soon became clear that they had a lot in common with the quarks of
Gell-Mann and Zweig.

Feynman’s partons have spin @xmath , fractional electric charge and
flavor, but they have a very small mass compared to Gell-Mann’s quarks,
a few MeV against about 300 MeV. Consequently, we call them current
quarks, to distinguish them from the constituent quarks of the quark
model. But this is not the only difference between the two models. In
the constituent quark model, the proton is made up just of three quarks,
while in the parton model it turns out that there is a huge number of
quark-antiquark pairs, together with a huge number of electrically
neutral particles, later to be identified as gluons .

Deep inelastic scattering experiments are performed in some of the
world’s largest experimental facilities for high energy physics, such as
CERN, SLAC, DESY, BNL. They usually employ beams of electrons,
positrons, muons or, more rarely, neutrinos. They scatter off different
kinds of fixed targets or off a beam of protons, and they operate at
different energies and kinematic coverage.

### 1.3 Quantum Chromodynamics and confinement

The parton model raised a profound question. We experience that matter,
at least in the normal conditions on earth, is composed of hadrons – it
is the so-called hadronic matter . If quarks are the hypothetical
constituents of hadrons, they must be bound extremely tight to explain
why we have never directly observed a single isolated quark, nor a
different state of matter other than hadronic. This essential feature of
quark dynamics is known as confinement . Yet, deep inelastic scattering
suggests that in the interaction with a high- @xmath virtual photon,
quarks behave as if they were essentially free. This property is known
as asymptotic freedom . The question is then: how is it possible to
devise a theory to reconcile these two opposing properties, confinement
and asymptotic freedom?

A first attempt to implement confinement was done by postulating that
quarks have a color charge and that all detectable objects have to be
colorless (cf. Refs. 142 , 143 and references therein). By virtue of
this assumption, it is impossible to see an isolated, colored quark. On
the other hand, such a point of view is not suited to describe
asymptotic freedom. There was the need of a theory that could describe
the binding of colored quarks as a dynamical mechanism.

To shape a new theory of color interactions, it seemed natural to follow
the example of Quantum Electrodynamics, the quantum field theory of
electromagnetic interactions. QED is in essence a perturbative theory,
which works because electromagnetic interactions are weak. In fact,
electrons can be separated quite easily from atoms and observed as free
particles. A measure of the strength of the electromagnetic interaction
is given by the value of the electromagnetic coupling constant @xmath .
From renormalization of QED, it is known that in reality @xmath is not
constant, but it has to increase as the momentum exchange of the
interaction increases, or equivalently as the interaction takes place
over shorter distances. However, the increase of the coupling is so weak
(e.g. @xmath at @xmath GeV @xmath ) that perturbative QED works
brilliantly for any electrodynamics experiment we might do. Fig. 1.1
shows approximately the way the electromagnetic coupling constant
changes with @xmath .

A breakthrough in the comprehension of quark interactions came in 1973,
when D. Gross and F. Wilczek [ 102 , 101 ] and D. Politzer [ 149 ]
showed that non-Abelian quantum field theories can display the crucial
properties of asymptotic freedom, i.e. the interaction they describe is
weak at high momentum transfer (or long distances). This discovery
prompted the birth of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), a non-Abelian field
theory of color interactions.

The difference between QED and QCD can be likened to the difference
between the attraction forces of two opposite magnetic poles and of two
ends of a spring. In the first case, we know that increasing the
distance between the magnets, the attraction diminishes, while, in the
second case, separating the two ends the force will increase more and
more.

In field theory language, the electromagnetic coupling constant is
reduced at large distances due to the effect of vacuum polarization,
which is responsible for a screening of the bare electric charge. On the
contrary, the color coupling constant is reduced at short distances
because the vacuum polarization induces an antiscreening of the charge,
or equivalently an enhancement of the charge at large distances. The
reason for this different behavior is that gluons , the mediator of the
color interaction, carry color charge themselves, while photons, the
mediator of the electromagnetic interaction, are chargeless. Ref. 147
(p. 541) and Ref. 96 (p. 5) present enlightening discussions on
antiscreening and asymptotic freedom.

QCD is able to justify asymptotic freedom, but what about confinement?
At the moment, we know that QCD is not in contradiction with confinement
and might in fact explain it, but we are not able to demonstrate this
statement. As in the case of QED, the strength of color interaction is
measured by the strong coupling constant @xmath , which has a value of
about 0.117 at @xmath GeV @xmath . But at lower energy scales, e.g.
@xmath GeV @xmath , the coupling constant grows and becomes of the order
of 1. The running of the strong coupling constant is illustrated in Fig.
1.2 . We might deduce that the increase of the coupling constant is a
sign of the onset of confinement. In reality, we can only conclude that
at low energies we enter a regime where perturbation theory cannot be
trusted. Therefore, even if QCD is in principle a consistent theory at
any energy scale, we cannot use standard techniques to draw conclusions
about its behavior in the nonperturbative regime. To a certain extent,
we cannot be sure that QCD is the correct theory in this regime: maybe
it is simply an asymptotic approximation of a more profound theory.

In practice, we have to make a distinction between two major branches of
QCD: perturbative and nonperturbative, or short-distance and
long-distance. Perturbative QCD is relatively well understood. It is
essentially similar to QED, it is based on Feynman-diagram approach,
although it often requires larger sets of diagrams to attain the desired
accuracy. The theory contains pointlike and almost massless fermions
(the so-called current quarks) and massless bosons to carry their
interactions (the gluons). Probably one of the most important
achievements of perturbative QCD is the study of the way deep inelastic
scattering data change with @xmath . The striking agreement between
theory and experiments is shown in Fig. 1.3 .

On the other hand, nonperturbative QCD is poorly understood and it is a
challenging playground for fundamental physics. At the moment, our
understanding of this theory relies on lattice calculations, effective
chiral field theories, and phenomenological models.

We know that nonperturbative QCD should display confinement as a
fundamental property, at least under normal conditions. Lattice
calculations already provide strong evidence that the quark-quark
interaction potential increases linearly, and is therefore a confining
potential [ 39 ] . It is essential to understand from first principles
why this occurs, and it is desirable to explore how it is possible to
achieve a deconfined phase of QCD, maybe under extreme conditions (e.g.
neutron stars). We also know that in QCD chiral symmetry is
approximately valid. On the other hand, the existence of pions, which
are nearly massless, suggests that chiral symmetry should be
spontaneously broken, with pions being Goldstone bosons. Nonperturbative
QCD should be able to explain this feature. Nonperturbative QCD should
also explain the transition between massless current quarks and
constituent quarks.

Finally and more generally, nonperturbative QCD should lead to a
reliable quantitative description of the structure of hadrons and of
hadronic phenomena. The question at the heart of hadronic physics is:
what is the structure of hadrons in terms of their quark and gluon
constituents? Therefore, we might define hadronic physics as the branch
of physics that deals with understanding QCD, and in particular
nonperturbative QCD.

### 1.4 Spin physics and the transversity distribution

One of the key questions in understanding the structure of hadrons is:
where does the spin of the nucleons come from? In the constituent quark
model, the spin of the quarks adds up to yield the total spin of the
proton. Deep inelastic scattering experiments, however, show the
importance of other contributions, such as the spin of the gluons and
the orbital angular momenta of quarks and gluons. A measure of the quark
spin contribution is given by the distribution function @xmath , often
denoted as @xmath and usually called the helicity distribution . In a
frame of reference where the hadron is moving with a very large speed (
infinite momentum frame ) and if the direction of its spin is
longitudinal to its motion, the helicity distribution describes the
number of quarks with their spin aligned with that of the hadron minus
the number of quarks with opposite spin, it is therefore a measure of
the longitudinal spin of the quarks in the hadron. The quark helicity
distribution has been measured with a good precision, as shown in Fig.
1.4 . Naively, if the spin of the hadron is entirely due to the quark
spin as in the constituent quark model, we expect to have a net balance
of one quark spinning in the direction of the proton and thus accounting
for the whole proton spin. In reality, it turns out that (the integral
of) the helicity distribution accounts for only about 30% of the proton
spin! We expect thus that the missing spin is provided by the gluon spin
and by the orbital angular momentum of quarks and gluons. These two
quantities have not been measured yet. Even worse, we don’t know if it
is possible to measure the orbital angular momentum directly [ 123 , 103
, 43 ] .

Tab. 1.1 shows a list of all polarized deep inelastic scattering
experiments, together with their typical energies and the
characteristics of their beams and targets. The kinematic coverage of
each experiment is indicated in the table by its average @xmath (GeV
@xmath ) and @xmath range. Columns @xmath and @xmath give the average or
typical beam and target polarizations as quoted by each experimental
group. The column labeled @xmath is an estimate of the total nucleon
luminosity (# of nucleons/cm @xmath times # of beam particles/s) in
units of @xmath nucleons/cm @xmath /s for each experiment.

So far we talked about the longitudinal spin of the quarks inside the
proton, but what about the transverse spin? The observable we have to
take into consideration is the transversity distribution . In the
infinite momentum frame with the proton spin transverse to the direction
of motion, the transversity distribution describes the number of quarks
with their spin aligned with that of the hadron minus the number of
quarks with opposite spin, it is therefore a measure of the transverse
spin of the quarks in the hadron. The transversity distribution looks
very similar to the helicity distribution, as at first sight they seem
related by rotational symmetry. However, we cannot forget the fact that
the interpretation of helicity and transversity holds true only in the
infinite momentum frame, where the direction of motion of the hadron
breaks rotational symmetry.

In the rest frame of the proton, there is a probability to find quark
spins aligned with the proton’s spin. This probability is obviously the
same no matter what the spin orientation is. If we now boost the proton
to a large speed in the direction of its spin, the alignment probability
will correspond to the helicity distribution. If we boost the proton in
a direction transverse to its spin, the alignment probability will
correspond to the transversity distribution. In a nonrelativistic
situation, Galilean boosts will not affect the spin distribution and we
would still expect helicity and transversity to be equal to each other
and to the spin distribution in the rest frame. But in a relativistic
context, Lorentz boosts can affect the spin distribution and can cause
helicity and transversity to be different from each other and from the
rest-frame distribution. The way this difference arises depends on the
inner structure of the nucleon.

The transverse spin of quarks is thus another missing piece in the
proton spin puzzle. It can give new information on the dynamics of
quarks inside hadrons, complementary to the helicity distribution. In
spite of this, the transversity distribution escaped notice until 1979,
when it was introduced by J. Ralston and D. Soper [ 151 ] . In the last
decade, it has been evaluated in models [ 116 , 120 , 148 , 40 ] and
lattice computations [ 24 ] . At this point, an experimental measurement
will be needed to put all these calculations on test, but unfortunately
the transversity distribution is an elusive object to measure. Today,
looking for a practical way to observe transversity is still an open
problem. Experimental collaborations are planning its measurement at
last [ 105 , 83 , 73 ] , and some of them will resort to the methods
discussed in this thesis.

### 1.5 Outline of the thesis

The goal of the thesis is to discuss three different ways to observe the
quark transversity distribution in deep inelastic scattering.

To start with, in chapter 2 I will review the formalism of deep
inelastic scattering. I will introduce the parton distribution functions
and I will devote a particular attention to the transversity
distribution function. I will discuss totally inclusive DIS, where only
the scattered electron is detected, and I will show that it is not
possible to measure the transversity distribution in this kind of
process.

In chapter 3 , I will turn the attention to one-particle inclusive DIS,
where one of the outgoing hadrons is detected in coincidence with the
scattered electron. I will introduce fragmentation functions to describe
the production of hadronic fragments. In particular, I will demonstrate
that the presence of the transverse momentum of the outgoing hadron
allows the introduction of the Collins fragmentation function. In the
cross section of one-particle inclusive DIS, I will show the occurrence
of the product of the transversity distribution and the Collins
function. Therefore, this suggests a first way to observe the
transversity distribution of the quarks.

In chapter 4 , I will examine the more complex case of two-particle
inclusive DIS, where two of the outgoing hadrons are detected together
with the scattered electron. I will discuss how the presence of the
relative transverse momentum between the two hadrons permits the
definition of a new function, @xmath , to be connected to the
transversity distribution. In the same chapter, I will study what
happens when we assume that the two hadrons are produced only in @xmath
and @xmath waves. In addition to the usual @xmath wave contributions, I
will distinguish the pure @xmath -wave contributions and the @xmath
interference contributions. This will lead to the introduction of two
new fragmentation functions that can be observed in connection with the
transversity. They are two distinct components of the function @xmath
and they generate the second and third way I will consider to access the
transversity distribution.

In chapter 5 , I will analyze the formalism needed to deal with spin-one
hadrons in deep inelastic scattering. In the first part of the chapter I
will focus on spin-one targets, while in the second part I will study
the production of spin-one hadrons in the final states. This process has
something in common with one-particle inclusive DIS (because the
production of a single hadron is addressed), but also with two-particle
inclusive DIS (because the spin-one hadron has to decay into two hadrons
to yield information on its polarization). In particular, I will clarify
the connection between spin-one fragmentation functions and the pure
@xmath -wave sector of the analysis of two-particle production.

The various options described to measure the transversity distribution
all involve the class of T-odd fragmentation functions. ² ² 2 In fact,
in the thesis I will not deal with the well known case of spin-half
production, which involves a T-even fragmentation function. To attempt
some quantitative assessments on the magnitude of T-odd fragmentation
functions, in chapter 6 I will present a model calculation of the
Collins function and of some of the measurable quantities in which it
appears.

## Chapter 2 Distribution functions and transversity

In this chapter, we will introduce the concept of parton distribution
functions. In order to do this, first of all we will review the general
formalism of polarized deep inelastic scattering, starting from the
simplest case of inclusive processes. This subject is covered in detail
in books (e.g. Refs. 152 , 147 , 134 ), PhD theses (e.g. Refs. 135 and
164 ) and reports (e.g. Refs. 21 and 41 ). Nevertheless, it is useful to
examine the formalism from the point of view we will adopt throughout
the remaining chapters. In the analysis of distribution functions, we
will include beam and target polarization and partonic transverse
momentum. We will limit the analysis to leading order in @xmath and we
will only briefly mention @xmath corrections.

A particular attention in this chapter and in the rest of the thesis
will be reserved to the quark transversity distribution. The quark
transversity distribution @xmath [ 115 ] – also called transverse spin
distribution [ 84 ] – was first introduced by Ralston and Soper [ 151 ]
and it is an essential component in the description of the nucleon spin.
It is a chiral-odd object describing the difference of probabilities to
find in a transversely polarized hadron a quark with spin aligned or
antialigned to the spin of the hadron. The transversity distribution has
been upstaged for many years by the helicity distribution, @xmath ,
which is easier to measure. However, some experimental collaborations
are planning to measure it in the next years [ 105 , 83 , 73 ] ,
possibly using one of the techniques we will outline in the thesis.

### 2.1 Inclusive deep inelastic scattering

In deep inelastic scattering, an electron scatters off a nucleon via a
large momentum transfer, the nucleon is destroyed and many hadrons are
formed as a consequence of the collision. In inclusive events, only the
scattered electron is detected, while the hadronic final states are
unobserved. A schematic view of the process is provided by Fig. 2.1 .

#### 2.1.1 Kinematics

In electron-nucleon scattering, an electron with momentum @xmath
scatters off a nucleon with momentum @xmath , mass @xmath and spin
@xmath , via the exchange of a virtual photon with momentum @xmath . The
electron final momentum is @xmath .

We define the invariants

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and we introduce the variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In deep inelastic scattering it is required that @xmath . Usually, the
Bjorken limit is assumed ( @xmath , @xmath fixed). In particular, @xmath
represents the hard scale of the process. In this thesis, only the
leading terms in an expansion in @xmath will be retained. In agreement
with the working redefinition of twist proposed by Jaffe, we will very
often identify the expression “leading twist” with the expression
“leading order in @xmath ” [ 119 ] .

When working in the Bjorken limit, the vectors @xmath and @xmath can be
conveniently parametrized (in light-cone coordinates) as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This parametrization holds in any frame of reference where the virtual
photon direction is antiparallel to the @xmath axis. Any frame
fulfilling this requirement will be simply called collinear . The
parameter @xmath specifies uniquely a specific collinear frame of
reference. For instance, for @xmath we select the nucleon rest frame,
where @xmath is purely timelike, while for @xmath we select the
so-called infinite momentum frame, where @xmath is purely spacelike.

In a @xmath expansion, it turns out that the plus component of @xmath
plays a dominant role. This statement holds regardless of the value of
@xmath , i.e. in any collinear frame. In the nucleon rest frame @xmath
is of the order of 1, while in the infinite momentum frame it is of the
order of @xmath . However, if we take for instance the scalar
combination @xmath , we see that the component @xmath is of the order of
@xmath , whereas @xmath is of the order of 1, independently of the
frame. Therefore, we can say that the plus component of the nucleon’s
momentum is the relevant or dominant one, although only in the infinite
momentum frame it is truly dominant.

We are going to define a process as soft if the relevant component of
all momenta remains the same. In contrast, in a hard process, such as
the interaction with the hard momentum @xmath , the relevant component
has to change. Similarly, when we describe a momentum as soft with
respect to another, we mean that their relevant component is the same.

In the Bjorken limit, the electron and the proton can be considered to
be massless, @xmath and @xmath . The lepton momenta can be parametrized
as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This parametrization implies that we chose the @xmath axis of our system
as pointing in the direction of the vector product @xmath . Normally,
transverse vectors and azimuthal angles will be defined as lying on a
plane perpendicular to the direction of the virtual photon (see Fig. 2.2
).

#### 2.1.2 The hadronic tensor

The cross section for polarized electron-nucleon scattering can be
written in a general way as the contraction between a leptonic and a
hadronic tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the vector @xmath denotes the spin of the nucleon and @xmath its
azimuthal angle, @xmath denotes the helicity of the electrons and @xmath
. Fig. 2.2 illustrates the definition of the scattering plane, the
@xmath axis of our collinear frame and the azimuthal angle @xmath .

Considering the lepton to be longitudinally polarized, in the massless
limit the leptonic tensor is given by [ 141 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The leptonic tensor contains all the information on the leptonic probe,
which can be described by means of perturbative QED, while the
information on the hadronic target is contained in the hadronic tensor

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The state @xmath symbolizes any final state, with total momentum @xmath
. It is integrated over since in inclusive processes the final state
goes undetected. By Fourier transforming the delta function and
translating one of the current operators, we can rewrite the hadronic
tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the structure of the hadronic tensor cannot be specified
further, because this would require an understanding of its inner
dynamics. At most, it can be parametrized in terms of structure
functions . However, the phenomenology of DIS taught us that at
sufficiently high @xmath we can assume that the scattering of the
electron takes place off a quark of mass @xmath inside the nucleon. The
final state @xmath can be split in a quark with momentum @xmath plus a
state @xmath with momentum @xmath . Considering the electron-quark
interaction at tree level only, the hadronic tensor can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.11)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum of the struck quark, the index @xmath
denotes the quark flavor and @xmath is the fractional charge of the
quark. Note that, for simplicity, we omitted the flavor indices on the
quark fields. The integration over the phase space of the final-state
quark can be replaced by a four-dimensional integral with an on-shell
condition, so that the hadronic tensor can be rewritten as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.12)
  -- -- -- --------

Next, we Fourier transform the Dirac delta function and we introduce the
momentum @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we use part of the exponential to perform a translation of the
field operators and we use completeness to eliminate the unobserved
@xmath states, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The hadronic tensor can be written in a more compact way by introducing
the quark-quark correlation function @xmath and the antiquark-antiquark
correlation function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
                    
     @xmath         (2.16a)
     @xmath         (2.16b)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

As the quark fields should carry a flavor index that we omitted, also
the correlation functions are flavor dependent and they should be
indicated more appropriately as @xmath and @xmath . For simplicity,
@xmath will be omitted henceforth. It can be accounted for simply by
extending the summation over quarks to a summation over quarks and
antiquarks. A graphical representation of the hadronic tensor at tree
level in the parton model is given by the so-called handbag diagram ,
depicted in Fig. 2.3 .

We parametrize the quark momentum @xmath in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our approach, we assume that neither the virtuality of the quark,
@xmath , nor its transverse momentum squared, @xmath , can be large in
comparison with the hard scale @xmath . Under these conditions, the
quark momentum is soft with respect to the hadron momentum and its
relevant component is @xmath . In Eq. ( 2.15 ), neglecting terms which
are @xmath suppressed, we can use an approximate expression for the
delta function and

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.18)
                    (2.19)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where we introduced the integrated correlation function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that there is a contradiction between the fact that we assumed
the transverse momentum of the quark to be small in comparison to the
hard scale, yet we are integrating over the entire space of @xmath .
Indeed, when dealing with transverse momentum of perturbative origin
(i.e. arising from the radiation of gluons, see next section), which
typically falls down as @xmath , we have to impose a cut-off on the
maximum value the transverse momentum can reach. This cut-off depends on
the scale @xmath . On the other hand, the transverse momentum of
nonperturbative origin, usually called intrinsic transverse momentum ,
is supposed to fall off very rapidly so that there is effectively almost
no intrinsic transverse momentum above a typical scale of 1 GeV @xmath .

Finally, from the outgoing quark momentum, @xmath , we can select only
the minus component and obtain the final form for the hadronic tensor at
leading twist

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

A few words to justify the last approximation are in order. The
dominance of the minus component is most easily seen in the infinite
momentum frame, where @xmath is of the order of @xmath , while @xmath ,
and @xmath and @xmath are of the order of 1. However, if we perform a
@xmath expansion of the full expression, including the correlation
function @xmath [starting from Eq. ( 2.31 )], we would be able to check
that in any collinear frame the dominant terms arise only from the
combination of plus component in the correlation function and minus
components in the outgoing quark momentum.

#### 2.1.3 One gluon additions

Up to now, we took into consideration only quark-quark correlation
functions at tree level. The addition of a gluon can either lead to the
introduction of a quark-gluon-quark correlation function or can give
rise to perturbative corrections to the photon-quark scattering [ 82 ] .
In this thesis, we will not take quark-gluon-quark correlation functions
into account, since they start contributing only at the twist-three
level, and we will not examine perturbative corrections, since they give
only origin to a logarithmic scale dependence of the quark-quark
functions. Nevertheless, for completeness we will now give a sketchy
view of these very important issues.

When the gluons come directly from the soft blob, as in the diagram of
Fig. 2.4 , longitudinally polarized gluons ( @xmath ) are the dominant
ones, while transversely polarized gluons ( @xmath ) are subject to a
@xmath suppression. If we choose a physical gauge where @xmath , then
this kind of diagrams contribute only at twist three and higher and they
require the introduction of quark-gluon-quark correlators [ 94 ] . On
the other hand, in a different gauge the contributions of longitudinal
gluons is present and is not necessarily suppressed by any power of
@xmath . Then, we have to sum all the contributions with an arbitrary
number of longitudinal gluons. The result of this summation can be cast
in the form of a gauge link to be inserted in the definition of the
quark-quark correlation function

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.22)
  -- -- -- --------

where the gauge link is a path-ordered exponential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a straight path along the light-cone minus direction [ 58 , 94 ] .

In @xmath gauges the link is equal to unity (although some subleties
have been recently analyzed in Ref. 71 ). We will henceforth neglect it
and trade off manifest color gauge invariance for a lighter notation.
Finally, we mention that recently it has been suggested that the gauge
link could play an important role in the context of T-odd distribution
functions [ 78 ] (see Sec. 2.4 ). In particular, much care should be
taken when including partonic transverse momentum. In this case, the
gauge link path cannot simply run along the light-cone but has to have a
transverse component and it might not be reducible to unity anymore [
124 , 78 ] .

Now we take a brief look to perturbative corrections to the quark-quark
correlation function (see Refs. 96 and 147 ). They are of two kinds:
virtual gluon loop diagrams (Fig. 2.5 ) and real gluon bremsstrahlung
diagrams (Fig. 2.6 ). Each virtual diagram contains ultraviolet and
infrared divergences. The ultraviolet divergences can be cured using
standard renormalization techniques. The infrared divergences cancel
with analogous divergences in the real gluon emission diagrams [ 96 ] .

The remaining parts of the diagrams give actual @xmath corrections to
the tree level result of the previous section. In particular, collinear
divergences give origin to the leading-log part of the evolution
equations , by which the parton distribution functions (see Sec. 2.2 )
acquire a dependence on the scale @xmath [ 100 , 12 , 88 ] .

#### 2.1.4 Leading twist part and connection with helicity formalism

To identify the leading twist contributions to the cross section, it is
convenient to define the projectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Before the interaction with the virtual photon, the relevant components
of the quark fields are the plus components, @xmath . They are usually
referred to as the good components . ¹ ¹ 1 In the infinite momentum
frame the good components are truly dominant and we can avoid the
distinction between “quark” and “good quark”. Vice versa, after the
interaction with the virtual photon, the relevant components of the
outgoing quark fields are the minus components, @xmath . Therefore, the
leading twist part of the hadronic tensor in Eq. ( 2.19 ) can be
projected out in the following way (see Fig. 2.7 ) ² ² 2 Note that
@xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differential cross section defined in Eq. ( 2.6 ) takes the form

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where we explicitly showed Dirac indices (repeated indices are summed
over). In Sec. 2.2.1 , we will see in detail how the insertion of the
projectors effectively reduces the four-dimensional Dirac space into a
two-dimensional subspace. Chiral-right and chiral-left good quark
spinors can be used as a basis in this space. Therefore, it is possible
to replace the Dirac indices with chirality indices (of good fields). By
doing this, we put particular evidence on the connection with the
helicity/chirality formalism (see e.g. Refs. 112 and 19 ). In fact, the
cross section can be conveniently rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the elementary electron-quark cross section is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, we define the matrix @xmath , i.e. the transpose of the
leading-twist part of the correlation function, and we observe that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the transpose of the correlation function describes the forward
scattering of a good antiquark off a hadron, or equivalently the forward
scattering of an antiquark off a hadron in the infinite momentum frame.
As any scattering matrix, for any antiquark-hadron state @xmath the
expectation value @xmath must be positive. In mathematical terms, this
means that the matrix is positive semidefinite , i.e.  the determinant
of all the principal minors of the matrix has to be positive or zero.
This property will prove to be essential in deriving bounds on the
components of the correlation function, i.e. the parton distribution
functions.

### 2.2 The correlation function @xmath

As shown in Eq. ( 2.16a ), the quark-quark distribution correlation
function, @xmath , can be expressed in terms of bilocal operators. At
leading order in @xmath , it contains all the relevant information about
the nonperturbative dynamics of the quarks inside the hadron. Due to its
nonperturbative nature, it is not possible to calculate it from first
principles, as we don’t know how the hadronic states are built up from
the elementary quark and gluon fields.

When considering subleading orders in a @xmath expansion,
quark-gluon-quark correlation functions have to be considered, as we
briefly mentioned in Sec. 2.1.3 . In this case, the general structure of
the hadronic tensor becomes richer. In the rest of the thesis, as the
analysis will be concerned only with leading order terms, we will not
deal with quark-gluon-quark correlation functions.

To get more insight into the information contained in the correlation
function, which is a Dirac matrix, we can decompose it in a general way
on a basis of Dirac structures. Each term of the decomposition can be a
combination of the Lorentz vectors @xmath and @xmath , the Lorentz
pseudovector @xmath (in case of spin-half hadrons) and the Dirac
structures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The spin vector can only appear linearly in the decomposition (cf. Eq. (
2.43 )). Moreover, each term of the full expression has to satisfy the
conditions of Hermiticity and parity invariance

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                             
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.30a)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.30b)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and so forth for the other vectors. The most general
decomposition of the correlation function @xmath imposing Hermiticity
and parity invariance is [ 151 , 141 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the amplitudes @xmath are dimensionless real scalar functions
@xmath .

The correlation function can be separated in a T-even part and a T-odd
part, according to the definition

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.32a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.32b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the terms containing the amplitudes @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can
be classified as T-odd.

At leading twist, we are interested in the projection @xmath . After
inserting the general decomposition of Eq. ( 2.31 ) into Eq. ( 2.20 ),
we can project out the leading-twist components and obtain the general
expression [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the parton distribution functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The function @xmath is usually referred to as the unpolarized parton
distribution, and it is sometimes denoted also as simply @xmath or
@xmath (where @xmath stands for the quark flavor). The function @xmath
is the parton helicity distribution and it can be denoted also as @xmath
or @xmath . Finally, the function @xmath is known as the parton
transversity distribution; in the literature it is sometimes denoted as
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath , although in the original paper of Ralston
and Soper [ 151 ] it was called @xmath . In this thesis, we will follow
the nomenclature suggested by Jaffe and Ji [ 116 ] and later extended in
Ref. 141 , because it allows a harmonious connection with the most
general cases of transverse momentum dependent distribution functions,
as we shall see later. A thorough discussion on the different naming
schemes is presented in Ref. [ 41 ] .

The individual distribution functions can be isolated by means of the
projection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for a specific Dirac structure. In particular, we
see that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 2.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism

We will now examine how it is possible to write the correlation function
as a matrix in the chirality space of the good quark fields @xmath the
spin space of the hadron. We will work out the steps in a meticulous
way, even if we will incur the risk of introducing some redundant steps.

The correlation function is a @xmath Dirac matrix. However, due to the
presence of the projector on the good components of the quark fields,
the leading-twist part spans only a @xmath Dirac subspace. This is
evident if we express the Dirac structures of Eq. ( 2.33 ) in the chiral
or Weyl representation. Using this representation, the correlation
function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

As shown by this explicit form, it seems that the four-dimensional Dirac
space can be reduced to a two-dimensional space, retaining only the
nonzero part of the correlation function. The relevant part of the Dirac
space is the one corresponding to good quark fields. To show this
explicitly, we introduce the chiral projectors @xmath and define the
good chiral-right and good chiral-left quark spinors, i.e. the
normalized projections

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, we can define a new matrix in the chirality space of the good
quark fields

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.39)
  -- -- -- --------

Any contraction with bad quark fields vanishes. Explicit computation of
the matrix elements yields

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The correlation matrix in the good quark chirality space is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we could have expected, this result corresponds simply to taking the
full Dirac matrix in Weyl representation, Eq. ( 2.37 ), and stripping
off the zeros. From the matrix representation in the chirality space it
is clear why the function @xmath is defined to be chiral odd .

The correlation function is a matrix in the parton chirality space and
depends on the target spin. By introducing the helicity density matrix
of the target

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can obtain the correlation function from the trace of the helicity
density matrix and a new matrix in the quark chirality space @xmath the
target spin space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will refer to the last term of this relation as the matrix
representation of the correlation function or, more simply, as the
correlation matrix. Fig. 2.8 shows pictorially the position of the spin
indices.

Starting from Eq. ( 2.33 ) and using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can cast the correlation function in the matrix form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, by expressing the Dirac structures in Weyl representation and
reducing the Dirac space as done before, we obtain the matrix
representation of the correlation function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the inner blocks are in the hadron helicity space (indices @xmath
), while the outer matrix is in the quark chirality space (indices
@xmath ).

The form of the correlation matrix can also be established directly from
angular momentum conservation (requiring @xmath ) and the conditions of
Hermiticity and parity invariance. In matrix language, the condition of
parity invariance consists in [ 119 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most general form of the correlation matrix complying with the
previous conditions corresponds to Eq. ( 2.46 ).

As mentioned at the end of Sec. 2.1.4 , with transposing the quark
chirality indices of the correlation matrix we obtain the scattering
matrix [ 32 , 33 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.48)
  -- -- -- --------

Note that because of the inversion of the quark indices, the lower left
block has @xmath , @xmath and vice versa for the upper right block.
Since this matrix must be positive semidefinite, we can readily obtain
the positivity conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The last relation is known as the Soffer bound [ 159 ] .

### 2.3 The transversity distribution function

In the previous section, we wrote the forward antiquark-nucleon
scattering matrix, @xmath , in the helicity basis of the hadron and of
the good quark (to be more precise, we used the chirality basis for the
quark). Each entry, with indices @xmath , @xmath describes the product
of the amplitude for the scattering of an antiquark with helicity
(chirality) @xmath off a hadron with helicity @xmath going to anything
times the conjugate of the amplitude for antiquark with helicity @xmath
off a hadron with helicity @xmath going to anything.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this basis, the probabilistic interpretation of the functions @xmath
and @xmath is manifest, since they occupy the diagonal elements of the
matrix and they are therefore connected to squares of probability
amplitudes (see Fig. 2.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the transversity distribution is off-diagonal in the
helicity basis. This means that it does not describe the square of a
probability amplitude, but rather the interference between two different
amplitudes [see Fig. 2.10 (a)]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transversity distribution recovers a probability interpretation if
we choose the so-called transversity basis , instead of the helicity
basis, for both quark and hadron [ 119 , 113 ] . The transversity basis
is formed by the “transverse up” and “transverse down” states. They can
be expressed in terms of chirality eigenstates

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The same relation holds between the hadron transversity and helicity
states.

In the new basis, the scattering matrix takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.54)
  -- -- -- --------

and clearly the transversity distribution function can be defined as
[Fig. 2.10 (b)]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transversity distribution has been the object of several model
calculations, using e.g. the bag model [ 116 ] , the spectator model [
120 ] , the chiral soliton model [ 148 ] and others [ 40 ] . The
integral of @xmath – also known as the tensor charge of the nucleon –
has been evaluated in lattice QCD [ 24 ] . A recent review on the
transversity distribution is presented in Ref. 41 .

The transversity distribution evolves with the energy scale in a
different way as compared to the helicity distribution, without mixing
with gluons [ 28 , 50 , 38 , 132 , 109 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Transversity and Thomas precession

In the literature, it is common to find the statement that the
difference between the helicity distribution and the transversity
distribution is connected to relativistic effects, since boosts and
rotation do not commute [ 114 , 119 , 117 , 113 ] . Relativistic effects
influence observable quantities depending on the dynamics of the system
and they can therefore give important information about its structure.
Therefore, the difference between helicity and transversity
distributions can shed light on the structure of the nucleon and its
spin.

This statement can be understood even in the framework of purely
classical relativistic mechanics. We will show how relativistic effects
can change an observable in a toy model with just a little bit of
dynamical complexity. Of course, the model is not meant to describe a
nucleon. We will consider “spin” merely as a pseudovector attached to
the quark. “Helicity” will be the projection of the spin along the
momentum of the quark and “transversity” will be the projection
transverse to the momentum of the quark. Note that these quantities are
only reminescent of the real helicity and transversity.

Suppose we have a system constituted by a quark revolving in a circular
orbit with its spin aligned in the direction of the orbital axis. To
have an analogy of the helicity distribution, we boost the system to a
velocity @xmath along the direction of the orbital axis, and we measure
what is the probability of finding the helicity of the quark aligned
along the axis direction. For the transversity, we boost the system to a
velocity @xmath transverse to the axis direction, and measure the
probability of finding the transversity of the quark aligned along the
axis direction.

To properly deal with this situation in a relativistic way, we have to
take into account Thomas precession , an effect which occurs whenever a
frame of reference (in our case joined to the quark) is moving with a
velocity @xmath with respect to the observer and is at the same time
subject to an acceleration @xmath [ 111 , 165 ] . Thomas precession
causes the quark frame of reference (and the spin of the quark with it)
to precess with an angular velocity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the infinite momentum frame, the speed of revolution of the quark is
negligible with respect to the overall velocity of the system, so that
the quark velocity is approximately @xmath . However we cannot neglect
its centripetal acceleration @xmath .

Let us first analyze the situation with transversity [Fig. 2.11 (a)].
The cross product of the velocity of the quark and the centripetal
acceleration is pointing in the transverse direction. Thomas precession
will not influence the orientation of the spin of the quark. The
transversity distribution is just 1.

The situation is dramatically different for helicity [Fig. 2.11 (b)].
The cross product of the quark velocity and its acceleration is still
pointing in a transverse direction, which is now orthogonal to the spin
of the quark. This causes the spin of the quark to precess around a
transverse axis. The net helicity of the quark will be zero and so will
be the helicity distribution.

In a simpler system, for instance if the quark would not have any
orbital angular momentum, helicity and transversity distributions would
be the same. In conclusion, from this example we see that, due to
relativistic effects, the difference between two apparently similar
observables can reveal something important about the structure of a
system.

### 2.4 Inclusion of transverse momentum

So far we have been concerned with the integrated correlation function,
defined in Eq. ( 2.20 ), the only relevant one in totally inclusive deep
inelastic scattering. In the next chapters, we will analyze also
semi-inclusive scatterings, where we will need to consider the
transverse-momentum dependent version of the correlation function, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Starting from the general decomposition presented in Eq. ( 2.31 ), the
leading order part of the transverse-momentum dependent correlation
function becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition of the parton distribution functions in terms of the
amplitudes @xmath , introduced in Eq. ( 2.33 ), can be found elsewhere [
135 , 164 , 120 ] .

For any transverse-momentum dependent distribution function, it will
turn out to be convenient to define the notation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.59a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.59b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath integer. We also need to introduce the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection with the integrated distribution functions defined in
Eq. ( 2.34 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.61a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.61b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.61c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that the distribution functions @xmath and @xmath are T-odd. At
first, this class of functions was supposed to vanish due to
time-reversal invariance [ 151 ] . Sivers [ 157 , 158 ] was the first
one to consider an observable arising from the T-odd distribution
function @xmath , since then called the Sivers function . The complete
analysis of leading-twist T-odd distribution functions and the
introduction of @xmath were carried out by Boer and Mulders [ 53 ] . A
proof of the nonexistence of T-odd distribution functions was suggested
by Collins in Ref. 77 , but recently it has been repudiated by the same
author [ 78 ] after Brodsky, Hwang and Schmidt [ 72 ] explicitly
obtained a nonzero Sivers function in the context of a simple model. The
question at the moment awaits clarification, but it is likely that T-odd
distribution functions will stir a lot of interest in the near future,
together with T-odd fragmentation functions, of which we shall
abundantly speak in the next chapters.

As done in the previous section, we can express the transverse momentum
dependent correlation function as a matrix in the parton chirality space
@xmath target helicity space. To simplify the formulae, it is useful to
identify the T-odd functions as imaginary parts of some of the T-even
functions, which become then complex scalar functions. The following
redefinitions are required: ³ ³ 3 From a rigorous point of view, it
would be better to introduce new functions, e.g. @xmath and @xmath , but
this would overload the notation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The resulting correlation matrix is [ 32 , 33 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for sake of brevity we did not explicitly indicate the @xmath and
@xmath dependence of the distribution functions and where @xmath is the
azimuthal angle of the transverse momentum vector.

The distribution matrix is clearly Hermitean. Notice that by introducing
the transverse momentum of the quark, the angular momentum conservation
requirement becomes less constraining and we can have non zero
contributions in all the entries of the scattering matrix. To be more
specific, when an exponential @xmath appears in the matrix, we have to
take into account @xmath units of angular momentum in the final state.
The condition of angular momentum conservation becomes then @xmath .
Also the condition of parity conservation is influenced by the presence
of orbital angular momentum and becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The positivity of the matrix is not hampered by the introduction of the
transverse momentum dependence, since

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.65)
  -- -- -- --------

Bounds to insure positivity of any matrix element can be obtained by
looking at the one-dimensional and two-dimensional subspaces and at the
eigenvalues of the full matrix. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Cf. Ref. 136 for an earlier
discussion on positivity bounds for transverse momentum dependent
structure functions . The one-dimensional subspaces give the trivial
bounds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From the two-dimensional subspaces we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where, once again, we did not explicitly indicate the @xmath and @xmath
dependence to avoid too heavy a notation. Besides the Soffer bound of
Eq. ( 2.67a ), now extended to include the transverse momentum
dependence, new bounds for the distribution functions are found.

The positivity bounds can be sharpened even further by imposing the
positivity of the eigenvalues of the correlation matrix. The complete
analysis has been accomplished in Ref. 32 (see also Ref. 33 ).

### 2.5 Cross section and spin asymmetries

The cross section for inclusive deep inelastic scattering at leading
twist is expressed by Eq. ( 2.26 ). Extracting the target helicity
density matrix as done in Eq. ( 2.43 ) and using the matrix @xmath , the
equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the expressions of Eq. ( 2.27 ), ( 2.42 ) and ( 2.48 ) into
the previous expression leads to the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath denotes the quark flavor.

The transversity distribution does not appear in the cross section for
totally inclusive deep inelastic scattering at leading twist. The reason
is that it is a chiral odd object and in any observable it must be
connected to another chiral odd “probe”. In inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, what probes the structure of the correlation function is the
elementary photon-quark scattering, which conserves chirality. We will
see in the next chapters how semi-inclusive deep inelastic scattering
provides the necessary chiral odd partners for the transversity
distribution (i.e. chiral odd fragmentation functions).

The r.h.s. of Eq. ( 2.69 ) is independent of the azimuthal angle @xmath
, so that we can integrate the cross section over this angle. The result
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the spin of the target is oriented along the direction of the
electron beam, it will have its longitudinal component oriented along
the @xmath direction, that is @xmath will be negative. On the contrary,
orienting the spin of the target in the opposite direction will produce
a positive @xmath . Summing the cross sections obtained with opposite
polarization, we isolate the unpolarized part of the cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first subscript indicates the polarization of the beam, while the
second stands for the polarization of the target. The letter @xmath
stands for unpolarized. The right arrow means polarization along the
beam direction, the left arrow means the opposite. Subtracting the cross
section we obtain the polarized part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now the subscript @xmath specifies that longitudinal polarizations
of beam and target are required. We can define the longitudinal double
spin asymmetry

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.73)
  -- -- -- --------

Note that, since the beam direction does not exactly correspond to the
virtual photon direction, the degree of longitudinal polarization of the
target will be somewhat smaller than the degree of polarization along
the beam direction , while a small transverse polarization will arise [
145 , 128 ] . These effects are anyway @xmath suppressed.

### 2.6 Summary

In this chapter, we introduced the hadronic tensor, containing the
information on the structure of hadronic targets in deep inelastic
scattering [cf. Eq. ( 2.6 )]. We studied the hadronic tensor in the
framework of the parton model at tree level and we came to the
introduction of a quark-quark correlation function [cf. Eqs. ( 2.20 )
and ( 2.21 )]. The correlation function can be parametrized in terms of
parton distribution functions. In particular, at leading order in @xmath
(leading twist) we introduced the unpolarized distribution function,
@xmath , the helicity distribution function, @xmath , and the
transversity distribution function, @xmath [Eq. ( 2.33 )].

We demonstrated how the leading twist part of the correlation function
can be cast in the form of a forward scattering matrix [cf. Eq. ( 2.48
)]. Exploiting the positivity of this matrix, we derived relations among
the distribution functions [Eq. ( 2.49 )]. We also discussed the
probabilistic interpretation of the distribution function, with a
particular emphasis on the transversity distribution.

We repeated the analysis of the correlation function introducing
partonic transverse momentum. In this case the decomposition of the
correlation function contains eight distribution functions [Eq. ( 2.58
)]. We have seen that each entry of the corresponding scattering matrix
is nonzero [Eq. ( 2.63 )], indicating that the full quark spin structure
in a polarized nucleon is accessible if transverse momentum is included.
The connection with the helicity formalism and consequently the
extraction of positivity bounds on transverse momentum dependent
distribution functions are among the original results of our work.

Finally, we expressed the cross section for inclusive deep inelastic
scattering at leading order in @xmath in terms of distribution functions
[Eq. ( 2.69 )]. We showed that the helicity distribution can be accessed
by measuring the longitudinal double spin asymmetry, but we concluded
that the transversity distribution is not accessible in inclusive deep
inelastic scattering.

In the next chapter, we are going to see how the transversity
distribution can be measured in one-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, in combination with the Collins fragmentation function.

## Chapter 3 Fragmentation functions and the Collins function

In the previous chapter we analyzed totally inclusive deep inelastic
scattering as a means to probe the quark structure of the nucleons. We
concluded that some aspects of this structure – notably the transversity
distribution and the transverse momentum distribution – are not
accessible in this kind of measurement. It is therefore desirable to
turn the attention to a more complex case, that of one-particle
inclusive deep inelastic scattering, where one of the fragments produced
in the collision is detected. In this case, we will need to introduce
some new nonperturbative objects, the fragmentation functions .

### 3.1 One-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering

In one-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering a high energy
electron collides on a target nucleon via the exchange of a photon with
a high virtuality. The target breaks up and several hadrons are
produced. One of the produced hadrons is detected in coincidence with
the scattered electron (see Fig. 3.1 ). As a result of the hardness of
the collision, the final state should consist of two well separated
“clusters” of particles, one is represented by the debris of the target,
broken by the collision, and the other is represented by the hadrons
formed and ejected by the hard interaction with the virtual photon [ 168
] . The former are called target fragments and the latter current
fragments . We will take into consideration only events where the tagged
final state hadron belongs to the current fragments.

#### 3.1.1 Kinematics

As for inclusive scattering, we denote with @xmath and @xmath the
momenta of the electron before and after the scattering, with @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath the momentum, mass and spin of the target nucleon,
with @xmath the momentum of the exchanged photon. Moreover, we introduce
the momentum @xmath and the mass @xmath of the outgoing hadron.

We define the variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We will assume that the following conditions hold: @xmath , and @xmath
fixed.

For a distinction between the current and the target fragments, the
rapidity separation should be taken into account. This separation is
quite clear for high values of @xmath . For low values of @xmath ,
separating the two clusters becomes arduous. In events with higher
@xmath , the limit of @xmath can be pushed lower [ 140 ] .

In the frame of reference defined in Sec. 2.1.1 , the target momentum
and the virtual photon momentum have no transverse components. The
outgoing hadron’s momentum can be parametrized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To avoid the introduction of further hard scales, it is required that
@xmath .

The frame of reference we adopted is the more natural one from the
experimental point of view, as the longitudinal direction corresponds
(up to order @xmath ) to the beam direction and the hadron’s transverse
momentum corresponds to what it is actually measured in the lab.
However, as it will become clear later, in order to preserve a symmetry
between the distribution and fragmentation functions, it is convenient
to use a different frame of reference where the target and outgoing
hadron momenta are collinear, while the photon acquires a transverse
component. To distinguish between the two frames of reference when
needed, from now on we will use the subscript @xmath when denoting a
transverse component in the new frame, while we will use the subscript
@xmath to denote transverse components in the former frame.

In the @xmath frame, the external momenta are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The connection with the transverse momentum components of
the photon in the @xmath frame and of the outgoing hadron in the @xmath
frame is [ 141 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 3.1.2 The hadronic tensor

The cross section for one-particle inclusive electron-nucleon scattering
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

or equivalently as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

To obtain the previous formula, we made use of the relation @xmath .

The hadronic tensor for one-particle inclusive scattering is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By integrating over the momentum of the final-state hadron and summing
over all possible hadrons, we recover the hadronic tensor for totally
inclusive scattering

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.9)
  -- -- -- -------

where now the state @xmath indicates the sum of the states @xmath and
@xmath , and @xmath . Note that we did not include any dependence of the
hadronic tensor on the polarization of the final state hadron. The
reason is that this polarization is usually measured through the decay
of the final state hadron into other hadrons. In this sense, this case
falls within the context of two-particle (or even three-particle)
inclusive scattering, as we will show in the next chapter.

In the spirit of the parton model, the virtual photon strikes a quark
inside the nucleon. In the case of current fragmentation, the tagged
final state hadron comes from the fragmentation of the struck quark. The
scattering process can then be factorized in two soft hadronic parts
connected by a hard scattering part, as shown in Fig. 3.2 .

We need to introduce a parametrization for the vectors

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Without expliciting including the antiquark contributions, the hadronic
tensor can be written at tree level as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the correlation function defined in Eq. ( 2.16a ) and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a new correlation function we need to introduce to describe the
fragmentation process [ 81 ] .

Neglecting terms which are @xmath suppressed, we obtain the compact
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as we shall do very often, we used the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where we introduced the integrated correlation functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Often in experimental situations the transverse momentum of the outgoing
hadron is not measured. This corresponds to integrating over the
outgoing hadron’s transverse momentum, @xmath . As we already pointed
out, this transverse momentum squared has to be small compared to @xmath
. Experimentally, this can be insured by imposing a cut-off on the data.
Due to the @xmath distribution in Eq. ( 3.14 ), this condition implies
also @xmath . Considerations as the one discussed in Sec. 2.1.2 , can be
applied to the perturbative and intrinsic components of the transverse
momenta.

The integration of the cross section yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 3.1.3 Leading twist part and connection with helicity formalism

Using the projectors @xmath and @xmath defined in Eq. ( 2.24 ), we can
isolate the leading order part of the hadronic tensor, analogously to
what was done in Sec. 2.1.4

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differential cross section becomes

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

As we already discussed in Sec. 2.2.1 , the restriction to the leading
order allows us to reduce the four dimensional Dirac space to the
two-dimensional subspace of good fields. Writing all the components of
the cross section in the chirality space of the good fields, we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.19)
  -- -- -- --------

The elementary electron-quark scattering matrix is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The internal blocks have indices @xmath and the outer matrix has indices
@xmath . Notice the difference between Eq. ( 3.20 ) and Eq. ( 2.27 ): in
the latter, the presence of the Kronecker delta was identifying two of
the chirality indices, thus reproducing a true scattering matrix. Here,
we don’t have just a quark line connecting the two scattering
amplitudes, but rather the correlation function @xmath . For this
reason, we cannot identify the chirality indices of the outgoing quark.
Strictly speaking, this is not a scattering matrix anymore, but a
scattering amplitude times the conjugate of a different scattering
amplitude [ 19 ] . However, for conciseness we follow the notation of,
e.g., Ref. 117 .

The leading order part of the correlation function corresponds to the
transition probability density for the process of a quark decaying into
hadrons

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.22)
  -- -- -- --------

Analogously to the distribution case, the fragmentation correlation
matrix is positive semidefinite, allowing us to set bounds on the
fragmentation functions.

### 3.2 The correlation function @xmath

While the distribution correlation function describe the confinement of
partons inside hadrons, the fragmentation correlation function describes
the way a virtual parton “decays” into a hadron plus something else,
i.e. @xmath . This process is referred to as hadronization . It is a
clear manifestation of color confinement: the asymptotic physical states
detected in experiment must be color neutral, so that quarks have to
evolve into hadrons. ¹ ¹ 1 Note that on the way to the final state
hadrons, the color carried by the initial quark can be neutralized
without breaking factorization, for instance via soft gluon
contributions. Nowadays, we can count on reliable phenomenological
descriptions of hadronization, such as the Lund model. On the other
side, understanding it from first principles, as well as including spin
degrees of freedom, is very difficult.

As on the distribution side the quark-quark correlation function is
sufficient to describe the dynamics at leading order in @xmath , also
for fragmentation it is sufficient to consider quark-quark correlation
functions.

The procedure for generating a complete decomposition of the correlation
functions closely follows what has been done on the distribution side in
Sec. 2.2 . It is necessary to combine the Lorentz vectors @xmath and
@xmath with a basis of structures in Dirac space, and impose the
condition of Hermiticity and parity invariance. The outcome is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The amplitudes @xmath are dimensionless real scalar functions @xmath .
The T-even and T-odd part of the correlation function @xmath can be
defined in analogy to Eqs. ( 2.32 ). According to those definitions, the
last term can be classified as T-odd.

At leading twist, we are interested in the projection @xmath . The
insertion of the decomposition given in Eq. ( 3.23 ) into Eq. ( 3.15b )
and the subsequent projection of the leading-twist component leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the parton fragmentation functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The fragmentation function @xmath is known with the name of Collins
function [ 77 ] .

The individual fragmentation functions can be isolated by means of the
projection ² ² 2 The absence of the factor 1/2 in Eq. ( 3.26 ) as
compared to Eq. ( 2.35 ) is due to the absence of an averaging over
initial states.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for a specific Dirac structure. In particular, we
see that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As we have done with the distribution functions, it will be helpful to
introduce the notation

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.28a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.28b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath integer.

#### 3.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism

Expressing the Dirac matrices of Eq. ( 3.24 ) in the chiral or Weyl
representation, as done in Sec. 2.2.1 , we get for the leading twist
part of the correlation function the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Restricting ourselves to the subspace of good quark fields and using the
chirality basis, we can rewrite the correlation function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 3.3 shows diagrammatically the position of the indices of the
correlation function.

Besides being Hermitean, the matrix fulfills the properties of angular
momentum conservation and parity invariance. Because of the presence of
factors @xmath , we have to take into account @xmath units of angular
momentum in the initial state, therefore the condition of angular
momentum conservation is @xmath and the condition of parity invariance
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Positivity of the correlation matrix implies the bounds

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

### 3.3 Cross section and asymmetries

In order to obtain the cross section for one-particle inclusive deep
inelastic scattering, the expressions for the spin density matrix of the
target, Eq. ( 2.42 ), for the distribution correlation matrix, Eq. (
2.48 ), and for the fragmentation correlation matrix Eq. ( 3.30 ) have
to be inserted in the formula for the cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead of presenting the full cross section, we turn directly to sum
and differences of polarized cross sections. As in the previous chapter,
we will use the symbols @xmath to indicate polarization along the beam
direction and @xmath opposite to it. We will also use @xmath to indicate
transverse polarization in the direction specified by the angle @xmath ,
and @xmath opposite to it. The subscript @xmath will denote unpolarized
particles, while @xmath and @xmath will denote longitudinally and
transversely polarized particles. The first subscript describes always
the beam polarization and the second subscript the target polarization.
Fig. 3.4 gives a pictorial description of the vectors and angles
involved in one-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering.

The unpolarized cross section reads [ 57 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following equations, we will omit to explicitly indicate the
variables in which the cross section is differential and the variables
the distribution and fragmentation functions depend on. We define the
following polarized cross sections differences

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

for which we obtain the following expressions in terms of distribution
and fragmentation functions [ 57 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36c)
                          (3.36d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 3.3.1 Transverse momentum measurements

Due to the presence of an observable transverse momentum, i.e. that of
the final hadron, one-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering gives
the possibility of extracting some information on the transverse
momentum of partons. It is convenient to introduce the transverse
momentum of the hadron with respect to the quark, @xmath . In
experiments where jets can be identified, it corresponds to the
transverse momentum of the detected hadron with respect to the jet axis.
The simplest quantity to be measured is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Assuming that all quark flavors have the same transverse momentum
distribution we reach the result

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.39)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 3.3.2 Transversity measurements

At the end of the previous chapter, we concluded that in inclusive deep
inelastic scattering it is not possible to measure the transversity
distribution function, @xmath . In one-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, we see from Eq. ( 3.36d ) that it is possible for the
transversity distribution to appear in an observable in connection with
a chiral-odd fragmentation function, i.e. the Collins function.

It is convenient to introduce the angle @xmath . As specified before, we
define the azimuthal angles with reference to the electron scattering
plane. On the other side, it is possible to choose the transverse
component of the target spin as the reference axis for the measurement
of azimuthal angles. When expressing angles with respect to the target
spin, we will use a superscript @xmath . The relations between the
angles in the two different systems is @xmath , @xmath , and, in
particular, @xmath .

The relevant quantity to be measured is the azimuthal single transverse
spin asymmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression, the transverse momenta of @xmath and @xmath are
entangled in a convolution integral [ 151 ] . To simplify the situation,
we have to make some assumptions on the transverse momentum dependence
of the distribution and fragmentation function.

The simplest example is to suppose there is no intrinsic transverse
momentum of the partons inside the target [ 15 , 23 ] , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this assumption, the pion transverse momentum with respect to the
virtual photon is entirely due to the fragmentation process, i.e. @xmath
, and the convolution can be disentangled

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the approximation sign reminds us that the equality is assumption
dependent.

Another possibility is to assume that the transverse momentum
distribution is Gaussian-like in both the distribution and fragmentation
side, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- --------

The convolution becomes [ 141 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 3.39 ). Using the relation @xmath , valid
for Gaussian distributions, we can carry out the integration over @xmath
and obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.45)
  -- -- -- --------

where the @xmath and @xmath dependence of the average transverse momenta
squared is understood. The asymmetry becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.46)
  -- -- -- --------

where the approximation sign reminds us that the equality is assumption
dependent.

If we want to disentangle the convolution integral of Eq. ( 3.36d )
without making any assumption on the intrinsic transverse momentum
distribution, we need to weight the integral with the magnitude of the
pion transverse momentum [ 127 ] . This procedure results in the
azimuthal transverse spin asymmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We achieved an assumption-free factorization of the @xmath dependent
transversity distribution and the @xmath dependent Collins function. The
measurement of this asymmetry requires binning the cross section
according to the magnitude of the pion transverse momentum. On the other
side, this asymmetry represents potentially the cleanest method to
measure the transversity distribution together with the Collins
function. Moreover, it turns out that it is possible to study the
evolution of the moment @xmath with the energy scale [ 104 ] , without
incurring complications due to Sudakov factors [ 54 ] . However, the
inclusion of transverse momentum raises delicate issues related to color
gauge invariance, factorization and evolution [ 133 , 124 ] .

The Collins function can be measured also in @xmath annihilation into
two hadrons belonging to two different jets [ 52 , 51 ] . We will only
briefly mention this issue at the end of Chap. 6 . The relevance of this
measurement is clear, since an independent measurement of the Collins
function would be extremely useful to pin down the transversity
distribution, despite the problems with relating measurements at
different energy scales [ 54 ] .

### 3.4 Summary

In this chapter we studied one-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering at leading twist, including transverse momenta and neglecting
the polarization of the final state hadron. To describe the process
@xmath we introduced the fragmentation correlation function of Eq. (
3.12 ). At leading order in @xmath , the correlation function can be
decomposed in two terms, containing the unpolarized fragmentation
function @xmath , and the chiral-odd, T-odd Collins fragmentation
function, @xmath [Eq. ( 3.23 )].

Similarly to what was done in Chap. 2 , we cast the correlation function
in the form of a forward decay matrix in the quark chirality space
[Eq. ( 3.30 )]. Since the matrix is positive semidefinite, we were able
to suggest for the first time a bound on the Collins function [Eq. (
3.32b )].

The Collins function is extremely important for possible transversity
measurements. Being chiral odd, it appears in the single transverse spin
asymmetry of Eq. ( 3.36d ) in a convolution with the transversity
distribution. The convolution can be disentangled by measuring the
weighted azimuthal asymmetry of Eq. ( 3.47 ). This is therefore a first
way to observe the transversity distribution.

This method to access transversity poses some problems. First of all, at
present we have no convincing information on the magnitude of the
Collins function. This is a problem common to all polarized
fragmentation functions, and in particular to T-odd functions. We
postpone this discussion to Chap. 6 , where we will mention the scarce
information we have on the Collins function, we will attempt to estimate
it in a consistent model, and we will address the question if T-odd
fragmentation functions could offer a good chance to tackle the
transversity.

The second problem presented by the Collins function is the need of
including transverse momentum in the analysis. The study of transverse
momentum dependent distribution and fragmentation functions is per se a
very intriguing subject, but one has to deal with theoretical subtleties
(e.g.  Sudakov factors, transverse gauge links, evolution equations),
phenomenological difficulties (e.g. describing the transverse momentum
dependence of the functions) and experimental challenges (e.g. measuring
a weighted azimuthal asymmetry).

In the next chapter, we will examine two-particle inclusive DIS and we
will show that the transversity distribution can appear in connection
with two different fragmentation functions, even if the cross section is
integrated over the transverse momentum of the outgoing hadron.

## Chapter 4 Two-hadron fragmentation functions

To observe transversity, an alternative process is represented by
two-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering, where we can introduce
two-hadron fragmentation functions. The transverse spin of the target
can be correlated via a transversely polarized quark to the relative
transverse momentum of the hadronic pair instead of the transverse
momentum of the outgoing hadron, as in the case of the Collins function.
This provides a way in which the transversity can be probed without
including partonic transverse momenta, thus avoiding several
complications and subtleties.

Two-hadron fragmentation functions and their relevance for transversity
measurements have been partially analyzed in some articles [ 79 , 117 ,
118 ] . The most complete treatment of these functions has been carried
out by Bianconi et al. in Ref. 44 . Model calculations have been
performed in Refs. 80 , 45 , 150 . Two-pion fragmentation functions have
been studied also in the context of @xmath annihilation with a somewhat
different formalism [ 27 ] .

In an apparently independent context, semi-inclusive production of
spin-one hadrons (e.g. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) has been also studied
and proposed as an alternative method to measure the transversity
distribution [ 92 , 122 , 19 , 36 ] . However, to measure the
polarization of the outgoing vector meson (e.g. @xmath ) it is necessary
to measure the four-momenta of the decay products (e.g. @xmath ). Thus,
the reaction @xmath is just a part of the more general reaction @xmath ,
namely the part where the total invariant mass of the pion pair is equal
to the @xmath mass.

In this chapter, we will go along the same route presented in Ref. 44
and we will complement that treatment with the study of the partial wave
expansion of two-hadron fragmentation functions. This step will prove to
be essential to unravel the connection with spin-one fragmentation
functions and interference fragmentation functions.

### 4.1 Two-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering

In two-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering, two of the hadrons
belonging to the current fragmentation region are detected in
coincidence with the scattered electron, as shown schematically in Fig.
4.1 .

Some experimental results on two pion production are already available [
76 , 25 , 29 ] . More recent data are available only on exclusive
production of two pions [ 67 , 68 , 69 , 7 , 8 ] and on two-hadron
production in @xmath annihilation [ 2 , 4 , 6 , 5 , 1 ] .

If we consider only low invariant masses, hadron pairs are produced
mainly in the @xmath -wave channel, with a typically smooth distribution
over the invariant mass, or in the @xmath -wave channel, via a spin-one
resonance, with its typical Breit-Wigner invariant mass distribution.
This is the case of the production of two pions (which can proceed
through a @xmath resonance), two kaons ( @xmath resonance), a pion and a
kaon ( @xmath resonance). Fig. 4.2 shows the typical invariant-mass
spectrum of pion pairs in two-particle inclusive DIS.

The situation is different for proton-pion production, where on top of
the smooth @xmath -wave continuum the sharp spin-half @xmath resonance
appears. Since the @xmath undergoes a parity-violating weak decay the
formalism we will develop in this chapter will prove to be inadequate.
Moreover, the resonance is so sharp that it is more appropriate and
easier to study it in the framework of polarized single hadron
production. For these reasons, although polarized @xmath production
represents a very nice way to observe the transversity distribution, we
will not touch this subject, for which it is possible to consult a vast
literature [ 84 , 28 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 14 , 86 ] .

#### 4.1.1 Kinematics

We assume to detect two hadrons with masses @xmath and @xmath and
momenta @xmath and @xmath . We denote the center-of-mass momentum as
@xmath and the total invariant mass of the system as @xmath . We
maintain the parametrization of the vectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
as given in Eqs. ( 3.3 ) and Eqs. ( 3.10 ), but we introduce also the
semi-difference of the two hadrons’ momenta, @xmath . We parametrize the
new momenta according to ¹ ¹ 1 The connection with the variable @xmath
used in Ref. 44 is @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The total invariant mass squared, @xmath , has to be small compared to
@xmath . For later convenience, we compute the scalar quantities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2e)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 4.1.2 The hadronic tensor

For a process with two outgoing hadrons we can define the cross section

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be rewritten in terms of the different variables as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The angle @xmath is the azimuthal angle of the vector @xmath with
respect to the lepton plane, measured in a plane perpendicular to the
direction of the outgoing hadron. Neglecting @xmath corrections, it can
be identified with the azimuthal angle measured in a plane perpendicular
to the virtual photon direction or to the lepton beam. Notice the extra
factor 8 in the denominator compared to the one-particle inclusive case.
To obtain the previous formula, we made use of the steps

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The hadronic tensor for two-particle inclusive scattering is defined as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (4.6)
     @xmath         (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

With this definition, it is possible to recover the hadronic tensor for
one-particle inclusive scattering by integration over the second hadron

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the state @xmath represents the sum of the states @xmath plus all
possible states of the second hadron, and @xmath .

In analogy to what we presented in Sec. 3.1.2 , at leading order in
@xmath the hadronic tensor can be expressed in terms of correlation
functions as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the fragmentation correlation function has been generalized to
include also the dependence on the vector @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fully differential cross section might be a little bit too complex
for experimental measurements. To simplify the situation, we can perform
the integration over the transverse part of the center-of-mass momentum,
@xmath . The integrated cross section is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

To identify the leading twist part of the hadronic tensor and write down
the cross section, we can trivially repeat the steps described in Sec.
3.1.3 .

### 4.2 The correlation function @xmath

The most general expansion of the quark-quark correlation matrix @xmath
, respecting Hermiticity and parity invariance, is [ 44 ] ² ² 2 Note
that we always use @xmath to render the amplitudes dimensionless, in
contrast to what is done in Ref. 44 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The amplitudes @xmath are dimensionless real scalar functions @xmath .
The last four terms are T-odd.

We are going to consider first the case when no hadron transverse
momentum, @xmath , is detected and postpone the complete case to the
second part of the chapter. We insert the general decomposition of Eq. (
4.12 ) into Eq. ( 3.17c ) and extract the leading-twist projection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The prefactor has been chosen to have a better connection with
one-hadron results, i.e. integrated over @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We
introduced the two-hadron parton fragmentation functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The fragmentation function @xmath is chiral-odd and T-odd. Like the
Collins function, it can be used as a partner for the transversity
distribution, as we will see in the next section. Notice that this
function does not require the presence of partonic transverse momentum.
Because of this, its evolution equations could be simpler than the ones
of the Collins function. Since this function has the same operator
structure as the transversity, it has been suggested that it could have
the same evolution equations [ 55 , 160 , 56 ] . However, the situation
could be complicated by the presence of the dependence on the variables
@xmath and @xmath , which are not present in single particle functions [
161 ] .

#### 4.2.1 Correlation function in helicity formalism

Once again, expressing the Dirac matrices of Eq. ( 4.13 ) in the chiral
or Weyl representation, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

As already observed before, we can restrict ourselves to the subspace of
good quark fields and adopt the chirality basis, and rewrite the
correlation function as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.16)
  -- -- -- --------

From the positivity of the previous matrix, we can derive bounds for the
two-hadron fragmentation functions defined above:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

### 4.3 Cross section and asymmetries

In Fig. 4.3 , we give a pictorial description of the vectors and angles
involved in one-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering.

The differential cross section integrated over the center-of-mass
transverse momentum reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting into the previous equation the formulae obtained for the
distribution correlation matrix, Eq. ( 2.48 ), the elementary cross
section, Eq. ( 3.20 ), and the two-hadron fragmentation matrix, Eq. (
4.16 ), we obtain the following result ³ ³ 3 The different prefactor
appearing in Ref. 150 is due to the different definition of the hadronic
tensor and of the fragmentation functions.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.3.1 Transversity measurements

To access transversity in two-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering it is required to measure the azimuthal single transverse
spin asymmetry [ 150 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most valuable characteristic of this asymmetry is that it does not
require the measurement of the center of mass transverse momentum, so
that the complications connected to the inclusion of partonic transverse
momenta can be avoided. Apart from the usual variables @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , the only other variable to be measured is the angle @xmath . In
case the transverse spin direction is used as a reference axis, instead
of the lepton scattering plane, then the angle to be measured is @xmath
.

### 4.4 Partial wave expansion

Up to now, we did not make any study of the inner structure of the
two-hadron fragmentation functions. It is useful to expand them in
partial waves, because if we restrict ourselves to systems with low
invariant masses, the dominant contributions come only from the lowest
harmonics, i.e. @xmath and @xmath waves.

#### 4.4.1 Center-of-mass parameters

The partial-wave expansion can be performed only in the frame of
reference of the center of mass of the hadron pair. As a first step, we
need to express all vectors in this frame, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21a)
     @xmath               (4.21b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The polar angle @xmath is illustrated in Fig. 4.4 .

The variable @xmath is connected to the center-of-mass variable @xmath
in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , notice that @xmath is purely spacelike and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 4.4.2 The correlation function @xmath with partial wave-expansion

To perform the partial-wave expansion of the fragmentation functions,
let us first express the correlation function @xmath in terms of
center-of-mass parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In general, we can expand the fragmentation functions on
the basis of the Legendre polynomials in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering only two-hadron systems with a low invariant mass, we assume
we can truncate the expansion in order to include only @xmath -wave and
@xmath -wave contributions to the correlation function. The connection
between the correlation function @xmath in terms of the variable @xmath
and in terms of the variable @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

to take into account the fact that @xmath . Then we can write the
partial-wave expanded correlation function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The correlation function can be consequently written in matrix form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, it is not yet clear what are the motivations to assign such names
to the functions. It will become clear after we distinguish the @xmath -
and @xmath -wave contributions in the rest of the section and also after
we study spin-one fragmentation functions in Chap. 5 .

The information encoded in the correlation function can be expressed in
a different way. Depending on the angular momentum of the system, the
angular distribution of the two hadrons is characterized by a specific
bilinear combination of spherical harmonics. If the angular momentum can
be only 0 or 1, as in the case of our truncated partial wave expansion,
the angular distribution of the two hadrons can be fully described by
the decay matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angular momentum indices, @xmath and @xmath , run only from 0 to 1.
For convenience, we split the matrix into blocks: the upper-left block (
@xmath ) refers to the pure @xmath -wave component, the lower-right
block ( @xmath ) describes the @xmath -wave component, and it is
subdivided according to the value of @xmath , Finally, the off-diagonal
blocks describe the @xmath interference.

The original correlation function can now be expressed as the trace of
the decay matrix and a fragmentation matrix in the quark chirality space
@xmath the hadronic system angular momentum space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution for the fragmentation matrix is the @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the inner blocks, spanning the hadronic angular momentum space,
read explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The choice of the indices in the names of the fragmentation functions is
connected to their position in the matrix. The @xmath functions are
typical of unpolarized two-hadron fragmentation. The @xmath sector
describes the interference between @xmath - and @xmath -wave
fragmentation; this is the sector studied by Jaffe et al. in Refs. 117
and 163 . The @xmath functions correspond to the spin-one fragmentation
functions studied in Refs. 122 , 19 , 36 . We will take a look at them
from a different point of view in the next chapter and also the choice
of the subscripts will become more transparent.

Note that the matrix fulfills the properties of Hermiticity,
conservation of angular momentum (requiring @xmath ) and parity
invariance [ 117 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The imaginary entries of the matrix correspond to T-odd functions.

In principle the fragmentation matrix could contain more functions,
without violating any symmetry, but after tracing it with the decay
matrix, they would vanish. In this sense, only part of the full
information contained in the fragmentation matrix can be analyzed
through a parity-conserving process [ 64 ] . We shall come back to this
issue after we studied spin-one fragmentation functions in the next
chapter.

Finally, if we trace the fragmentation matrix with the decay matrix, we
obtain exactly the correlation function expanded in partial waves, Eq. (
4.30 ) , except for the fact that the unpolarized fragmentation function
turns out to be expressed in terms of pure @xmath - and @xmath -wave
contributions, i.e

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

In any cross section, these two contributions are merged together and
they are kinematically indistinguishable, unless a specific behavior of
the invariant mass dependence can be assumed. For instance, the @xmath
-wave contribution could be due to the existence of a resonance,
emerging over a background of continuum @xmath -wave states [ 79 ] .

#### 4.4.3 Positivity bounds on partial-wave fragmentation functions

The fragmentation matrix, Eq. ( 4.33 ), has to be positive definite,
thus allowing us to set positivity bounds on the two-hadron
fragmentation functions. From the positivity of the diagonal matrix
elements, we obtain the bounds

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

while from the positivity of the two-dimensional minors we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 4.4.4 Cross section and asymmetries with partial-wave expansion

Thanks to the partial-wave expansion, the cross section at leading twist
can be expressed in a factorized way [ 112 , 117 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The unpolarized and polarized parts of the cross section are ⁴ ⁴ 4 The
distribution and fragmentation functions are understood to have a flavor
index @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
                    
     @xmath         (4.40a)
     @xmath         (4.40b)
                    (4.40c)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

From the partial wave analysis we see in particular that the
transversity distribution can be matched with two different chiral-odd,
T-odd fragmentation functions, one pertaining to the interference
between the @xmath - and @xmath -wave channels of two-hadron production,
the second being a purely @xmath -wave effect. This considerations agree
with the past literature on interference fragmentation functions [ 117 ,
163 ] and spin-one fragmentation functions [ 122 , 19 , 36 ] . A priori,
we don’t know what is the magnitude of these functions, nor their
behavior with respect to the invariant mass of the system. Jaffe et al.
[ 117 ] studied one of the possible mechanisms that could generate an
@xmath interference fragmentation function in @xmath production. They
separated the production of the pion pair (which they did not evaluate)
from a @xmath rescattering process, which determines the T-odd character
of the fragmentation function and implies a peculiar behavior with
respect to the invariant mass, shown in Fig. 4.5 (a).

A different model was applied by Radici et al. [ 150 ] : the expected
invariant mass behavior turns out to be very different, as shown in Fig.
4.5 (b), and the magnitude of the effect is estimated to be of the order
of 1%. For what concerns @xmath fragmentation functions, at the moment
there are no estimates of their magnitude and behavior. However, in
general @xmath -wave production of two hadrons becomes significant only
when they come from the decay of a spin-one resonance. Because of this,
we can expect that the invariant mass shape of these functions
corresponds to a Breit-Wigner curve peaked at the resonance mass.

If we integrate over @xmath , with the polar angle ranging from 0 to
@xmath , the only surviving contributions to the cross sections are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is possible to integrate over @xmath with the polar angle going from
@xmath to @xmath . While the first two cross sections vanish, the
transverse cross section would turn out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the asymmetry in Eq. ( 4.41c ) is almost identical to the one
discussed in Ref. 117 , the last asymmetry contains a contribution of
pure @xmath waves that, as already mentioned, will become particularly
relevant when the two hadrons are produced through a spin-one resonance.

### 4.5 The correlation function @xmath with transverse momentum

We turn now to the correlation functions with the dependence on the
transverse momenta, Eqs. ( 2.57 ) and ( 4.9 ). Consequently, their
general decomposition is richer than before. We already know what is the
form of the correlation function @xmath [Eq. ( 2.58 )]. For what
concerns the correlation function @xmath , the inclusion of transverse
momentum results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, we can express the correlation function as a matrix in the
chirality space of the quark

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can easily obtain positivity bounds on the transverse-momentum
dependent functions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where it is understood that all the functions are dependent on the
variables @xmath .

Note that if we integrate over @xmath , the fragmentation function
@xmath will disappear, while parts of the functions @xmath and @xmath
will merge into a single function, @xmath , and we will recover the
results of Sec. 4.2 .

### 4.6 Cross section and asymmetries with transverse momentum

Prior to integration over the center-of-mass transverse momentum we have
the nine-fold cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

To simplify the notation, we introduce the projection @xmath . Inserting
the formulae obtained for the distribution correlation matrix, Eq. (
2.48 ), the elementary cross section, Eq. ( 3.20 ), and the two-hadron
fragmentation matrix, Eq. ( 4.44 ), we obtain the following result ⁵ ⁵ 5
The @xmath and @xmath cross sections correspond to the one calculated in
Ref. 150 except for a difference in the overall coefficient – an extra
factor 2 in the denominator, due to the use of the variable @xmath
instead of @xmath , the lack of a factor @xmath in the denominator, due
to the different definition of the hadronic tensor, an extra factor
@xmath due to the different definitions of the fragmentation functions–
the use of @xmath in the denominators instead of @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath , and a factor 2 difference in the definition of the coefficient
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (4.48)
     @xmath         (4.49)
     @xmath         (4.50)
     @xmath         (4.51)
     @xmath         (4.52)
     @xmath         (4.53)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

### 4.7 Partial-wave expansion with transverse momentum

To proceed with the partial wave expansion of transverse-momentum
dependent functions, it turns out to be convenient to rewrite the
correlation function in a somewhat different way, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath and @xmath have been merged into the complex
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the presence of the azimuthal angles, this function can be
expanded in spherical harmonics, provided we retain only those terms
which are consistent with the definition in Eq. ( 4.55 ). If we wish to
include only the @xmath - and @xmath -wave contributions, the partial
wave expansion of the function @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the functions on the right-hand side depend only on the
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The expansion of the other two functions, @xmath and @xmath , is
considerably simpler, because they can depend only on @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.57a)
              @xmath      (4.57b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.57c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the functions on the right-hand side depend only on the variables
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

As a conclusive remark, note that it would have been possible to expand
the functions @xmath and @xmath in a way similar to what we have done
for @xmath and @xmath , but some care is required to properly treat the
component @xmath , which is shared by the two functions. This is why we
preferred to take an alternative way. In any case, for completeness we
give also the expansions of @xmath and @xmath separately:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.58a)
              @xmath      (4.58b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.58c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As before, the functions on the right-hand side depend only on the
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

As we have done in Sec. 4.4.2 , it is possible to rewrite the
correlation function as a trace between the decay matrix, Eq. ( 4.31 ),
and a fragmentation matrix in the quark chirality space @xmath the
hadronic system angular momentum space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, the result is a @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inner blocks span the space of the orbital angular momentum of the
hadronic system and read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The block @xmath of the fragmentation matrix can be obtained from the
block @xmath by imposing parity invariance relations.

The @xmath sector of the matrix contains functions analogous to the ones
we discussed in the previous chapter in the context of single-particle
unpolarized fragmentation. The @xmath sector corresponds to the spin-one
fragmentation functions studied in Ref. 36 . We will discuss them again
in the next chapter. The @xmath interference sector has never been
studied with the inclusion of transverse momentum.

Similar considerations to the ones discussed after Eqs. ( 4.34 ) hold
for the transverse momentum dependent fragmentation matrix. In
particular, the matrix fulfills the properties of Hermiticity,
conservation of angular momentum ( @xmath ) and parity invariance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The imaginary parts of the matrix represent T-odd functions. Note that
the off-diagonal blocks, which are chiral-odd, can only contain T-odd
functions. The matrix could in principle contain other functions, but
they are lost when tracing with the decay matrix and thus cannot be
analyzed by a parity conserving decay process.

From the fact that the matrix @xmath is positive semi-definite, it is
possible to obtain positivity bounds on the fragmentation functions, as
we have done already before.

### 4.8 Summary

In this chapter we analyzed two-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, at leading order in @xmath , without and with partonic
transverse momentum. For the description of the fragmentation side, we
introduced a correlation function @xmath that depends on the
center-of-mass momentum of the two hadrons and on their relative
momentum.

In the first part of the chapter we neglected partonic transverse
momentum. We distinguished one chiral-even T-even and one chiral-odd
T-odd fragmentation function [Eq. ( 4.13 )]. They are complicated
objects depending on three variables, whereas single-particle
fragmentation functions depend on one variable only. We derived
positivity bounds on these functions [Eqs. ( 4.17 )] and we computed the
cross section of two-particle inclusive scattering [Eq. ( 4.19 )].

Since two-particle systems with a low invariant mass are usually
produced in the @xmath and @xmath waves, we performed a partial wave
expansion of the fragmentation functions taking into consideration only
these two lowest modes. We split the chiral-even fragmentation function
into three contributions, pertaining to the pure @xmath waves, pure
@xmath waves and @xmath interference. We split the chiral-odd function
into two contributions, typical of pure @xmath waves and @xmath
interference. These five new fragmentation functions depend only on two
variables, namely @xmath and the invariant mass squared of the system
[Eq. ( 4.29 )]. Employing the usual helicity formalism, we discussed
positivity bounds on the new fragmentation functions [Eqs. ( 4.37 )
and ( 4.38 )]. We computed all non vanishing spin asymmetries of
two-particle inclusive DIS at leading twist [Eqs. ( 4.40 )]. In
particular, we showed that in the single transverse spin asymmetry of
Eq. ( 4.40c ) the transversity distribution appears in connection with
both chiral-odd fragmentation functions. Integrating the asymmetry over
different ranges of the polar angle @xmath , we presented two distinct
ways to access the transversity distribution. The first one [Eq. ( 4.41c
)] involves only the @xmath interference term and corresponds to the one
discussed in Ref. 117 , while the second one [Eq. ( 4.42 )] involves
also the pure @xmath term, which could have an entirely different
physical origin and should be particularly relevant in the presence of a
spin-one resonance. These two asymmetries are in all respects two
distinct ways to access the transversity distribution function. The
second one has never been clearly indicated in the literature.

In the rest of the chapter, we repeated the analysis of the correlation
function including partonic transverse momentum and also in this case we
applied a partial wave expansion.

## Chapter 5 Spin one

In the previous chapter we examined the production of two hadrons in the
@xmath and @xmath waves. As we already mentioned, the @xmath -wave
sector of the analysis should overlap with the description of the
fragmentation functions for spin-one mesons. The reason is that the
polarization of the vector meson can be analyzed by measuring its decay
in two other particles, as in the case of a @xmath meson decaying into
two pions.

In this chapter, we will take a small detour from the mainstream of the
thesis, and we shall deal with spin-one targets and spin-one fragments.
In the first part, we will examine what is necessary for the description
of a spin-one object and what are the differences with the spin-half
case. We will introduce distribution functions for quarks inside
spin-one objects, with and without transverse momentum.

Then we will turn our attention to spin-one hadrons in the final state
and we will examine the fragmentation functions for a quark producing a
spin-one hadron. In the end, we will check whether the connection with
two-hadron fragmentation can be established and if there are any
differences between the two situations.

### 5.1 Spin-one targets

In recent years some attention has been devoted to distribution
functions characterizing spin-one targets, starting from the work of
Hoodbhoy, Jaffe and Manohar [ 110 ] . Unfortunately, the only available
spin-one target is the deuteron, which is essentially a weakly bound
system of two spin-half hadrons. In fact, deuteron targets are often
used in deep inelastic scattering with the major purpose of extracting
the neutron distribution functions. However, the spin-one structure of
the deuteron in itself can be very interesting [ 144 , 62 , 89 , 169 ] .
A large amount of work is already present on deuteron structure
functions, especially in Drell-Yan processes [ 106 , 108 ] .

#### 5.1.1 Spin density matrix and spin tensor

The description of particles with spin can be attained by using a spin
density matrix @xmath in the rest frame of the particle. The
parametrization of the density matrix for a spin- @xmath particle is
conveniently performed with the introduction of irreducible spin tensors
up to rank @xmath . For example, we have already seen [cf. Eq. ( 2.42 )]
that the density matrix of a spin-half particle can be decomposed on a
Cartesian basis of @xmath matrices, formed by the identity matrix and
the three Pauli matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the (rank-one) spin vector @xmath .

To parametrize the density matrix of a spin-one particle we can choose a
Cartesian basis of @xmath matrices, formed by the identity matrix, three
spin matrices @xmath (generalization of the Pauli matrices to the
three-dimensional case) and five extra matrices @xmath . These last ones
can be built using bilinear combinations of the spin matrices. In three
dimensions these combinations are no longer dependent on the spin
matrices themselves, as would be for the Pauli matrices. We choose them
to be (see Refs. 64 , 134 and 42 for a comparison)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these preliminaries, we can write the spin density matrix as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the symmetric traceless rank-two spin tensor @xmath
. We choose the following way of parametrizing the spin vector and
tensor in the rest frame of the hadron,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath is often called alignment [ 64 , 134 , 91 , 93 ] .

Although we introduced the spin vector and tensor in the particle rest
frame, it is possible to introduce covariant generalizations of them,
satisfying the conditions @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
momentum of the hadron. In a collinear frame, the parametrizations of
the covariant spin vector and tensor will be

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the particle rest frame (where @xmath ) they correspond to Eqs. ( 5.4
) (note that here they are written in light-cone coordinates).

Inserting in Eq. ( 5.3 ) the spin vector, Eq. ( 5.4a ), and the spin
tensor, Eq. ( 5.4b ), the explicit form of the spin density matrix
@xmath turns out to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The treatment of spin-one particles can be done equivalently by
introducing the complex polarization vector @xmath , and its covariant
generalization @xmath . The two formalisms can be related by means of
the formulae [ 134 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

or for the covariant generalizations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.2 Interpretation of the components of the spin tensor

A particular component of the spin tensor measures a combination of
probabilities of finding the system in a certain spin state (defined in
the particle rest frame). As “analyzing” spin states we can choose the
eigenstates of the spin vector operator in a particular direction. We
can write the spin vector operator in terms of polar and azimuthal
angles,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we can denote its eigenstates as @xmath , @xmath being their
magnetic quantum number. The probability of finding one of these states
can be calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the explicit formula of the density matrix, Eq. ( 5.6 ), one can
compute

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.11a)
                 (5.11b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Below, we suggest a diagrammatic interpretation of these probability
combinations. Arrows represent spin states @xmath and @xmath in the
direction of the arrow itself, while dashed lines denote spin state
@xmath in the direction of the line itself.

  -- -------- -- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                          
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The probabilistic interpretations suggest straightforward bounds on the
values the spin tensor parameters can achieve, namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Finally, it is possible to define a total degree of
polarization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose value ranges between 0 and 1.

### 5.2 The correlation function @xmath

The correlation function @xmath has to fulfill the condition of
Hermiticity and parity invariance. For spin-one hadrons, they are
slightly different from the spin-half case, because of the presence of
the spin tensor

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                             
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.14a)
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.14b)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and so forth for the other vectors, and @xmath .

The most general decomposition of the correlation function @xmath for
spin-one hadrons is ¹ ¹ 1 In Ref. 107 a similar decomposition of the
correlation function was attempted, but in an incorrect way.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The amplitudes @xmath are real functions @xmath . The terms with the
amplitudes @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (included between parentheses) constitute the T-odd part of the
correlation function, according to the definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading-twist part of the correlation function, parametrized in
terms of five distribution functions, is [ 36 , 37 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The underlined function, @xmath , is T-odd. Apart from the usual
distribution functions defined in Eq. ( 2.34 ), we introduced the
spin-one parton distribution functions

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
                    
     @xmath         (5.18a)
     @xmath         (5.18b)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Note that the distribution function @xmath , introduced in Ref. 110 ,
was called in a different way in Refs. 36 and 37 to follow a more
systematic naming of the functions, especially in view of the inclusion
of transverse momentum, as we will do in Sec. 5.2.2 . Finally, note that
the function @xmath is T-odd, but does not require the presence of
intrinsic transverse momentum, a feature that is absent in T-odd
distribution functions for spin-half targets at leading order in @xmath
. It could be interesting to study this object in order to clarify the
role of intrinsic transverse momentum in generating T-odd effects in
distribution functions [ 72 , 124 ] .

#### 5.2.1 Correlation function in the helicity formalism

The only difference from the analysis of Sec. 2.2.1 is that we have to
deal with a more complex spin density matrix and with a @xmath target
spin space. The connection with the correlation function and its matrix
representation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath               (5.20a)
     @xmath               (5.20b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Eventually, the @xmath leading-twist scattering matrix turns out to be ²
² 2 Note the difference of sign in the imaginary components of the
matrix with respect to Ref. 37 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the functions on the right-hand side depend on the variable @xmath
only. The matrix @xmath is Hermitean, parity invariant and conserves
angular momentum ( @xmath ).

From the positivity of the diagonal elements we obtain the bounds:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

while positivity of two-dimensional minors gives the bound

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.23)
  -- -- -- --------

This bound is a generalization of the Soffer bound [ 159 ] and must be
fulfilled by any spin-one target. If we assume that T-odd distribution
functions vanish due to time-reversal invariance, then the bound can be
reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.2.2 Inclusion of transverse momentum

We now consider the correlation function unintegrated over the parton
transverse momentum, as defined in Eq. ( 2.57 ). For convenience, the
correlation function can be decomposed in several terms in relation to
the polarization state of the target, i.e. @xmath . To leading order in
@xmath , these terms can be decomposed as (T-odd terms are underlined)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25b)
     @xmath               (5.25c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25d)
     @xmath               (5.25e)
     @xmath               (5.25f)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

All the distribution functions on the right-hand side are understood to
depend on @xmath and @xmath .

Similarly to the function @xmath , defined in Eq. ( 2.60 ), it is
convenient to define the functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.26a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.26b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the rest of this Section, unless otherwise specified, all the
functions are understood to depend on the variables @xmath and @xmath .

As we have already done in Eq. ( 2.62 ), to simplify the notation it is
preferable to introduce new complex functions with a real part,
corresponding to a T-even function, and an imaginary part, corresponding
to a T-odd function. To avoid the introduction of new names, we will
simply call the new functions with the name of their real part, in the
following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Following steps analogous to the previous section, we can reconstruct
the complete @xmath scattering matrix.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inner blocks span the target spin space and they are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This matrix is Hermitean. Conservation of angular momentum is guaranteed
( @xmath ). The matrix is also parity invariant, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, block @xmath of the fragmentation matrix can be obtained from
block @xmath by imposing parity invariance relations.

Since the matrix @xmath is positive semidefinite, we can extract bounds
on the distribution functions. If we fully exploit the positivity of the
scattering matrix, we can write several relations involving an
increasing number of different functions. We feel this to be an
excessive task if compared to the exiguity of information we have on the
functions involved. Therefore, here we choose to focus only on the
relations stemming from positivity of the two-dimensional minors of the
matrix.

Because of the symmetry properties of the matrix, only nine independent
inequality relations between the different functions are produced: ³ ³ 3
Note the difference in Eq. ( 5.34g ) compared to Eq. (38) of Ref. 37 ,
due to an error in the latter.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34f)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34g)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34h)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34i)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

### 5.3 Cross sections and asymmetries for spin-one targets

We will not dwell very much on the analysis of spin-one targets. The
only available one is the deuteron, which is a system of two spin-half
hadrons connected by nuclear interaction. In the approximation of
independent scattering off the nucleons, the distribution function
@xmath is expected to be small. However, calculations of @xmath are
available in the literature (see e.g.  Ref. 169 ). Some calculations
show that this function could be sizeable in the low- @xmath region [
144 , 62 , 89 ] , due to nuclear shadowing effects. New precision
measurements of the deuteron structure functions (e.g. from HERMES) may
provide an experimental test of this expectation, as already observed in
several papers [ 21 , 131 , 93 ] .

We will focus only on totally inclusive deep inelastic scattering off a
spin-one target at leading twist. As we have seen in Chap. 2 , in this
type of process we can access only chiral-even, transverse momentum
independent functions. Spin-one targets are characterized by three such
functions, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, we should be able to
define three independent asymmetries. In addition to the indices @xmath
to denote the @xmath polarization along the direction of the beam, with
the index 0 we will denote when the target is polarized along the
direction of the beam but with magnetic number equal to 0.

The total cross section integrated over the azimuthal angle @xmath is
analogous to Eq. ( 2.70 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

A few words on the value of the polarization coefficients are needed.
When the target is polarized purely in the @xmath state along the beam
direction, then @xmath and @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 5.11a )]. In case the
polarization is not complete, then a possible notation could be @xmath
and @xmath , with @xmath . When the target is polarized purely in the 0
state along the beam, then @xmath and @xmath . In case the polarization
is not complete, we can use the notation @xmath , where the coefficient
@xmath is smaller than 1, and can be different from @xmath . If we just
sum the cross section with opposite vector polarization @xmath , in
analogy to Eq. ( 2.71 ), we will obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a contamination of tensor polarization is still present. Thus, the
unpolarized part of the cross section has to be properly defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector polarized part of the cross section corresponds exactly to
Eq. ( 2.72 ). We rewrite it here for convenience

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we can define a tensor polarized part of the cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the appropriate asymmetry to measure the spin-one
distribution function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.4 Spin-one hadrons in the final state

Instead of pointing the attention to spin-one targets, it is possible to
analyze spin-one final state hadrons in semi-inclusive deep inelastic
scattering or in @xmath annihilation. This idea was first considered by
Efremov and Teryaev [ 91 ] (and more recently rediscussed in Ref. [ 155
] ). A systematic study was accomplished by Ji [ 122 ] , who singled out
two new fragmentation functions, the function @xmath , analogous to the
distribution function @xmath , and the T-odd function @xmath . These new
fragmentation functions can be observed in the production of vector
mesons, e.g. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . However, these functions require
polarimetry on the final-state meson, which can be done by studying the
angular distribution of its decay products (e.g. @xmath in the case of
@xmath meson). In this sense, vector meson production represents just a
specific contribution to the more general case of two-particle
production near the vector meson mass.

#### 5.4.1 The decay of a spin-one hadron

We want to describe the decay of a spin-one hadron with momentum @xmath
and mass @xmath into two unpolarized particles with momenta @xmath ,
@xmath , and masses @xmath , @xmath . We assume the same parametrization
of the momenta as presented in Chap. 4 , in particular Eqs. ( 4.1 ). In
general, the angular distribution of the decay products of a spin-one
hadron into two unpolarized hadrons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the polar and azimuthal angles of the vector
@xmath in the decaying particle rest frame, as defined in Chap. 4 ,
Eqs. ( 4.21 ), and they correspond to the angles usually measured in
experiments [ 69 , 8 , 7 ] . The decay matrix, @xmath , has been defined
in Eq. ( 4.31 ). In this chapter, we are only interested in the @xmath
sector, therefore for convenience we define a spin-one decay matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be checked by explicit comparison, this matrix can be rewritten
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Notice that @xmath stands for the modulus of the vector
@xmath in the center-of-mass frame of reference. We know from Eq. ( 4.22
) or Eq. ( 4.24 ) how to express it in terms of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

In general, the decay matrix can be expressed in terms of analyzing
powers :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the decay distribution can be obtained accordingly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparing Eq. ( 5.43 ) with Eq. ( 5.44 ) we can identify

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

from which we observe that the vector analyzing powers are zero [ 64 ] .
⁴ ⁴ 4 The vector analyzing powers can be different from zero in a decay
that does not conserve parity.

The tensor analyzing power can be written in a covariant form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can use a parametrization of the tensor analyzing power analogous to
that of the spin tensor, Eq. ( 5.5b ), provided we exchange the plus and
minus components and we replace @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
. Then, we can write the parameters of the tensor in terms of the angles
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.48a)
     @xmath      (5.48b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting the explicit form of the tensor analyzing power in Eq. (
5.45 ), we obtain the decay distribution (cf. Ref. 156 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.5 The correlation function @xmath

The decomposition of the correlation function @xmath is analogous to
that of @xmath , just replacing @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and the spin vector and tensor, @xmath and @xmath , with
the vector and tensor analyzing powers, @xmath and @xmath . Therefore,
the leading-twist part of the correlation functions, @xmath , can be
parametrized in terms of five fragmentation functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The prefactor has been chosen to have a better connection to the
unpolarized results, i.e. integrated over @xmath and @xmath . We
retained the terms containing the vector analyzing powers, although we
know that they vanish in the case of a parity-conserving decay. The
function @xmath is T-odd and corresponds to the function @xmath of Ref.
122 . This function evolves with the energy scale in the same way as the
transversity fragmentation function [ 160 ] .

The matrix representation of the leading part of @xmath can be obtained
almost directly from the result of the matrix @xmath , shown in Eq. (
5.21 ), provided we apply the correct replacements. The result is

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.51)
  -- -- -- --------

Conservation of angular momentum in the fragmentation process requires
@xmath .

At this point, we can compare the matrix we obtained with the pure
@xmath -wave sector of the matrix @xmath in Eq. ( 4.33 ). We notice that
the two matrix have an almost identical form, after we identify

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

There are, however, a couple of differences. The first difference is
that two-hadron fragmentation functions depend also on the total
invariant mass squared, while spin-one fragmentation functions do not,
since they are supposed to be nonzero only at the mass of the hadron we
are observing. More appropriately, since we are usually observing a
resonance we should assume that spin-one fragmentation functions have to
be multiplied by an invariant mass distribution, e.g. a Breit-Wigner
curve peaked at the resonance mass.

The second difference is that in the analysis of two-hadron
fragmentation we missed the components @xmath and @xmath , typical of
vector polarization. The reason is that a parity violating decay is
required to analyze these components. In fact, if we trace the matrix of
Eq. ( LABEL:e:Dspinone ) with a decay matrix such as the one defined in
Eq. ( 5.42 ), the vector polarization functions, @xmath and @xmath ,
would not appear in the decay distribution. When studying two-hadron
fragmentation, we imposed parity invariance from the very beginning –
from Eq. ( 4.12 ) – thus missing any contribution of vector
polarization.

We are not going to analyze the features of the correlation function
@xmath when partonic transverse momentum is included, as they
essentially reproduce those of the correlation function @xmath , studied
in Sec. 5.2.2 , modulo the replacements we discussed at the beginning of
this section.

#### 5.5.1 Positivity bounds on spin-one fragmentation functions

The bounds stemming from the positivity of the fragmentation matrix are
very similar to the ones we discussed for spin-one distribution
functions in Sec. 5.2.1 . From the diagonal elements we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.53a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.53b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.53c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Eqs. ( 5.53a ) and ( 5.53b ) correspond to the Eqs. ( 4.37b ) and (
4.37c ). From positivity of the two-dimensional minors we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the lack of information on vector polarized fragmentation
functions, the bound in Eq. ( 5.53c ) does not have a direct relevance
for experiments, but it can be very useful to test the consistency of
model calculations. The bound in Eq. ( 5.54 ) can be used in a less
restrictive version [ 37 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to Eq. ( 4.38c ).

### 5.6 Cross section and asymmetries for spin-one production

We consider one-particle inclusive DIS events where the target consists
of a spin-half hadron and the fragment is a spin-one hadron. We assume
the polarization of the final state hadron is analyzed by means of a
two-particle, parity-conserving decay. It is worthwhile to mention that
the experimental analysis of spin-one final state polarization has been
already performed for exclusive leptoproduction of vector mesons [ 67 ,
68 , 69 , 7 , 8 ] and in @xmath annihilation [ 2 , 4 , 6 , 5 , 1 ] .
Fig. 5.1 shows a typical distribution of the energy absorbed by the
target in @xmath production events. The peak represents the exclusive
events, while the rest of the distribution contains deep inelastic
events, which have always been excluded from data analyses.

Let us first analyze the cross section integrated over the transverse
momentum of the outgoing hadron. It will be differential in six
variables

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.56)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the decay angles discussed in Sec. 5.4.1 .

The unpolarized and polarized parts of the cross section are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.57a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.57b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.57c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The unpolarized cross section corresponds to Eq. (58) of Ref. 36 (there
the unpolarized fragmentation function has been neglected), while Eq. (
5.57b ) corresponds to Eq. (61) of Ref. 36 integrated over the hadron
transverse momentum and finally Eq. ( 5.57c ) corresponds to Eq. (63) of
Ref. 36 . ⁵ ⁵ 5 An overall minus sign is missing in Eq. (63) of Ref. 36
At the same time, note the correspondence with the @xmath sector of
Eqs. ( 4.40 ), after we apply the identifications of Eqs. ( 5.52 ).

The asymmetry of Eq. ( 5.57c ) contains the transversity distribution
multiplied with the chiral-odd T-odd function @xmath . This observable
is just a part of the one we presented in Eq. ( 4.40c ), but this is a
good point to stress once more a couple of details. The function @xmath
is different from the @xmath interference fragmentation function @xmath
. Although a proper analysis of this function has to be done in the
framework of two-particle fragmentation, it is important to realize that
it enjoys the characteristics of a single-particle function. For
instance, there is little doubt about the fact that it will be strongly
peaked at the mass of some spin-one resonance. On the contrary, we don’t
know what is the invariant mass behavior of @xmath interference
fragmentation functions. Moreover, its physical origin could be more
similar to that of the Collins function than to that of @xmath
interference fragmentation functions. Since we have some indications
that the Collins function is possibly sizable, there is hope that also
@xmath will turn out to be large, maybe larger than @xmath interference
fragmentation functions. However, it must be remembered that @xmath does
not depend on partonic transverse momentum.

If we don’t integrate over the transverse momentum of the outgoing
hadron, the the cross section will be differential in eight variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, the cross sections are much more complex than before. The
following formulae correspond to the ones listed in Ref. 36 , if we
replace the tensor polarization components with the analyzing powers of
Eqs. ( 5.48 ). However, here we show also the unpolarized contributions
and we examine also the terms with T-odd distribution functions. ⁶ ⁶ 6
Moreover, in Ref. 36 there are a few typos and there is a systematic
error sign whenever the factors @xmath and @xmath are used.

##### Unpolarized lepton beam and unpolarized target

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.59)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Polarized lepton beam and unpolarized target

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Unpolarized lepton beam and longitudinally polarized target

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.61)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Polarized lepton beam and longitudinally polarized target

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Unpolarized lepton beam and transversely polarized target

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.63)
              @xmath      (5.64)
              @xmath      (5.65)
              @xmath      (5.66)
                          (5.67)
              @xmath      (5.68)
              @xmath      (5.69)
              @xmath      (5.70)
              @xmath      (5.71)
                          (5.72)
              @xmath      (5.73)
              @xmath      (5.74)
              @xmath      (5.75)
              @xmath      (5.76)
              @xmath      (5.77)
              @xmath      (5.78)
              @xmath      (5.79)
              @xmath      (5.80)
              @xmath      (5.81)
              @xmath      (5.82)
              @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Polarized lepton beam and transversely polarized target

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The previous formulae describe the @xmath sector of two-hadron
production with transverse momentum and partial-wave expansion, which we
did not compute in Chap. 4 .

### 5.7 Summary

In this chapter, we examined the description of spin-one hadrons, both
in the role of targets and of final-state fragments.

To describe spin-one targets, we introduced a rank-two spin tensor in
the decomposition of the spin density matrix. The presence of the spin
tensor made the decomposition of the correlation function @xmath more
complex than the spin-half case. Neglecting partonic transverse
momentum, we could describe the leading twist part of the correlation
function by means of five distribution functions [Eq. ( 5.17 )]. Besides
the familiar three functions of the spin-half case ( @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ), we needed to introduce the function @xmath and the T-odd
function @xmath . The latter was never discussed in the literature
before and it is the first leading-twist T-odd distribution function
that survives the integration over partonic transverse momentum.

We studied the correlation function in the framework of the helicity
formalism and we obtained for the first time positivity bounds on
spin-one distribution functions [Eqs. ( 5.22 ) and ( 5.23 )]. In
particular, we demonstrated that the bounds on the helicity and
transversity distribution functions are different from the spin-half
case. We carried out the analysis of the correlation function including
also transverse momentum, leading to the decomposition of the
correlation function shown in Eqs. ( 5.25 ), together with the
positivity bounds of Eqs. ( 5.34 ).

We briefly discussed the cross section for inclusive deep inelastic
scattering on spin-one targets, emphasizing the contribution of the
distribution function @xmath [Eqs. ( 5.36 ), ( 5.37 ) and ( 5.39 )].

We devoted the second half of the chapter to the analysis of spin-one
hadron as current fragments. We explained how it is possible to probe
the polarization of an outgoing hadron if it undergoes a two-particle
decay. After studying the correlation function @xmath , in Sec. 5.6 we
listed all the spin asymmetries occurring at leading order in @xmath in
spin-one deep inelastic leptoproduction, with or without integration
over the outgoing hadron’s transverse momentum. In particular, we
highlighted the single transverse spin asymmetry of Eq. ( 5.57c ). Even
though this asymmetry was already included in the discussion of
two-hadron fragmentation functions, in this chapter we made clear that
it has the characteristics of a single-particle fragmentation function
and it is not related to the two-hadron @xmath interference function
@xmath .

In the next chapter, we are going to study how it is possible to
generate T-odd single-particle fragmentation functions in the framework
of a field theoretical approach.

## Chapter 6 A model estimate of the Collins function

In the previous chapters, we extensively discussed how it is possible to
observe the transversity distribution function in connection with T-odd
chiral-odd fragmentation function, in particular the Collins function
@xmath , the two-hadron interference function @xmath or the spin-one
fragmentation function @xmath . Unfortunately, at the moment we have
scarce or no information about these functions. Therefore, we need to
address the important issue of estimating them and check whether they
could be measurable. Beside giving an indication of the magnitude of
unknown fuctions, model evaluations, however rough or naive, serve some
useful purposes: they show whether a nonzero function can be obtained in
the framework of known theories, they pave the way for future improved
estimates, they shed light on some crucial properties, and they analyze
the consequences of the assumptions of the model. In this chapter, we
focus on the Collins function, which could be regarded as the prototype
of a T-odd function, and present an estimate of it.

In spite of the apparent difficulty in modeling T-odd effects, a
nonvanishing Collins function can be obtained through a consistent
one-loop calculation, in a description where massive constituent quarks
and pions are the only effective degrees of freedom and interact via a
simple pseudoscalar coupling, as we have shown in Ref. [ 34 ] . We point
out that Collins himself suggested the idea of dressing the quark
propagator as a possible mechanism to produce a nonzero @xmath [ 77 ]
and a more specific way to achieve this goal was mentioned by Suzuky in
Ref. 162 . The model discussed in our early work was admittedly unfit to
reproduce the phenomenology of the Collins function. Here, we show the
result of a recent calculation [ 35 ] , which gives a more reasonable
estimate.

At present, only one attempt to theoretically estimate the Collins
function for pions exists [ 26 ] , and little phenomenological
information is available from experiments. The HERMES Collaboration
reported the first measurements of single spin asymmetries in
semi-inclusive DIS [ 10 , 11 ] , giving an indication of a possibly
nonzero Collins function. Preliminary results have been presented by the
SMC collaboration as well [ 65 ] . The Collins function has also been
invoked to explain large azimuthal asymmetries in @xmath [ 23 , 60 ] .
However, all these analyses are plagued by large uncertainties, and
hence do not allow any conclusive statement yet. Recently, a
phenomenological estimate of the Collins function has been proposed [ 90
] , combining results from the DELPHI, SMC and HERMES experiments.
However, in spite of all the efforts to pin down the Collins function,
the knowledge we have at present is still insufficient.

In this chapter we calculate the Collins function for pions in a chiral
invariant approach at a low energy scale, as we have done in Ref. 35 .
We use the model of Manohar and Georgi [ 139 ] , which incorporates
chiral symmetry and its spontaneous breaking, two important aspects of
QCD at low energies. The spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry leads
to the existence of (almost massless) Goldstone bosons, which are
included as effective degrees of freedom in the model. Quarks appear as
further degrees of freedom as well. However, in contrast with the
current quarks of the QCD Lagrangian, the model uses massive constituent
quarks – a concept that has been proven very successful in many
phenomenological models at hadronic scales. With the exception of Ref.
121 , the implications of a chiral invariant interaction for
fragmentation functions into Goldstone bosons at low energy scales
remain essentially unexplored.

Although the applicability of the Manohar-Georgi model is restricted to
energies below the scale of chiral symmetry breaking @xmath , this might
be sufficient to calculate soft objects. In this kinematical regime, the
chiral power counting allows setting up a consistent perturbation theory
[ 170 ] . The relevant expansion parameter is given by @xmath , where
@xmath is a generic external momentum of a particle participating in the
fragmentation. To guarantee the convergence of the perturbation theory,
we restrict the maximum virtuality @xmath of the decaying quark to a
soft value. We mostly consider the case @xmath .

The outline of the chapter is as follows. We first give the details of
our model and present the analytical results of our calculation. Next,
we discuss our results and compare them with known observables,
indicating the choice of the parameters of our model. Then, we present
the features of our prediction for the Collins function and its moments.
Finally, using the outcome of our model, we estimate the leading order
asymmetries containing the Collins function in semi-inclusive DIS and in
@xmath annihilation into two hadrons.

### 6.1 Calculation of the Collins function

Considering the fragmentation process of a quark into a pion, @xmath ,
we use the expressions of the unpolarized fragmentation function @xmath
and the Collins function @xmath given in Eq. ( 3.27 ). For convenience,
we reproduce that definition in a more explicit way: ¹ ¹ 1 Note that
this definition of @xmath slightly differs from the original one given
by Collins [ 77 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath denoting the pion mass and @xmath being the correlation
function defined in Eq. ( 3.12 ).

We now use the chiral invariant model of Manohar and Georgi [ 139 ] to
calculate the matrix elements in the correlation function. Neglecting
the part that describes free Goldstone bosons, the Lagrangian of the
model reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Eq. ( 6.2 ) the pion field enters through the vector and axial vector
combinations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , where the @xmath are the generators of the SU(2) flavor
group and @xmath represents the pion decay constant. In absence of
resonances, the pion decay constant determines the scale of chiral
symmetry breaking via @xmath . The quark mass @xmath and the axial
coupling constant @xmath are free parameters of the model that are not
constrained by chiral symmetry. The values of these parameters will be
specified in Sec. 6.2 . Although we limit ourselves here to the SU(2)
flavor sector of the model, the extension to strange quarks is
straightforward, allowing in particular the calculation of kaon
fragmentation functions. For convenience we write down explicitly those
terms of the interaction part of the Lagrangian ( 6.2 ) that are
relevant for our calculation. To be specific we need both the
interaction of a single pion with a quark and the two-pion contact
interaction, which can easily be obtained by expanding the nonlinear
representation @xmath in terms of the pion field:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Performing the numerical calculation of the Collins function, it turns
out that the contact interaction ( 6.4b ), which is a direct consequence
of chiral symmetry, plays a dominant role.

At tree level, the fragmentation of a quark is modeled through the
process @xmath , where Fig. 6.1 represents the corresponding unitarity
diagram. Using the Lagrangian in Eq. ( 6.4a ), the correlation function
at lowest order reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This correlation function allows to compute the unpolarized
fragmentation function @xmath by means of Eq. ( 6.1a ), leading to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the expression in Eq. ( 6.6 ) is only weakly dependent on the
transverse momentum of the quark. In fact, @xmath is constant as a
function of @xmath , if @xmath and (or) @xmath . Because our approach is
limited to the soft regime, we will impose an upper cutoff on the @xmath
integration, as will be discussed in more detail in Sec. 6.2 . This in
turn leads to a finite @xmath after integration over the transverse
momentum.

The SU(2) flavor structure of our approach implies the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (6.7a)
     @xmath      (6.7b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the result given in Eq. ( 6.6 ). In the case of
unfavored fragmentation processes @xmath vanishes at tree level, but
will be nonzero as soon as one-loop corrections are included. According
to the chiral power counting, one-loop contributions to @xmath are
suppressed by a factor @xmath compared to the tree level result. The
maximum momentum up to which the chiral perturbation expansion converges
numerically can be determined only by an explicit calculation of the
one-loop corrections.

As in the case of a pseudoscalar quark-pion coupling [ 34 ] , the
Collins function @xmath turns out to be zero in Born approximation. To
obtain a nonzero result, we have to resort to the one-loop level. In
Fig. 6.2 the corresponding diagrams are shown, where we have displayed
only those graphs that contribute to the Collins function. The explicit
calculation of @xmath is similar to our previous work [ 34 ] . The
relevant ingredients of the calculation are the self-energy and the
vertex correction diagrams. These ingredients are sketched in Fig. 6.3
and can be expressed analytically as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where flavor factors have been suppressed. For later purpose, we give
here the most general parametrization of the functions @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.9b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.9c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The real parts of the functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath etc.
could be UV divergent and require in principle a proper renormalization.
Here, we do not need to deal with the question of renormalization at
all, since only the imaginary parts of the loop diagrams are important
when calculating the Collins function [ 34 ] .

Taking now flavor factors properly into account, the contributions to
the correlation function generated by the diagrams (a), (b) and (c) in
Fig. 6.2 are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.10a)
              @xmath      (6.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.10c)
              @xmath      (6.10d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.10e)
              @xmath      (6.10f)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The correlation functions of the Hermitean conjugate diagrams follow
from the Hermiticity condition @xmath .

Summing the contributions of all diagrams and inserting the resulting
correlation function in Eq. ( 6.1b ), we eventually obtain the result

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.11)
  -- -- -- --------

Thus, the Collins function is entirely given by the imaginary parts of
the coefficients defined in Eqs. ( 6.9 ). We can compute these imaginary
parts by applying Cutkosky rules to the self-energy and vertex diagrams
of Fig. 6.3 . Explicit calculation leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12b)
              @xmath      (6.12c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have introduced the so-called Källen function, @xmath , and the
factors

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.13b)
                          (6.13c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These integrals are finite and vanish below the threshold of quark-pion
production, where the self-energy and vertex diagrams do not possess an
imaginary part.

Thus, Eq. ( 6.11 ) in combination with Eqs. ( 6.12 ) gives the explicit
result for the Collins function in the Manohar-Georgi model to lowest
possible order. Because of its chiral-odd nature, the Collins function
would vanish in this model if we set the mass of the quark to zero. The
same phenomenon has been observed in the calculation of a chiral-odd
twist-3 fragmentation function [ 121 ] . The result in Eq. ( 6.11 )
corresponds, e.g., to the fragmentation @xmath . The expressions for the
remaining favored transitions are obtained in analogy to Eqs. ( 6.7 ).
Unfavored fragmentation processes in the case of the Collins function
appear only at the two-loop level.

### 6.2 Estimates and phenomenology

#### 6.2.1 Unpolarized fragmentation function and the choice of
parameters

We now present our numerical estimates, where all results for the
fragmentation functions in this subsection refer to the transition
@xmath . To begin with we calculate the unpolarized fragmentation
function @xmath , which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the transverse momentum of the outgoing hadron with
respect to the quark direction. The upper limit on the @xmath
integration is set by the cutoff on the fragmenting quark virtuality,
@xmath , and corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition to @xmath and @xmath , the cutoff @xmath is the third
parameter of our approach that is not fixed a priori . However, as will
be explained below, the possible values of @xmath can be restricted when
comparing our results to experimental data. Unless otherwise specified,
we always use the values

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the relevant places, the dependence of our results on possible
variations of these parameters will be discussed. A few remarks
concerning the choice in Eq. ( 6.16 ) are in order. The value of @xmath
is a typical mass of a constituent quark. The choice for the axial
coupling can be seen as a kind of average number of what has been
proposed in the literature. For instance, in a simple SU(6) spin-flavor
model for the proton one finds @xmath in order to obtain the correct
value for the axial charge of the nucleon [ 139 ] . On the other hand,
large @xmath arguments favor a value of the order of 1 [ 171 ] , while,
according to a recent calculation in a relativistic point-form approach
[ 59 ] , a @xmath slightly above 1 seems to be required for describing
the axial charge of the nucleon. Finally, our choice for @xmath ensures
that the momenta of the outgoing pion and quark, in the rest frame of
the fragmenting quark, remain below values of the order @xmath . In this
region we believe chiral perturbation theory to be applicable, meaning
that our leading order result can provide a reliable estimate.

In Fig. 6.4 we show the result for the unpolarized fragmentation
function @xmath . Notice that in general the fragmentation functions
vanish outside the kinematical limits, which in our model are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the situation when the upper limit of the @xmath
integration becomes equal to zero. We consider our tree level result as
a pure valence-type part of @xmath . The sea-type (unfavored) transition
@xmath is strictly zero at leading order. Therefore, we compare the
model result to the valence-type quantity @xmath , where the
fragmentation functions have been taken from the parametrization of
Kretzer ² ² 2 Other parametrizations [ 125 , 63 , 130 ] use a starting
energy scale @xmath , which is too high to allow a comparison with our
results. Moreover, the valence parts of these other parametrizations
would have to be obtained with some extra assumptions and seems too
arbitrary. [ 129 ] at a scale @xmath . Obviously, the @xmath dependence
of both curves is in nice agreement, which is a nontrivial result. For
example, in the pseudoscalar model that we used in our previous work [
34 ] , @xmath behaves quite differently and peaks at an intermediate
@xmath value.

On the other hand, we underestimate the parametrization of Ref. 129 by
about a factor of 2. Some remarks are in order at this point. Although a
part of the discrepancy might be attributed to the uncertainty in the
value of @xmath , the most important point is to address the question as
to what extent we can compare our estimate with existing
parametrizations. The parametrization of [ 129 ] serves basically as
input function of the perturbative QCD evolution equations, used to
describe high-energy @xmath data, and displays the typical logarithmic
dependence on the scale @xmath . A value of @xmath GeV @xmath is
believed to be already beyond the limit of applicability of perturbative
QCD calculations. On the other hand, our approach displays, to a first
approximation, a linear dependence on the cutoff @xmath . It is supposed
to be valid at low scales and it is also stretched to the limit of its
applicability for @xmath GeV @xmath . In this context it should also be
investigated to what extent the inclusion of one-loop corrections, which
allow for the additional decay channel @xmath , will increase the result
for @xmath at @xmath . Finally, we want to remark that to our knowledge
there exists no strict one-to-one correspondence between the quark
virtuality @xmath and the scale used in the evolution equation of
fragmentation functions, which in semi-inclusive DIS is typically
identified with the photon virtuality @xmath . For all these reasons, a
smooth matching of our calculation and the parametrization of [ 129 ]
cannot necessarily be expected. Despite these caveats, the correct
@xmath behavior displayed by our result for @xmath suggests that the
calculation can well be used as an input for evolution equations at a
low scale. In the next subsection we will elaborate more on this point
in connection with the Collins function.

The best indication of the appropriate value of the cutoff @xmath may be
obtained when comparing our calculation to experimental data of the
average transverse momentum of the outgoing hadron with respect to the
quark, which we evaluate according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 6.5 we show the result of this observable as a function of
@xmath for three different choices of the parameter @xmath . As a
comparison, we also show a fit (taken from Ref. 23 ) to experimental
data obtained by the DELPHI Collaboration [ 3 ] . As in the case of
@xmath , the shape of our result is very similar to the experimental
one, which we consider as an encouraging result. For @xmath our curve is
about @xmath below the data. Such a disagreement is not surprising,
keeping in mind that at LEP energies higher order perturbative QCD
effects (e.g. gluon bremsstrahlung, unfavored fragmentations, etc.) play
an important role, leading in general to a broadening of the @xmath
distribution. For experiments at lower energies, however, where
perturbative QCD contributions can be neglected in a first
approximation, it may be possible to exhaust the experimental value for
@xmath with genuine soft contributions as described in our model. This
in turn would determine the appropriate value of the cutoff @xmath . For
example, such a method of matching our calculation with experimental
conditions could be applied at HERMES kinematics, even though the method
is somewhat hampered since @xmath is not directly measured in
semi-inclusive DIS. In this case, one rather observes the transverse
momentum of the outgoing hadron with respect to the virtual photon,
@xmath , which depends on both @xmath and the transverse momentum of the
partons inside the target @xmath , as shown in Eq. ( 3.39 ).

#### 6.2.2 Collins function

We now turn to the description of our model result for the Collins
function. In Fig. 6.6 , @xmath is plotted for three different values of
the constituent quark mass, @xmath GeV. In a large @xmath range, the
function does not depend strongly on the precise value of the quark
mass, if we choose it within reasonable limits. That is why we can
confidently fix @xmath for our numerical studies. It is very interesting
to observe that the behavior of the unpolarized fragmentation function
@xmath is quite distinct from that of the Collins function: while the
former is decreasing as @xmath increases, the latter is growing.

The different behavior of the two functions becomes even more evident
when looking at their ratio, shown in Fig. 6.7 . At present, there
exists some evidence of @xmath behavior of the Collins function and it
is in agreement with our results. We briefly discuss this subject in
Sec. 6.3 .

The ratios of the Collins function or any of its moments with @xmath are
almost independent of the coupling constant @xmath . The reason is that
the one-loop correction containing the contact interaction is only
proportional to @xmath , as @xmath is, and is dominating over the
others. Furthermore, the ratio @xmath is nearly independent of the
cutoff @xmath . In conclusion, the prediction shown in Fig. 6.7 is
almost independent of the choice of parameters in our approach.

At this point we would like to add some general remarks concerning the
@xmath behavior of our results. It turns out that the shape of all the
results does not vary much when changing the parameters within
reasonable limits. In particular, variations of @xmath and of the cutoff
@xmath only change the normalization of the curves but not their shape.
In this sense our calculation of fragmentation functions has a good
predictive power for the @xmath behavior of the function. This has a
direct practical consequence if one uses, for instance, our result of
the Collins function as input in an evolution equation: the @xmath
dependence of the input function can be adjusted to the shape of our
@xmath , while its normalization can be kept free in order to account
for uncertainties in the values of @xmath and @xmath .

In Fig. 6.8 we plot the ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which enters the transverse single spin asymmetry of Eq. ( 3.42 ). This
quantity rises roughly linearly within a large @xmath range, leading to
a similar @xmath behavior of the transverse spin asymmetry. @xmath is no
longer independent of the cutoff @xmath , but rather the same dependence
as in the case of @xmath (Fig. 6.5 ) can be assumed. In Fig. 6.8 , this
ratio is compared to the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

A very close agreement between the two different curves can be observed,
indicating that the model predicts a quite similar transverse momentum
dependence of both the Collins function and @xmath . In the literature,
this feature is sometimes assumed in phenomenological parametrizations
of @xmath . Note, however, that in our approach deviations from this
simple behavior can be expected, if @xmath is also calculated
consistently to the one-loop order.

The Collins function has to fulfill the positivity bound of Eq. ( 3.32b
), which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integration over @xmath gives the simplified expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied by our model calculation. It is clear, however, that
increasing the value of @xmath will eventually result in a violation of
the positivity condition. To avoid such a violation, we should calculate
@xmath and @xmath consistently at the same order, i.e., the one-loop
corrections to @xmath should be included. By doing so, the positivity
bound will be fulfilled even at larger values of @xmath , for which our
numerical results are no longer trustworthy.

From our results, we expect an increasing behavior of the azimuthal
asymmetry in @xmath as function of @xmath , qualitatively similar to
what has been predicted in Ref. 26 in the context of the Lund
fragmentation model. At this point, it is also interesting to discuss
the comparison of our results with the ones obtained using the so-called
“Collins guess”. On the basis of very general assumptions, Collins
suggested a possible behavior for the transverse spin asymmetry
containing @xmath [ 77 ] . This suggestion has been used in the
literature (see, e.g., Refs. 145 , 128 , 87 , 137 ) to propose the
following shape for the Collins function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the parameter @xmath ranging between 0.3 and @xmath . ³ ³ 3 Note
that even this particular form does not correspond precisely to what
proposed in Ref. 77 , even if it is often referred to as “Collins
ansatz”. Using our model outcome for the unpolarized fragmentation
function, we apply Eq. ( 6.23 ) to estimate @xmath , and in Fig. 6.9 we
show how this compares to Eq. ( 6.19 ). There is a rough qualitative
agreement with the Collins ansatz for the lowest value of the parameter
@xmath , although it is not growing fast enough compared to Eq. ( 6.19
). On the other hand, in the Manohar-Georgi model there is no agreement
with the Collins ansatz for high values of the parameter @xmath , which
might indicate that the relation suggested in Eq. ( 6.23 ) should be
handled with care.

Finally, in Fig. 6.10 we display the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

because this ratio appears in the weighted asymmetries of Eq. ( 3.47 ).
In Fig. 6.10 , the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

is also shown for comparison. Once again, there is a remarkable
agreement between the two different expressions, confirming the quite
similar @xmath behavior of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 6.2.3 Asymmetries in semi-inclusive DIS and @xmath annihilation

We turn now to estimates of possible observables containing the Collins
function. We will take into consideration one-particle inclusive DIS,
where the Collins function appears in connection with the transversity
distribution of the nucleon, and @xmath annihilation into two hadrons
belonging to two different jets.

In the first case, we show predictions for both transverse spin
asymmetries defined in Eqs. ( 3.42 ) and ( 3.47 ). Different
calculations can be found in the literature, e.g., in Refs. 22 , 126 ,
137 . To estimate the magnitude of the asymmetries, we need inputs for
the distribution functions, in particular for the transversity
distribution. Several model calculations of this function are available
at present (see [ 41 ] for a comprehensive review). We refrain from
considering many different examples and rather restrict the analysis to
two limiting situations. In the first case we adopt the
“nonrelativistic” assumption @xmath , while in the second case we
exhaust the upper bound on the transversity distribution, i.e., @xmath [
159 ] . We use the simple parametrization of @xmath and @xmath suggested
in Ref. 70 . At the moment, more sophisticated parametrizations are
available, taking scale evolution into account also. However, all these
parametrizations are compatible with each other to the extent of our
purpose here, which is to give an estimate of the asymmetries for a low
scale. We focus on the production of @xmath , where the contribution of
down quarks is negligible, not only because of the presence of unfavored
fragmentation functions, but also because the transversity distribution
for down quarks appears to be much smaller than for up quarks in model
calculations.

In Fig. 6.11 we present the azimuthal asymmetry defined in Eq. ( 3.42 )
as a function of @xmath , after integrating numerator and denominator
over the variables @xmath and @xmath , for the two cases described
above. In Fig. 6.12 , we present the same asymmetry as a function of
@xmath , after integrating over @xmath and @xmath . As already mentioned
before, our prediction is supposed to be valid at a low energy scale of
about @xmath . Neglecting evolution effects, it could be utilized for
comparison with experiments at a scale of a few GeV @xmath . We assume
the value of the transverse polarization to be @xmath . In performing
the integrations, we apply the kinematical cuts typical of the HERMES
experiment, as described in [ 10 ] . Therefore, our prediction is
particularly significant for HERMES, which is expected to be the first
experiment to measure this asymmetry. In principle, the simultaneous
study of the @xmath and @xmath dependence of the asymmetry yields
separate information on the distribution and fragmentation parts and
allows one to extract both up to a normalization factor [ 126 ] . Note,
however, that this procedure relies on the assumption of up-quark
dominance and is valid only if the @xmath dependence of the asymmetry
can be ascribed entirely to the distribution functions and the @xmath
dependence entirely to the fragmentation functions. Kinematical cuts
could partially spoil this situation. We would like to stress that our
calculation predicts an asymmetry up to the order of 10%, which should
be within experimental reach, and suggests the possibility of
distinguishing between different assumptions on the transversity
distribution.

Using the same procedure as before, we have estimated the asymmetry
defined in Eq. ( 3.47 ), containing the weighting with @xmath . The
results are shown in Fig. 6.13 as a function of @xmath and in Fig. 6.14
as a function of @xmath . The magnitude of this asymmetry is higher than
in the unweighted case, which is partially due to the fact that the
weighting enhances the asymmetry by about a factor of 2.

In addition to appearing in semi-inclusive DIS in connection with the
transversity distribution of the nucleon, the Collins function can be
independently extracted from another process, i.e. electron-positron
annihilation into two hadrons belonging to two back-to-back jets [ 51 ,
52 ] . We restrict ourselves to the case of photon exchange only. In
this process, one of the two hadrons (say hadron 2) defines the
scattering plane together with the leptons and determines the direction
with respect to which the azimuthal angles must be measured. The cross
section is differential in five variables, e.g. @xmath . The variables
@xmath and @xmath are the longitudinal fractional momenta of the two
hadrons. In the center of mass frame @xmath , where @xmath is the angle
of hadron 2 with respect to the momentum of the incoming leptons. The
vector @xmath denotes the transverse component of the momentum of hadron
1 and @xmath is its azimuthal angle with respect to the scattering
plane. For a more detailed description of the kinematical variables we
refer to [ 51 , 52 ] .

We define the azimuthal asymmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where summations over quark flavors are understood. The weighting with a
second power of @xmath in the numerator is necessary to obtain a
deconvoluted expression. We prefer to use the same weighting in the
denominator as well, to avoid a modification of the asymmetry just
caused by the weighting.

In Fig. 6.15 we present the estimate of the asymmetry defined above,
entirely based on our model. The asymmetry has been integrated over
@xmath and @xmath , leaving the dependence on @xmath alone. We have
extended the @xmath integration interval all the way to @xmath , to
obtain a conservative estimate. In fact, limiting the interval to @xmath
will enhance the asymmetry by a factor of 2, approximately. Because the
Collins function increases with increasing @xmath , we also get a larger
asymmetry by restricting the integration range for @xmath . As an
illustration of this feature, in Fig. 6.15 we present two results,
obtained from two different integration ranges. Our prediction is
supposed to be valid only at low energy scales and should be evolved for
comparison with higher energy experiments. It is important to note that
we estimate the asymmetry to be of the order of about 5%, and thus it
should observable in experiments.

### 6.3 Comparison with existing data

The HERMES collaboration recently measured the single longitudinal spin
asymmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

On purpose, we avoid entering the details of the formula. It is
difficult to extract information on the Collins function and on the
transversity distribution from this asymmetry [ 61 ] . In a recent
analysis of this asymmetry, Efremov et al. [ 90 ] extracted a behavior
@xmath for @xmath , although some questionable assumptions were used to
obtain this result.

If we assume that the other terms in ( 6.27 ) are small, then the @xmath
dependence of the asymmetry should be almost entirely due to the Collins
function. To compare this behavior with our model estimate, as a first
step we parametrize our result for the ratio @xmath with a simple
analytic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 6.16 shows the result of our model together with this
parametrization (note that we extended the plot to higher values of
@xmath compared to Fig. 6.8 ).

In Fig. 6.17 we compare our parametrization with HERMES data on @xmath [
11 ] and preliminary data on the same asymmetry from the CLAS
collaboration at JLAB [ 30 ] . Note that we arbitrarily normalized our
curve to take into account the unknown distribution functions and
prefactors. The agreement of the @xmath shape is remarkable.

### 6.4 Summary

We have estimated the Collins fragmentation function for pions at a low
energy scale by means of the Manohar-Georgi model. This model contains
three essential features of nonperturbative QCD: massive quark degrees
of freedom, chiral symmetry and its spontaneous breaking (with pions as
Goldstone bosons). Because of the chiral invariant interaction between
pions and quarks, the fragmentation process can be evaluated in a
perturbative expansion. The constituent quark mass, the axial pion-quark
coupling @xmath and the maximum virtuality @xmath of the fragmenting
quark are free parameters of our approach. The quark mass and @xmath are
constrained within reasonable limits. To ensure the convergence of the
chiral perturbation expansion, @xmath cannot exceed a typical hadronic
scale. We have mostly considered the value @xmath , which guarantees
that the momenta of the particles produced in the fragmentation process
stay well below the scale of chiral symmetry breaking, @xmath GeV. To
determine the appropriate value of @xmath , the average transverse
momentum of a data set could be used. In any case, we observed that
variations of the free parameters within reasonable limits have only a
minor influence on the shape of the results, implying that our approach
has a good predictive power for the @xmath behavior of the various
functions.

We have found that the Manohar-Georgi model reproduces reasonably well
the unpolarized pion fragmentation function and the average transverse
momentum of a produced hadron as a function of @xmath , supporting the
idea of describing the fragmentation process by such a chiral invariant
approach.

Compared to the unpolarized fragmentation function, modeling the Collins
function is considerably more difficult, mainly because of its
chiral-odd and T-odd nature. In our approach, the helicity flip required
to generate a chiral-odd object is caused by the mass of the constituent
quark, while the T-odd behavior is produced via one-loop corrections.
The Collins function exhibits a quite distinct behavior from the
unpolarized fragmentation function. In particular, the ratio @xmath is
strongly increasing with increasing @xmath .

On the basis of our results, we have calculated the transverse
single-spin asymmetry in semi-inclusive DIS where the Collins function
appears in combination with the transversity of the nucleon. This
observable will be measured in the near future at HERMES and could also
be investigated at COMPASS, Jlab (upgraded) and EIC. For typical HERMES
kinematics the asymmetry is of the order of @xmath , giving support to
the intention of extracting the nucleon transversity in this way. We
believe that our estimate of the Collins function, despite its
uncertainties, can be very useful for this extraction. Finally, we found
an encouraging agreement between the shape of our estimate and the trend
of the single spin asymmetry measured by the HERMES collaboration [ 10 ,
11 ] , although it is not clear if this asymmetry is originated solely
by the Collins function.

More information on the Collins function from the experimental side is
required. In this respect, the most promising experiment seems to be
@xmath annihilation into two hadrons, where @xmath appears squared in an
azimuthal @xmath asymmetry. According to our calculation, an asymmetry
of the order of @xmath can be expected, which should be measurable at
high luminosity accelerators, such as BABAR and BELLE [ 146 ] .
Dedicated measurements of the Collins function would be extremely
important for the extraction of the transversity distribution. Moreover,
they could answer the question whether a chiral invariant Lagrangian can
be used to model the Collins function.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions and outlook

The main focus of this thesis was to present some ways of accessing the
transversity distribution of quarks inside hadrons, @xmath . This was
the main motivation to perform a thorough analysis of one-particle and
two-particle inclusive deep inelastic scattering at leading order in
@xmath , with a particular attention to T-odd fragmentation functions.
This thesis is certainly not the first work on this important subject,
however it complements the existing literature in many respects.

### 7.1 Conclusions

Several observables containing the transversity distribution appear all
along the thesis, but three of them are particularly promising and have
been highlighted. The first method presented to access transversity is
the measurement of the azimuthal single spin asymmetry described in
Eq. ( 3.47 ), or the similar asymmetry described in Eq. ( 3.42 ). In
these asymmetries, the transversity distribution appears in combination
with the Collins fragmentation function, which provides the chirality
flip necessary to compensate the chiral-odd nature of @xmath .

The Collins function was introduced in Ref. 77 as early as 1993.
However, it was looked at with some skepticism because it is a
single-particle T-odd fragmentation function. It was conjectured to be
small or to vanish altogether [ 117 ] . In this thesis, we tackled the
question by calculating directly the Collins function in a consistent
and time-reversal invariant field theoretical approach. Our model
calculation dispels the doubts about the vanishing of the Collins
function and, more in general, of T-odd fragmentation functions.
Moreover, our calculation aspires to describe the Collins function in a
qualitative and quantitative way. At the moment, there is no
unquestionable experimental information on the Collins function.
However, the single longitudinal spin asymmetry measured by the HERMES
collaboration [ 10 , 11 ] can be originated by the Collins function. We
tested our model on this experimental results and we found an
encouraging agreement between the shape of our estimate and the trend of
the data.

It would be of remarkable importance to collect extra information on the
Collins function, not only to allow the extraction of the transversity
distribution, but also to open a new window on polarization in
hadronization processes. New measurements could consider different
asymmetries in deep inelastic scattering (HERMES, COMPASS, CLAS, EIC),
@xmath scattering (RHIC) and @xmath annihilation into two hadrons
belonging to two jets (BABAR, BELLE).

The second observable containing the transversity presented in this
thesis is the asymmetry of Eq. ( 4.41c ), involving a chiral-odd T-odd
fragmentation function generated by the interference between the
production of two hadrons in the @xmath and @xmath waves. This asymmetry
was indicated for the first time by Jaffe, Jin and Tang in 1998 [ 117 ]
. However, their analysis suffered two limitations: it did not present a
complete treatment of two-hadron fragmentation functions and it relied
just on one specific mechanism to give some phenomenological
indications. An improved analysis of two-hadron fragmentation was
presented by Bianconi, Boffi, Jakob and Radici [ 44 ] , together with
different models of the interference fragmentation function [ 45 , 150 ]
. In this thesis, we complemented their formalism by performing a
partial-wave decomposition of two-hadron fragmentation functions, with
and without including partonic transverse momentum. ¹ ¹ 1 The results of
the partial-wave expansion are presented here for the first time and
still await publication. We were able to separate the contribution of
the @xmath and @xmath waves and we recovered the results of Jaffe, Jin
and Tang in the transverse momentum integrated @xmath interference
sector.

Besides rediscussing the interference fragmentation function in a more
exhaustive framework, another interesting asymmetry came out of the
analysis, as shown in Eq. ( 4.42 ). This asymmetry contains a chiral-odd
T-odd function pertaining to the pure @xmath -wave sector of two-hadron
production. Such a contribution was already mentioned by Collins,
Heppelmann and Ladinsky in 1994 [ 79 ] and identified more formally by
Ji in the same year [ 122 ] . However, our work is the first one to
clearly distinguish the @xmath -wave from the @xmath -interference part
in the single transverse spin asymmetry. It is useful to stress once
more that the @xmath -wave contribution should not be overlooked. It
vanishes when integrating over the full range of the polar angle @xmath
, unlike the @xmath interference term. On the other hand, it might be
larger than the latter – especially in the presence of a spin-one
resonance –thus offering an excellent way to access the transversity
distribution.

We looked more carefully at @xmath -wave two-hadron fragmentation
functions from a different point of view, i.e. comparing them with
spin-one fragmentation functions, introduced for the first time by Ji [
122 ] . In the thesis, we carried out the analysis of spin-one functions
in a more detailed way compared to the original work of Ji. We showed
that they overlap almost exactly with pure @xmath -wave two-hadron
fragmentation functions, except for the lack of a dependence on the
invariant mass squared. We included partonic transverse momentum and we
presented the complete cross section of spin-one leptoproduction at
leading order in @xmath . As in the case of the Collins function,
spin-one functions could provide us with fresh information on spin
effects in hadronization.

An important achievement of the thesis is the connection between the
formalism of correlation functions and of helicity matrices. The two
approaches were known to be equivalent at leading order in @xmath , but
the connection had to be worked out more explicitly. We expressed in the
helicity matrix formalism all the partonic functions we considered –
spin-half and spin-one distribution functions, without and with
transverse momentum, and one-hadron, two-hadron and spin-one
fragmentation functions, without and with transverse momentum. A
significant outcome of this examination was the derivation of positivity
bounds for all of them. Positivity bounds can be valuable tools, as they
provide guidance to estimate unknown functions and they test the
consistency of model calculations.

### 7.2 Outlook

The formalism of two-hadron and spin-one fragmentation functions has to
be completed by analyzing all the azimuthal asymmetries containing the
transversity distribution function, in case partonic transverse momentum
is included. The only step in this direction was presented in Ref. 31
and was limited to the spin-one contributions. Subleading twist
contributions have been neglected in the thesis and they deserve further
survey.

Another very useful extension would be to calculate the cross section of
@xmath annihilation into two couples of hadrons belonging to two
different jets, including in the analysis the distinction of the @xmath
- and @xmath -wave contributions. A measurement of two-hadron
fragmentation functions in this process would be extremely interesting
first of all because – as already mentioned – they contain valuable
information on the role of polarization in fragmentation processes, and
secondly because – as in the case of the Collins function – an
independent measurement of these functions would be very important for a
clear extraction of the transversity distribution.

For what concerns our model calculation of T-odd functions, an immediate
application would be to use our results to estimate other asymmetries
containing the Collins function. Furthermore, the shape of our results
could be used to choose a specific analytical form to parametrize the
Collins function and fit future experimental data.

Another possible development is to use a similar approach to estimate
T-odd interference fragmentation functions and T-odd spin-one
fragmentation functions. The analysis is complicated by the presence of
a vector meson, which is beyond the reach of our model as formulated at
present. In principle, it is possible to extend the model. In any case,
even without any extension it would be already possible to explore the
effect of one-loop corrections on “incoherent” two-pion production, and
compare the relative importance of @xmath interference and pure @xmath
-wave contributions, even in the absence of a resonance (e.g. in @xmath
production).

From a more formal point of view, the use of a chiral invariant approach
for describing fragmentation functions at low energy scales should be
investigated further. First of all, we should check if the chiral
perturbation expansion is reliable. Secondly, we should try to describe
fragmentation functions entirely, and not their “valence” part only.
Finally, it would be interesting to explore the connection between our
one-loop corrections and the recent models of T-odd effects [ 72 ] ,
which are also based on one-loop effects.

## References

-    [1] OPAL Collaboration, G. Abbiendi et al. , “A study of spin
    alignment of @xmath and @xmath mesons in hadronic @xmath decays,”
    Eur. Phys. J. C16  (2000) 61–70, [hep-ex/9906043] .
-    [2] DELPHI Collaboration, P. Abreu et al. , “Production
    characteristics of @xmath and light meson resonances in hadronic
    decays of the @xmath ,” Z. Phys. C65 (1995) 587–602.
-    [3] DELPHI Collaboration, P. Abreu et al. , “Tuning and test of
    fragmentation models based on identified particles and precision
    event shape data,” Z. Phys. C73 (1996) 11–60.
-    [4] DELPHI Collaboration, P. Abreu et al. , “Measurement of the
    spin density matrix for the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath produced in
    @xmath decays,” Phys. Lett. B406 (1997) 271–286.
-    [5] OPAL Collaboration, K. Ackerstaff et al. , “Spin alignment of
    leading @xmath mesons in hadronic @xmath decays,” Phys. Lett. B412
     (1997) 210–224, [hep-ex/9708022] .
-    [6] OPAL Collaboration, K. Ackerstaff et al. , “Study of @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath spin alignment in hadronic @xmath decays,” Z.
    Phys. C74 (1997) 437–449.
-    [7] HERMES Collaboration, K. Ackerstaff et al. , “Measurement of
    angular distributions and @xmath in diffractive electroproduction of
    @xmath mesons,” Eur. Phys. J. C18  (2000) 303–316, [hep-ex/0002016]
    .
-    [8] H1 Collaboration, C. Adloff et al. , “Elastic electroproduction
    of @xmath mesons at HERA,” Eur. Phys. J. C13  (2000) 371–396,
    [hep-ex/9902019] .
-    [9] HERMES Collaboration, A. Airapetian et al. , “Measurement of
    the proton spin structure function @xmath with a pure hydrogen
    target,” Phys. Lett. B442  (1998) 484–492, [hep-ex/9807015] .
-    [10] HERMES Collaboration, A. Airapetian et al. , “Observation of a
    single-spin azimuthal asymmetry in semi-inclusive pion
    electro-production,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84  (2000) 4047–4051,
    [hep-ex/9910062] .
-    [11] HERMES Collaboration, A. Airapetian et al. , “Single-spin
    azimuthal asymmetries in electroproduction of neutral pions in
    semi-inclusive deep-inelastic scattering,” Phys. Rev. D64  (2001)
    097101, [hep-ex/0104005] .
-    [12] G. Altarelli and G. Parisi, “Asymptotic freedom in parton
    language,” Nucl. Phys. B126 (1977) 298.
-    [13] M. Anselmino, D. Boer, U. D’Alesio, and F. Murgia, “ @xmath
    polarization from unpolarized quark fragmentation,” Phys. Rev. D63
     (2001) 054029, [hep-ph/0008186] .
-    [14] M. Anselmino, D. Boer, U. D’Alesio, and F. Murgia, “Transverse
    @xmath polarization in inclusive processes,” [hep-ph/0201076] .
-    [15] M. Anselmino, D. Boer, U. D’Alesio, and F. Murgia, “Transverse
    @xmath polarization in semi-inclusive DIS,” Phys. Rev. D65  (2002)
    114014, [hep-ph/0109186] .
-    [16] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, U. D’Alesio, E. Leader, and
    F. Murgia, “Parton densities and fragmentation functions from
    polarized @xmath production in semi-inclusive DIS,” Phys. Lett. B509
     (2001) 246–252, [hep-ph/0102119] .
-    [17] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, U. D’Alesio, and F. Murgia,
    “Longitudinal @xmath polarization in polarized semi- inclusive DIS,”
    [hep-ph/0106256] .
-    [18] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, J. Hansson, and F. Murgia,
    “Inclusive production of hadrons in @xmath and spin measurements,”
    [hep-ph/9607334] .
-    [19] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, J. Hansson, and F. Murgia,
    “Polarized inclusive leptoproduction, @xmath , and the hadron
    helicity density matrix, @xmath : possible measurements and
    predictions,” Phys. Rev. D54  (1996) 828–837, [hep-ph/9512379] .
-    [20] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, and F. Murgia, “ @xmath and @xmath
    polarization in polarized DIS,” Phys. Lett. B481  (2000) 253–262,
    [hep-ph/0001307] .
-    [21] M. Anselmino, A. Efremov, and E. Leader, “The theory and
    phenomenology of polarized deep inelastic scattering,” Phys. Rept.
    261  (1995) 1–124, [hep-ph/9501369] .
-    [22] M. Anselmino and F. Murgia, “Spin effects in the fragmentation
    of a transversely polarized quark,” Phys. Lett. B483  (2000) 74–86,
    [hep-ph/0002120] .
-    [23] M. Anselmino, M. Boglione, and F. Murgia, “Phenomenology of
    single spin asymmetries in @xmath ,” Phys. Rev. D60 (1999) 054027,
    [hep-ph/9901442] .
-    [24] S. Aoki, M. Doui, T. Hatsuda, and Y. Kuramashi, “Tensor charge
    of the nucleon in lattice QCD,” Phys. Rev. D56  (1997) 433–436,
    [hep-lat/9608115] .
-    [25] European Muon Collaboration, M. Arneodo et al. , “ @xmath and
    @xmath production in deep inelastic @xmath interactions at 280
    GeV/c,” Z. Phys. C33 (1986) 167.
-    [26] X. Artru, J. Czyzewski, and H. Yabuki, “Single spin asymmetry
    in inclusive pion production, Collins effect and the string
    model,” Z. Phys. C73  (1997) 527–534, [hep-ph/9508239] .
-    [27] X. Artru and J. C. Collins, “Measuring transverse spin
    correlations by 4 particle correlations in @xmath 2 jets,” Z. Phys.
    C69 (1996) 277–286, [hep-ph/9504220] .
-    [28] X. Artru and M. Mekhfi, “Transversely polarized parton
    densities, their evolution and their measurement,” Z. Phys. C45
    (1990) 669–676.
-    [29] European Muon Collaboration, J. J. Aubert et al. , “ @xmath
    production in deep inelastic @xmath interactions,” Phys. Lett. B133
    (1983) 370.
-    [30] CLAS Collaboration, H. Avakian, “Single-spin asymmetries at
    CLAS,”. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the
    Structure of Baryons (BARYONS 2002), Jefferson Lab, VA, USA, 3-8 Mar
    2002.
-    [31] A. Bacchetta, “Measuring transversity with T-odd single
    particle production,” [hep-ph/0106218] . Proceedings of the 9th
    International Workshop on Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS 2001),
    Bologna, Italy, 27 Apr - 1 May 2001.
-    [32] A. Bacchetta, M. Boglione, A. Henneman, and P. J. Mulders,
    “Bounds on transverse momentum dependent distribution and
    fragmentation functions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85  (2000) 712–715,
    [hep-ph/9912490] .
-    [33] A. Bacchetta, M. Boglione, A. Henneman, and P. J. Mulders,
    “The full spin structure of quarks in the nucleon,” [hep-ph/0005140]
    . Proceedings of the Workshop on Nucleon Structure in the High
    @xmath -Bjorken Region (HiX 2000), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 30 Mar - 1
    Apr 2000.
-    [34] A. Bacchetta, R. Kundu, A. Metz, and P. J. Mulders, “The
    Collins fragmentation function: a simple model calculation,” Phys.
    Lett. B506 (2001) 155–160, [hep-ph/0102278] .
-    [35] A. Bacchetta, R. Kundu, A. Metz, and P. J. Mulders, “Estimate
    of the Collins function in a chiral invariant approach,”
    [hep-ph/0206309] .
-    [36] A. Bacchetta and P. J. Mulders, “Deep inelastic
    leptoproduction of spin-one hadrons,” Phys. Rev. D62  (2000) 114004,
    [hep-ph/0007120] .
-    [37] A. Bacchetta and P. J. Mulders, “Positivity bounds on spin-one
    distribution and fragmentation functions,” Phys. Lett. B518  (2001)
    85–93, [hep-ph/0104176] .
-    [38] F. Baldracchini, N. S. Craigie, V. Roberto, and M. Socolovsky,
    “A survey of polarization asymmetries predicted by QCD,” Fortschr.
    Phys. 30 (1981) 505–550.
-    [39] G. S. Bali, “QCD forces and heavy quark bound states,” Phys.
    Rept. 343  (2001) 1–136, [hep-ph/0001312] .
-    [40] V. Barone, T. Calarco, and A. Drago, “A confinement model
    calculation of @xmath ,” Phys. Lett. B390  (1997) 287–292,
    [hep-ph/9605434] .
-    [41] V. Barone, A. Drago, and P. G. Ratcliffe, “Transverse
    polarisation of quarks in hadrons,” Phys. Rept. 359  (2002) 1–168,
    [hep-ph/0104283] .
-    [42] H. H. Barschall and W. Haeberli, eds., Polarization phenomena
    in nuclear reactions , p. xxv. University of Wisconsis Press,
    Madison, 1971. Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on
    Polarization Phenomena in Nuclear Reactions, Madison, WI, USA, 31
    Aug - 4 Sep 1970.
-    [43] S. V. Bashinsky and R. L. Jaffe, “Quark and gluon orbital
    angular momentum and spin in hard processes,” Nucl. Phys. B536
     (1998) 303–317, [hep-ph/9804397] .
-    [44] A. Bianconi, S. Boffi, R. Jakob, and M. Radici, “Two-hadron
    interference fragmentation functions. I: General framework,” Phys.
    Rev. D62 (2000) 034008, [hep-ph/9907475] .
-    [45] A. Bianconi, S. Boffi, R. Jakob, and M. Radici, “Two-hadron
    interference fragmentation functions. II: A model calculation,”
    Phys. Rev. D62  (2000) 034009, [hep-ph/9907488] .
-    [46] J. D. Bjorken, “Asymptotic sum rules at infinite momentum,”
    Phys. Rev. 179 (1969) 1547–1553.
-    [47] J. D. Bjorken and E. A. Paschos, “Inelastic electron-proton
    and @xmath -proton scattering and the structure of the nucleon,”
    Phys. Rev. 185 (1969) 1975–1982.
-    [48] J. D. Bjorken, “Intersections 2000: What’s new in hadron
    physics,” [hep-ph/0008048] .
-    [49] E. D. Bloom et al. , “High-energy inelastic @xmath scattering
    at 6 @xmath and 10 @xmath ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 23 (1969) 930–934.
-    [50] J. Blumlein, “On the anomalous dimension of the transversity
    distribution @xmath ,” Eur. Phys. J. C20  (2001) 683–687,
    [hep-ph/0104099] .
-    [51] D. Boer, R. Jakob, and P. J. Mulders, “Asymmetries in
    polarized hadron production in @xmath annihilation up to order 1/Q,”
    Nucl. Phys. B504  (1997) 345–380, [hep-ph/9702281] .
-    [52] D. Boer, R. Jakob, and P. J. Mulders, “Leading asymmetries in
    two-hadron production in @xmath annihilation at the @xmath pole,”
    Phys. Lett. B424  (1998) 143–151, [hep-ph/9711488] .
-    [53] D. Boer and P. J. Mulders, “Time-reversal odd distribution
    functions in leptoproduction,” Phys. Rev. D57  (1998) 5780–5786,
    [hep-ph/9711485] .
-    [54] D. Boer, “Sudakov suppression in azimuthal spin asymmetries,”
    Nucl. Phys. B603  (2001) 195–217, [hep-ph/0102071] .
-    [55] D. Boer, “Transversity single spin asymmetries,”
    [hep-ph/0106206] .
-    [56] D. Boer, “Theoretical aspects of transversity observables,”
    Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 105  (2002) 76–79, [hep-ph/0109221] .
-    [57] D. Boer, R. Jakob, and P. J. Mulders, “Angular dependences in
    electroweak semi-inclusive leptoproduction,” Nucl. Phys. B564
     (2000) 471–485, [hep-ph/9907504] .
-    [58] D. Boer and P. J. Mulders, “Color gauge invariance in the
    Drell-Yan process,” Nucl. Phys. B569  (2000) 505–526,
    [hep-ph/9906223] .
-    [59] S. Boffi et al. , “Covariant electroweak nucleon form factors
    in a chiral constituent quark model,” [hep-ph/0108271] .
-    [60] M. Boglione and E. Leader, “Reassessment of the Collins
    mechanism for single-spin asymmetries and the behavior of @xmath at
    large @xmath ,” Phys. Rev. D61  (2000) 114001, [hep-ph/9911207] .
-    [61] M. Boglione and P. J. Mulders, “Azimuthal spin asymmetries in
    semi-inclusive production from positron-proton scattering,” Phys.
    Lett. B478 (2000) 114–120, [hep-ph/0001196] .
-    [62] K. Bora and R. L. Jaffe, “The double scattering contribution
    to @xmath in the deuteron,” Phys. Rev. D57  (1998) 6906–6911,
    [hep-ph/9711323] .
-    [63] L. Bourhis, M. Fontannaz, J. P. Guillet, and M. Werlen,
    “Next-to-leading order determination of fragmentation functions,”
    Eur. Phys. J. C19 (2001) 89–98, [hep-ph/0009101] .
-    [64] C. Bourrely, J. Soffer, and E. Leader, “Polarization phenomena
    in hadronic reactions,” Phys. Rept. 59 (1980) 95–297.
-    [65] Spin Muon Collaboration, A. Bravar, “Transverse spin
    asymmetries in @xmath and @xmath ,” Nucl. Phys. A666 (2000) 314–317.
-    [66] M. Breidenbach et al. , “Observed behavior of highly inelastic
    electron - proton scattering,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 23 (1969) 935–939.
-    [67] ZEUS Collaboration, J. Breitweg et al. , “Elastic and
    proton-dissociative @xmath photoproduction at HERA,” Eur. Phys. J.
    C2  (1998) 247–267, [hep-ex/9712020] .
-    [68] ZEUS Collaboration, J. Breitweg et al. , “Exclusive
    electroproduction of @xmath and @xmath mesons at HERA,” Eur. Phys.
    J. C6 (1999) 603–627, [hep-ex/9808020] .
-    [69] ZEUS Collaboration, J. Breitweg et al. , “Measurement of the
    spin-density matrix elements in exclusive electroproduction of
    @xmath mesons at HERA,” Eur. Phys. J. C12  (2000) 393–410,
    [hep-ex/9908026] .
-    [70] S. J. Brodsky, M. Burkardt, and I. Schmidt, “Perturbative QCD
    constraints on the shape of polarized quark and gluon
    distributions,” Nucl. Phys. B441  (1995) 197–214, [hep-ph/9401328] .
-    [71] S. J. Brodsky, P. Hoyer, N. Marchal, S. Peigne, and
    F. Sannino, “Structure functions are not parton probabilities,”
    Phys. Rev. D65  (2002) 114025, [hep-ph/0104291] .
-    [72] S. J. Brodsky, D. S. Hwang, and I. Schmidt, “Final-state
    interactions and single-spin asymmetries in semi-inclusive deep
    inelastic scattering,” Phys. Lett. B530  (2002) 99–107,
    [hep-ph/0201296] .
-    [73] G. Bunce, N. Saito, J. Soffer, and W. Vogelsang, “Prospects
    for spin physics at RHIC,” Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 50  (2000)
    525–575, [hep-ph/0007218] .
-    [74] S. Capstick et al. , “Key issues in hadronic physics,”
    [hep-ph/0012238] .
-    [75] J. Chadwick, “The existence of a neutron,” Proc. Roy. Soc.
    A136 (1933) 692.
-    [76] I. Cohen et al. , “Electroproduction of @xmath mesons,” Phys.
    Rev. D25 (1982) 634.
-    [77] J. C. Collins, “Fragmentation of transversely polarized quarks
    probed in transverse momentum distributions,” Nucl. Phys. B396
     (1993) 161–182, [hep-ph/9208213] .
-    [78] J. C. Collins, “Leading-twist single-transverse-spin
    asymmetries: Drell-Yan and deep-inelastic scattering,”
    [hep-ph/0204004] .
-    [79] J. C. Collins, S. F. Heppelmann, and G. A. Ladinsky,
    “Measuring transversity densities in singly polarized hadron-hadron
    and lepton-hadron collisions,” Nucl. Phys. B420  (1994) 565–582,
    [hep-ph/9305309] .
-    [80] J. C. Collins and G. A. Ladinsky, “On @xmath correlations in
    polarized quark fragmentation using the linear sigma model,”
    [hep-ph/9411444] .
-    [81] J. C. Collins and D. E. Soper, “Parton distribution and decay
    functions,” Nucl. Phys. B194 (1982) 445.
-    [82] J. C. Collins, D. E. Soper, and G. Sterman, “Factorization of
    hard processes in QCD,” in Perturbative quantum chromodynamics ,
    A. H. Mueller, ed. World Scientific, Singapore, 1989.
-    [83] COMPASS Collaboration, “Common Muon and Proton Apparatus for
    Structure and Spectroscopy,” CERN/SPSLC 96-14 (1996).
-    [84] J. L. Cortes, B. Pire, and J. P. Ralston, “Measuring the
    transverse polarization of quarks in the proton,” Z. Phys. C55
    (1992) 409–416.
-    [85] J. Dalton, “On the absorption of gases by water and other
    liquids,” Mem. of the Liter. and Phil. Soc. of Manchester 1  (1805)
    271–287.
-    [86] D. de Florian, J. Soffer, M. Stratmann, and W. Vogelsang,
    “Bounds on transverse spin asymmetries for @xmath baryon production
    in @xmath collisions at BNL RHIC,” Phys. Lett. B439  (1998) 176–182,
    [hep-ph/9806513] .
-    [87] E. De Sanctis, W. D. Nowak, and K. A. Oganessyan, “Single-spin
    azimuthal asymmetries in the reduced twist-3 approximation,” Phys.
    Lett. B483  (2000) 69–73, [hep-ph/0002091] .
-    [88] Y. L. Dokshitzer, “Calculation of the structure functions for
    deep inelastic scattering and @xmath annihilation by perturbation
    theory in quantum chromodynamics,” Sov. Phys. JETP 46 (1977)
    641–653.
-    [89] J. Edelmann, G. Piller, and W. Weise, “Polarized deuteron
    structure functions at small @xmath ,” Z. Phys. A357  (1997)
    129–131, [nucl-th/9701026] .
-    [90] A. V. Efremov, K. Goeke, and P. Schweitzer, “Azimuthal
    asymmetry in electroproduction of neutral pions in semi-inclusive
    DIS,” Phys. Lett. B522  (2001) 37–48, [hep-ph/0108213] . Erratum
    [hep-ph/0204056].
-    [91] A. V. Efremov and O. V. Teryaev, “On high @xmath vector mesons
    spin alignment,” Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 36 (1982) 557.
-    [92] A. V. Efremov and O. V. Teryaev, “On spin effects in quantum
    chromodynamics,” Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 36 (1982) 140.
-    [93] A. V. Efremov and O. V. Teryaev, “On the oscillations of the
    tensor spin structure function,” [hep-ph/9910555] .
-    [94] R. K. Ellis, W. Furmanski, and R. Petronzio, “Unraveling
    higher twists,” Nucl. Phys. B212 (1983) 29.
-    [95] R. P. Feynman, “Very high-energy collisions of hadrons,” Phys.
    Rev. Lett. 23 (1969) 1415–1417.
-    [96] R. D. Field, Applications of perturbative QCD .
    Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, USA, 1995.
-    [97] B. W. Filippone and X. Ji, “The spin structure of the
    nucleon,” [hep-ph/0101224] .
-    [98] H. Geiger and E. Marsden, “On a diffuse reflection of the
    @xmath -particles,” Proc. Roy. Soc. A82  (1909) 495–500.
-    [99] M. Gell-Mann, “A schematic model of baryons and mesons,” Phys.
    Lett. 8 (1964) 214–215.
-    [100] V. N. Gribov and L. N. Lipatov, “Deep inelastic e p
    scattering in perturbation theory,” Yad. Fiz. 15 (1972) 781–807.
-    [101] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, “Asymptotically free gauge
    theories. I,” Phys. Rev. D8 (1973) 3633–3652.
-    [102] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, “Ultraviolet behavior of
    non-abelian gauge theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973) 1343–1346.
-    [103] A. Harindranath and R. Kundu, “On orbital angular momentum in
    deep inelastic scattering,” Phys. Rev. D59  (1999) 116013,
    [hep-ph/9802406] .
-    [104] A. A. Henneman, D. Boer, and P. J. Mulders, “Evolution of
    transverse momentum dependent distribution and fragmentation
    functions,” Nucl. Phys. B620  (2002) 331–350, [hep-ph/0104271] .
-    [105] HERMES Collaboration, “The HERMES physics program and plans
    for 2001-2006,” DESY-PRC 00/096 (2000).
-    [106] S. Hino and S. Kumano, “Structure functions in the polarized
    Drell-Yan processes with spin-1/2 and spin-1 hadrons. I: General
    formalism,” Phys. Rev. D59  (1999) 094026, [hep-ph/9810425] .
-    [107] S. Hino and S. Kumano, “Structure functions in the polarized
    Drell-Yan processes with spin-1/2 and spin-1 hadrons. II: Parton
    model,” Phys. Rev. D60  (1999) 054018, [hep-ph/9902258] .
-    [108] S. Hino and S. Kumano, “Polarized proton deuteron Drell-Yan
    processes and parton distributions,” Nucl. Phys. A670  (2000) 80–83,
    [hep-ph/9902314] .
-    [109] M. Hirai, S. Kumano, and M. Miyama, “Numerical solution of
    @xmath evolution equation for the transversity distribution @xmath
    ,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 111  (1998) 150–166, [hep-ph/9712410] .
-    [110] P. Hoodbhoy, R. L. Jaffe, and A. Manohar, “Novel effects in
    deep inelastic scattering from spin 1 hadrons,” Nucl. Phys. B312
    (1989) 571.
-    [111] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics .  J. Wiley & Sons,
    New York, NY, USA, 1998.
-    [112] R. L. Jaffe, “Polarized @xmath ’s in the current
    fragmentation region,” Phys. Rev. D54  (1996) 6581–6585,
    [hep-ph/9605456] .
-    [113] R. L. Jaffe, “Can transversity be measured?,”
    [hep-ph/9710465] .
-    [114] R. L. Jaffe, “The theory of the nucleon spin,” Phil. Trans.
    Roy. Soc. Lond. A359  (2001) 391–404, [hep-ph/0008038] .
-    [115] R. L. Jaffe and X. Ji, “Chiral odd parton distributions and
    polarized Drell-Yan,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 552–555.
-    [116] R. L. Jaffe and X. Ji, “Chiral odd parton distributions and
    Drell-Yan processes,” Nucl. Phys. B375 (1992) 527–560.
-    [117] R. L. Jaffe, X. Jin, and J. Tang, “Interference fragmentation
    functions and the nucleon’s transversity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80
     (1998) 1166–1169, [hep-ph/9709322] .
-    [118] R. L. Jaffe, X. Jin, and J. Tang, “Interference fragmentation
    functions and valence quark spin distributions in the nucleon,”
    Phys. Rev. D57  (1998) 5920–5922, [hep-ph/9710561] .
-    [119] R. L. Jaffe, “Spin, twist and hadron structure in deep
    inelastic processes,” [hep-ph/9602236] . Proceedings of the Ettore
    Majorana International School on the Spin Structure of the Nucleon,
    Erice, Italy, 3-10 Aug 1995.
-    [120] R. Jakob, P. J. Mulders, and J. Rodrigues, “Modelling quark
    distribution and fragmentation functions,” Nucl. Phys. A626  (1997)
    937–965, [hep-ph/9704335] .
-    [121] X. Ji and Z. Zhu, “Quark fragmentation functions in
    low-energy chiral theory,” [hep-ph/9402303] .
-    [122] X. Ji, “Chiral odd and spin dependent quark fragmentation
    functions and their applications,” Phys. Rev. D49  (1994) 114–124,
    [hep-ph/9307235] .
-    [123] X. Ji, “Gauge invariant decomposition of nucleon spin,” Phys.
    Rev. Lett. 78  (1997) 610–613, [hep-ph/9603249] .
-    [124] X. Ji and F. Yuan, “Parton distributions in light-cone gauge:
    Where are the final-state interactions?,” [hep-ph/0206057] .
-    [125] B. A. Kniehl, G. Kramer, and B. Potter, “Fragmentation
    functions for pions, kaons, and protons at next-to-leading order,”
    Nucl. Phys. B582 (2000) 514–536, [hep-ph/0010289] .
-    [126] V. A. Korotkov, W. D. Nowak, and K. A. Oganessyan,
    “Transversity distribution and polarized fragmentation function from
    semi-inclusive pion electroproduction,” Eur. Phys. J. C18  (2001)
    639–644, [hep-ph/0002268] .
-    [127] A. M. Kotzinian and P. J. Mulders, “Probing transverse quark
    polarization via azimuthal asymmetries in leptoproduction,” Phys.
    Lett. B406 (1997) 373–380, [hep-ph/9701330] .
-    [128] A. M. Kotzinian, K. A. Oganessyan, H. R. Avakian, and
    E. De Sanctis, “Single target-spin asymmetries in semi-inclusive
    pion electroproduction on longitudinally polarized protons,”
    [hep-ph/9908466] .
-    [129] S. Kretzer, “Fragmentation functions from flavour-inclusive
    and flavour-tagged @xmath annihilations,” Phys. Rev. D62  (2000)
    054001, [hep-ph/0003177] .
-    [130] S. Kretzer, E. Leader, and E. Christova, “Fragmentation
    functions from semi-inclusive DIS pion production and implications
    for the polarized parton densities,” Eur. Phys. J. C22  (2001)
    269–276, [hep-ph/0108055] .
-    [131] S. Kumano, “Tensor structure function @xmath for spin-one
    hadrons,” [hep-ph/9302320] .
-    [132] S. Kumano and M. Miyama, “Two-loop anomalous dimensions for
    the structure function @xmath ,” Phys. Rev. D56  (1997) 2504–2508,
    [hep-ph/9706420] .
-    [133] R. Kundu and A. Metz, “Higher twist and transverse momentum
    dependent parton distributions: A light-front Hamiltonian approach,”
    Phys. Rev. D65  (2002) 014009, [hep-ph/0107073] .
-    [134] E. Leader, Spin in particle physics . Cambridge Univ. Press,
    Cambridge, UK, 2001.
-    [135] J. Levelt, Deep inelastic semi-inclusive processes . PhD
    thesis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1993.
-    [136] W. Lu and J.-J. Yang, “Bounding the Levelt-Mulders asymmetry
    from the positivity of the hadronic tensor and Callan-Gross
    relation,” Z. Phys. C73  (1997) 689–696, [hep-ph/9601255] .
-    [137] B.-Q. Ma, I. Schmidt, and J.-J. Yang, “Azimuthal spin
    asymmetries of pion electroproduction,” [hep-ph/0110324] .
-    [138] N. Makins, “Spin physics,”. Talk delivered at the 8th
    International Workshop on Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS 2000),
    Liverpool, England, 25 - 30 Apr 2000.
-    [139] A. Manohar and H. Georgi, “Chiral quarks and the
    nonrelativistic quark model,” Nucl. Phys. B234 (1984) 189.
-    [140] P. J. Mulders, “Current fragmentation in semiinclusive
    leptoproduction,” [hep-ph/0010199] . Proceedings of the workshop
    “Physics with an electron polarized light ion collider”, Cambridge,
    MA, USA, 14-16 Sep 2000.
-    [141] P. J. Mulders and R. D. Tangerman, “The complete tree-level
    result up to order @xmath for polarized deep-inelastic
    leptoproduction,” Nucl. Phys. B461  (1996) 197–237, [hep-ph/9510301]
    . Erratum-ibid. B484  (1996) 538.
-    [142] Y. Nambu in Preludes in Theoretical Pysics , A. de Shalit,
    H. Feshbach, and L. van Hove, eds., p. 133. North Holland,
    Amsterdam, 1966.
-    [143] Y. Nambu and M. Y. Han, “Three triplets, paraquarks, and
    colored quarks,” Phys. Rev. D10 (1974) 674–683.
-    [144] N. N. Nikolaev and W. Schafer, “Nonvanishing tensor
    polarization of sea quarks in polarized deuterons,” Phys. Lett. B398
     (1997) 245–251, [hep-ph/9611460] . Erratum-ibid. B407  (1997) 453.
-    [145] K. A. Oganessyan, H. R. Avakian, N. Bianchi, and A. M.
    Kotzinian, “Sin( @xmath ) azimuthal asymmetry in semi-inclusive
    electroproduction on longitudinally polarized nucleon,”
    [hep-ph/9808368] .
-    [146] A. Ogawa, “Chiral odd fragmentation functions at BELLE,”.
    Talk delivered at the Topical Workshop on Transverse Spin Physics,
    Zeuthen, Germany, 9-11 Jul 2001.
-    [147] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An introduction to quantum
    field theory . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, USA, 1995.
-    [148] P. V. Pobylitsa and M. V. Polyakov, “Transverse spin
    distribution function of nucleon in chiral theory,” Phys. Lett. B389
     (1996) 350–357, [hep-ph/9608434] .
-    [149] H. D. Politzer, “Reliable perturbative results for strong
    interactions?,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 30 (1973) 1346–1349.
-    [150] M. Radici, R. Jakob, and A. Bianconi, “Accessing transversity
    with interference fragmentation functions,” Phys. Rev. D65  (2002)
    074031, [hep-ph/0110252] .
-    [151] J. P. Ralston and D. E. Soper, “Production of dimuons from
    high-energy polarized proton- proton collisions,” Nucl. Phys. B152
    (1979) 109.
-    [152] R. G. Roberts, The structure of the proton . Cambridge Univ.
    Press, Cambridge, UK, 1990.
-    [153] E. Rutherford, “The scattering of @xmath and @xmath particles
    by matter and the structure of the atom,” Phil. Mag. 21  (1911)
    669–688.
-    [154] E. Rutherford, “Bakerian lecture: nuclear constitution of
    atoms,” Proc. Roy. Soc. 97  (1920) 374–400.
-    [155] A. Schafer, L. Szymanowski, and O. V. Teryaev, “Tensor
    polarization of vector mesons from quark and gluon fragmentation,”
    Phys. Lett. B464 (1999) 94–100, [hep-ph/9906471] .
-    [156] K. Schilling, P. Seyboth, and G. E. Wolf, “On the analysis of
    vector meson production by polarized photons,” Nucl. Phys. B15
    (1970) 397–412.
-    [157] D. W. Sivers, “Single spin production asymmetries from the
    hard scattering of pointlike constituents,” Phys. Rev. D41 (1990)
    83.
-    [158] D. W. Sivers, “Hard scattering scaling laws for single spin
    production asymmetries,” Phys. Rev. D43 (1991) 261–263.
-    [159] J. Soffer, “Positivity constraints for spin dependent parton
    distributions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 74  (1995) 1292–1294,
    [hep-ph/9409254] .
-    [160] M. Stratmann and W. Vogelsang, “Next-to-leading order QCD
    evolution of transversity fragmentation functions,” Phys. Rev. D65
     (2002) 057502, [hep-ph/0108241] .
-    [161] U. P. Sukhatme and K. E. Lassila, “ @xmath evolution of
    multi-hadron fragmentation functions,” Phys. Rev. D22 (1980) 1184.
-    [162] K. Suzuki, “T-odd quark fragmentation function and transverse
    spin asymmetries in the pion production,” RIKEN Rev. 28  (2000)
    105–109, [hep-ph/0002218] .
-    [163] J. Tang, “Probing the nucleon’s transversity via two-meson
    production in polarized nucleon nucleon collisions,”
    [hep-ph/9807560] .
-    [164] R. D. Tangerman, Higher-twist correlations in polarized
    hadrons . PhD thesis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1996.
-    [165] E. F. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Spacetime physics .  W. H.
    Freeman & Co., San Francisco, UK, 1966.
-    [166] J. J. Thomson, “Cathode-rays,” Phil. Mag. 44  (1897) 293–316.
-    [167] J. J. Thomson, “On the masses of the ions in gases at low
    pressures,” Phil. Mag. 48  (1899) 547–567.
-    [168] L. Trentadue and G. Veneziano, “Fracture functions: An
    Improved description of inclusive hard processes in QCD,” Phys.
    Lett. B323 (1994) 201–211.
-    [169] A. Y. Umnikov, “Relativistic Calculation of Structure
    Functions @xmath of the Deuteron,” Phys. Lett. B391  (1997) 177–184,
    [hep-ph/9605291] .
-    [170] S. Weinberg, “Phenomenological Lagrangians,” Physica A96
    (1979) 327.
-    [171] S. Weinberg, “Mended symmetries,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990)
    1177–1180.
-    [172] G. Zweig, “An SU(3) model for strong interaction symmetry and
    its breaking.,” CERN preprints TH-401, TH-412 (1964).

## Summary

This thesis discusses three different ways to observe the transverse
spin of quarks inside the nucleons. This problem relates to one of the
unanswered questions of present day physics: what is the internal
structure of protons and neutrons?

One of the ways to investigate such a question is to study the process
of deep inelastic scattering , in which a nucleon is bombarded with a
focused beam of electrons (or other leptons) at very high energies. The
electrons penetrate inside the nucleon and the way they are scattered
yields information on its inner structure. A down-to-earth analogy would
be shooting at a car with a machine gun, penetrating its hood and
recording the way bullets bounce on its internal components – engine,
gear box and all.

Deep inelastic scattering provides us with snapshots of the nucleon at
high resolution, a few percents of the proton size. Extracting the
relevant information on the structure of the nucleon is a complex task
and requires a lot of theoretical effort. Due to the high energies and
high momenta involved, we resort to the techniques of quantum field
theory , which incorporates relativity and quantum mechanics. At low
resolution – in low energy experiments – nucleons appear to be
unbreakable particles with a certain mass, electric charge and spin. At
high resolution – in deep inelastic scattering – nucleons display an
extremely intricate structure, involving a very high number of smaller
particles, quarks and gluons . At present, we are not able to match
these two pictures, in other words we are not able to explain how quarks
and gluons interact to give origin to the characteristics of the
nucleons.

A key issue in understanding the nucleon is to explain the composition
of its spin in terms of the underlying quark and gluon structure. So
far, we acquired a good knowledge of the helicity distribution of quarks
inside targets with a longitudinal spin. The exploration of the
transverse spin distribution (or transversity ) of quarks in targets
with a transverse spin would give us a new perspective on the dynamics
inside the nucleon. To a certain extent, the helicity and the transverse
spin distributions represent a front and a side view of the nucleon
spin.

Observing the transversity of quarks is an arduous task. Several
approaches have been suggested in theory, but none of them has been put
into practice yet. In this thesis, three ways to probe the transversity
are highlighted and analyzed. They are far from exhausting all possible
methods, but they seem to be promising and could be adopted in
experiments in the near future. All of them require that in the deep
inelastic process we keep track not only of the scattered electron, but
also of one or two of the fragments coming from the disintegration of
the nucleon. The detection of the fragments offers the opportunity to
unravel more details of the structure of the target, but the price to
pay is that we have to deal not only with the way the quarks are
arranged in the nucleon, but also with the way they produce the final
fragments, i.e. with fragmentation functions .

From a more technical point of view, this thesis starts with reviewing
the formalism to deal with deep inelastic scattering. The parton
distribution functions are introduced, describing the way quarks and
gluons are disposed inside the nucleon. Totally inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, where only the scattered electron is detected, is discussed
as the first and simplest way to observe distribution functions. To
identify some way to measure the quark transversity, this thesis
analyzes one-particle and two-particle inclusive deep inelastic
scattering, where one and two of the outgoing hadrons are detected in
coincidence with the electron. These processes require the introduction
of parton fragmentation functions , describing the way a quark evolves
into final state hadrons. This thesis shows that transversity can be
measured in the above processes, in connection with three different
fragmentation functions: the first one requires the observation of an
unpolarized final state hadron with transverse momentum, the second
requires the observation of the interference between the @xmath - and
@xmath -wave production of two hadrons, the third requires the
observation of pure @xmath -wave two-hadron production, or equivalently
of a spin-one resonance. All these fragmentation functions fall in the
category of T-odd fragmentation functions: they require the presence of
final state interactions, or else they are forbidden by time-reversal
invariance. The last part of the thesis looks at the possibility of
modeling this kind of fragmentation functions and investigates whether
they can be large enough to allow the extraction of transversity.
