## Motivation and introduction

Twistor geometry

In 1967, Penrose [ 189 ] introduced the foundations of twistor geometry.
The corner stone of twistor geometry is the substitution of space-time
as background for physical processes by some new background manifold –
called twistor space, and furthermore the reinterpretation of physical
theories on this new space. As originally proposed, twistor space, or
rather the projectivization thereof, which is associated with
complexified four-dimensional Minkowski space, is the complex projective
space @xmath . Geometrically, this space parametrizes all isotropic
two-planes in complexified Minkowski space. Upon this correspondence, it
is possible to reinterpret solutions to zero rest mass free field
equations on Minkowski space in terms of certain cohomology groups on
twistor space [ 189 ] – [ 192 ] . For instance, if @xmath is some open
subset in complexified Minkowski space and if @xmath denotes the sheaf
of solutions to the helicity @xmath zero rest mass field equations, then
there is an isomorphism between the two cohomology groups @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath is an appropriate region on twistor space related
to @xmath . Here, @xmath is the sheaf of sections of a certain
holomorphic line bundle (over @xmath ) having first Chern class @xmath .
The map between representatives of these cohomology groups has been
termed Penrose transform. Putting it differently, any solution to zero
rest mass free field equations can be represented by certain holomorphic
“functions” on twistor space, which are “free” of differential
constraints. For a detailed discussion of this correspondence in terms
of Čech cohomology, we refer the reader to [ 89 ] . Let us mention in
passing that, as was shown by Eastwood in [ 90 ] , it is also possible
to generalize this description to the case of massive free fields.

Besides giving insights into the geometric nature of solutions to linear
field equations, the ideas of twistor geometry turned out to be
extremely powerful for studying various nonlinear classical field
equations. Twistor methods have successfully been applied to subclasses
of the Einstein’s equations of General Relativity and of the (super)
Yang-Mills equations, to name just the most prominent ones. Indeed, it
is possible to associate with any self-dual oriented Riemannian
four-dimensional manifold @xmath , that is, a manifold with self-dual
Weyl tensor, a complex three-dimensional twistor space [ 193 , 20 ] .
All the information about the conformal structure of @xmath is encoded
in the complex structure of this “curved” twistor space. Some additional
data then allows for the construction of self-dual metrics and conformal
structures on @xmath . Among such metrics, there are interesting
subclasses as, e.g., self-dual Einstein metrics, Kähler metrics with
vanishing scalar curvature and Ricci-flat self-dual metrics. For
constructions, see Refs. [ 252 , 242 , 253 , 195 , 114 , 115 , 129 , 116
, 267 , 96 , 144 , 243 , 117 , 172 , 147 ] , for instance. Furthermore,
the question when such a twistor space is in addition Kähler was
answered by Hitchin [ 112 ] . He showed that given a compact oriented
self-dual Riemannian four-dimensional manifold @xmath , the
corresponding twistor space admits a Kähler structure if and only if
@xmath is conformally equivalent to either @xmath or @xmath . Besides
questions related to Einstein’s equations, twistor theory has given
striking advances in our understanding of the properties of gauge
theories. In an important paper [ 251 ] , Ward has proven a one-to-one
correspondence between gauge equivalence classes of self-dual Yang-Mills
fields on complexified four-dimensional space-time and equivalence
classes of holomorphic vector bundles over twistor space which obey
certain triviality conditions. Upon imposing additional conditions on
the bundles over twistor space, one may also reduce the structure group
of the bundles on space-time to some real form of the general linear
group and in addition, the discussion to, for instance, an Euclidean
setting. Furthermore, replacing twistor space by ambitwistor space – the
space of complex light rays (null lines) in complexified
four-dimensional Minkowski space – one can discuss general Yang-Mills
fields, as well. In fact, Isenberg et al. [ 124 ] and Witten [ 262 ]
showed that it is possible to represent gauge equivalence classes of
solutions to the full Yang-Mills equations in terms of equivalence
classes of certain holomorphic vector bundles on formal neighborhoods of
ambitwistor space. Khenkin et al. [ 133 ] discussed a generalization
thereof by giving an interpretation in terms of certain cohomology
groups. A detailed discussion of the cohomology interpretation of
solutions to the full Yang-Mills equations can be found in [ 63 , 201 ]
. Of course, the discussion can also be reduced to real Yang-Mills
fields and to, e.g., Minkowski space-time. A map between gauge
equivalence classes of solutions to Yang-Mills equations on some
space-time and equivalence classes of holomorphic vector bundles over a
twistor space associated with the space-time under consideration is
called a Penrose-Ward transform [ 171 ] .

Furthermore, in this respect it is also worth mentioning that, by
considering the space of all complex null geodesics of some general
four-dimensional complex space-time, one can generalize ambitwistor
space to a curved setting. As was shown by LeBrun [ 142 ] , this
“curved” ambitwistor space is a five-dimensional complex manifold.
Moreover, this construction then forms the basis for a twistorial
description of four-dimensional conformal gravity [ 25 , 145 ] .

Besides Penrose-Ward transforms involving the already mentioned twistor
and ambitwistor spaces, one may establish such correspondences on quite
generic ground. This was considered, e.g., by Eastwood [ 91 ] . In fact,
suppose we are given three complex manifolds @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath is simultaneously fibered over @xmath and @xmath , that
is, we consider a double fibration of the form

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

together with two suitable holomorphic projections @xmath . Here and in
the following, we shall refer to @xmath as space-time, to @xmath as
correspondence space and to @xmath as twistor space, respectively.
Clearly, such a double fibration induces a correspondence between @xmath
and @xmath , that is, there is a relation between points and subsets in
either manifold. In particular, a point @xmath gives a submanifold
@xmath , and conversely a point in twistor space, @xmath , yields a
submanifold @xmath embedded into space-time @xmath . In addition, this
correspondence can be used to transfer data given on @xmath to data on
@xmath and vice versa. Indeed, given some analytic object, Ob @xmath ,
on twistor space (e.g., certain cohomology classes or holomorphic vector
bundles), one may relate it to some object Ob @xmath on space-time. The
latter will be constrained by certain partial differential equations
since by definition, the pull-back @xmath Ob @xmath must be constant
along the fibers of @xmath . Under suitable topological conditions, the
maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

define a bijection between equivalence classes @xmath Ob @xmath and
@xmath Ob @xmath (in general, the objects under consideration will only
be defined up to equivalence). The correspondence thus established gives
a way of studying objects on space-time obeying differential equations
in terms of objects on twistor space which are “free” of such
differential constraints. As before, we shall refer to such a map as
Penrose-Ward transform.

Suppose now that the objects in question are holomorphic vector bundles.
If we let @xmath be the sheaf of relative differential one-forms on the
correspondence space, i.e., the dual of the vertical tangent vectors
spanning the tangent spaces of @xmath , we have the following theorem [
91 ] :

Theorem. Suppose the fibers of @xmath are simply connected and @xmath is
compact and connected for all @xmath . If in addition @xmath , then
there is a one-to-one correspondence between equivalence classes of
holomorphic vector bundles @xmath being holomorphically trivial on any
@xmath , equivalence classes of holomorphic vector bundles on @xmath
equipped with flat relative connection and equivalence classes of
holomorphic vector bundles @xmath equipped with a connection flat on
each @xmath for @xmath .
In particular, if @xmath is twistor space then @xmath and the
submanifolds @xmath represent isotropic two-planes in complexified
Minkowski space. In case of ambitwistor space, one has @xmath and @xmath
are complex light rays. To jump ahead of our story a bit, such double
fibrations and correspondences between vector bundles will play the
basis of all the discussion presented in this thesis.

The twistor approach to field theories also provides a suitable
framework for studying certain supersymmetric field theories. One simply
needs to replace the manifolds appearing in double fibrations like the
one discussed above, by so-called supermanifolds. Originally, the
concept of supermanifolds goes back to the work by Berezin, Kostant and
Leites [ 44 , 137 , 156 ] . The idea is basically to define a
supermanifold as a particular ringed space @xmath , that is, a
topological space @xmath together with a sheaf of supercommutative rings
@xmath (the structure sheaf) obeying certain local properties. A
thorough description of supermanifolds, as proposed by the above
authors, has been developed by Manin [ 166 ] . In our subsequent
discussion, we shall adopt this approach to supermanifolds. Let us also
mention that there are alternative ways to introduce supermanifolds. For
instance, a different one has been given by DeWitt [ 77 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 There
is another, third approach due to Rogers [ 217 ] . It is based on the
concept of supernumbers which are elements of a certain Graßmann
algebra. We refer also to the book by Bartocci et al. [ 24 ] (and
references therein), where all existing approaches are described and
compared among each other.

As indicated above, the twistor approach facilitates the studies of
supersymmetric field theories. For instance, by combining the ideas of
formal neighborhoods with those of supermanifolds, Witten has shown [
262 ] that it is possible to recover the full @xmath super Yang-Mills
theory in four dimensions by discussing holomorphic vector bundles over
a certain superambitwistor space, which we shall denote by @xmath . In
fact, @xmath is the space of super light rays @xmath in complexified
@xmath Minkowski superspace @xmath . Furthermore, it can be viewed as a
certain degree two hypersurface in the direct product @xmath . In this
respect, it is also important to stress that the @xmath and @xmath
theories are physically equivalent. The only thing appearing to be
different is that the @xmath formulation makes only the @xmath subgroup
of the R-symmetry group @xmath manifest. In this sense, Witten’s
approach can be understood as a twistorial formulation of @xmath super
Yang-Mills theory. Furthermore, Manin [ 166 ] generalized Witten’s
discussion to theories with less supersymmetry. In particular, he
established a Penrose-Ward transform between solutions to the @xmath
-extended super Yang-Mills equations and holomorphic vector bundles over
@xmath -extended superambitwistor space – the space parametrizing super
light rays @xmath in @xmath – which admit an extension to a @xmath -th
formal neighborhood in superambitwistor space.

The twistor string

Within the last three years, the twistorial studies of supersymmetric
field theories received a somewhat unexpected renaissance due to string
theory. In 2003, Witten [ 266 ] proposed a string theory whose target
manifold is the supertwistor space @xmath . His idea is based on three
facts: i) holomorphic vector bundles over twistor space and similarly
over supertwistor space are related to gauge and, respectively, super
gauge theories on four-dimensional space-time, ii) supertwistor space
@xmath is a Calabi-Yau supermanifold, that is, its first Chern class
vanishes and in addition it admits a Ricci-flat metric and iii) the
existence of a string theory – the open topological B model – whose
space-time effective action is holomorphic Chern-Simons theory [ 264 ] .
More specifically, Witten showed that the open topological B model on
supertwistor space @xmath with a stack of @xmath D5-branes ² ² 2 These
D5-branes are not quite space-filling and defined by the condition that
all open string vertex operators do not depend on antiholomorphic
Graßmann coordinates on @xmath . is equivalent to holomorphic
Chern-Simons theory on the same space. This theory describes holomorphic
structures on a rank @xmath complex vector bundle @xmath over @xmath
which are given by the (0,1) part @xmath of a connection one-form @xmath
on @xmath . The components of @xmath appear as the excitations of open
strings ending on the D5-branes. Furthermore, the spectrum of physical
states contained in @xmath is the same as that of @xmath super
Yang-Mills theory, but the interactions of both theories differ. In
fact, by analyzing the linearized [ 266 ] and the full [ 207 ] field
equations, it was shown that holomorphic Chern-Simons theory on @xmath
is equivalent to @xmath self-dual super Yang-Mills theory in four
dimensions as introduced by Siegel [ 232 ] . Note that this theory can
be considered as a truncation of the full @xmath super Yang-Mills
theory.

It was conjectured by Witten that perturbative amplitudes of full @xmath
super Yang-Mills theory are recovered by including into the B model
so-called D-instantons which wrap certain holomorphic curves in
supertwistor space. The presence of these D1-branes leads to additional
fermionic states from the strings stretching between the D5- and
D1-branes. Scattering amplitudes are then computed in terms of currents
constructed from these additional fields, which localize on the
D1-branes, by integrating certain correlation functions over the moduli
space of these D1-branes in @xmath . This proposal generalizes an
earlier construction of maximally helicity-violating amplitudes by Nair
[ 185 ] . Thus, by incorporating D1-branes into the topological B model,
one can complement @xmath self-dual super Yang-Mills theory to the full
theory. However, soon after this proposal it was realized that this
construction works only at tree-level, as already at one-loop level
amplitudes of super Yang-Mills theory mix with those of conformal
supergravity [ 49 ] . Recently, Boels et al. [ 57 ] proposed a twistor
approach to @xmath super Yang-Mills theory which reproduces perturbative
Yang-Mills theory without conformal supergravity. ³ ³ 3 In [ 6 ] , a
family of twistor string theories has been constructed yielding Einstein
supergravity coupled to super Yang-Mills theory on space-time. For
related papers regarding twistor actions, see also Refs. [ 173 , 174 ] .
After all, twistor string theory resulted in striking advances in
computing gauge theory scattering amplitudes – even beyond tree-level,
as powerful methods inspired by the twistor string have been developed;
see, e.g., Ref. [ 65 , 272 ] for reviews and also [ 159 ] for more
references.

In addition to twistor string theory on supertwistor space, Witten [ 266
] also mentioned the possibility of formulating a twistor string theory,
i.e., the open topological B model on the superambitwistor space which
is associated with @xmath complexified Minkowski superspace. Within such
a formulation, no D-instantons would be needed as already at classical
level, holomorphic Chern-Simons theory on superambitwistor space gives
the full @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) super Yang-Mills theory in four
dimensions [ 262 ] . Therefore, the mechanism for reproducing
perturbative super Yang-Mills theory would be completely different
compared to the supertwistor space approach. However, even though this
particular superambitwistor space is a Calabi-Yau supermanifold, it is
not entirely clear how to formulate the B model on it. This is basically
because of the difficulty in making sense of an appropriate measure on
this space. Only recently, some progress in this direction has been made
by Mason et al. [ 174 ] . Therein, the authors formulated a Chern-Simons
type theory (whose interpretation on four-dimensional space-time is
super Yang-Mills theory) on a certain codimension @xmath Cauchy-Riemann
submanifold in superambitwistor space. Their description is based on
Euclidean signature (instead of Minkowski signature) but as far as
perturbation theory is concerned, this would not be of importance.

Since Witten’s proposal, a variety of questions associated with
supertwistor theory and twistor string theory has been investigated. For
instance, an interesting property of Calabi-Yau supermanifolds is that
Yau’s theorem does not apply, that is, a Kähler supermanifold with
vanishing first Chern class does not automatically admit a Ricci-flat
metric. This fact was already observed by Sethi [ 229 ] and after
Witten’s paper explored in more detail by the authors of [ 215 , 274 ,
216 , 222 , 157 ] . Another direction triggered by twistor string theory
is the discussion of mirror symmetry between Calabi-Yau supermanifolds.
For instance, it has been argued that for a certain limit of the Kähler
moduli, supertwistor space @xmath and superambitwistor space @xmath are
mirror manifolds [ 186 , 7 ] . For further surveys on this material, we
refer to [ 140 , 8 , 34 , 199 , 214 , 141 ] . Furthermore, various other
target spaces for twistor string theory have been discussed by the
authors of [ 208 , 222 , 188 , 103 , 73 , 223 , 74 , 210 , 155 ] leading
to, e.g., certain dimensional reductions of self-dual super Yang-Mills
and full super Yang-Mills theories. Moreover, alternative formulations
of twistor string theories have been proposed in Refs. [ 47 , 48 , 234 ,
154 , 22 ] . In addition, issues related to gravity were investigated,
as well. See, e.g., [ 102 , 9 , 10 , 28 , 56 , 2 , 5 , 6 ] . For other
aspects, see also Refs. [ 1 , 235 , 139 , 227 , 225 , 228 ] .

Integrability

Besides twistor string theory, @xmath super Yang-Mills theory appears to
be connected with another string theory. Approximately ten years ago, a
correspondence – nowadays known as AdS/CFT correspondence – was
discovered. Maldacena conjectured an equivalence between @xmath super
Yang-Mills theory in four dimensions and type IIB superstring theory on
the curved background AdS @xmath [ 164 , 106 , 265 ] . Besides matching
of global symmetries, this conjecture claims full dynamical agreement of
both theories. For instance, one of the statements is that the spectrum
of the scaling dimensions of the gauge theory should coincide with the
energy spectrum of the string states. However, due to the weak-strong
nature of this correspondence, that is, the weak coupling regime of
either theory gets mapped to the strong coupling regime of the other, it
is extremely difficult to test or rather prove this conjecture.
Therefore, one is searching for appropriate tools which may help to
clarify this relation on general grounds.

One such tool which emerged in recent years is integrability. As already
indicated, @xmath super Yang-Mills theory appears to be integrable at
classical level in the sense of admitting a certain twistor formulation
(thus yielding a Lax pair formulation). Quantum integrable structures in
@xmath super Yang-Mills theory have first been discovered by Minahan et
al. [ 182 ] being inspired by the work of Berenstein et al. [ 42 ] . ⁴ ⁴
4 For an ealier account of integrable structures in QCD, see, e.g.,
Refs. [ 158 , 94 , 35 , 61 , 36 , 37 ] . They found that the planar
dilatation operator, which measures the planar scaling dimension of
local operators, in a certain sector of the theory can be interpreted at
one-loop level as Hamiltonian of an integrable quantum spin chain. Based
on this observation, it has then been shown that it is indeed possible
to interpret the complete one-loop dilatation operator as Hamiltonian of
an integrable quantum spin chain; see, e.g., [ 30 , 38 ] and references
therein. For discussions beyond leading order, see also [ 29 , 39 , 236
, 32 , 175 , 197 , 43 , 33 , 275 , 99 , 93 , 40 ] . Another development
pointing towards integrable structures was initiated by Bena et al. [ 41
] . Their investigation is based on the observation that the
Green-Schwarz formulation of the superstring on AdS @xmath can be
interpreted as a coset theory, where the fields take values in the
supercoset space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[ 181 , 132 , 218 ] . Although this is not a symmetric space (the
denominator group is too small) [ 165 ] , this coset theory admits an
infinite set of conserved nonlocal charges, quite similar to those that
exist in two-dimensional field theories. ⁵ ⁵ 5 These charges were also
independently found by Polyakov [ 200 ] . For the construction of
nonlocal conserved charges in two-dimensional sigma models, we refer to
[ 161 , 162 ] . Such charges are in turn related to Kac-Moody algebras [
80 , 82 , 230 ] and generate Yangian algebras [ 78 , 79 ] as has been
discussed, e.g., in [ 51 ] . For reviews of Yangian algebras see Refs. [
52 , 163 ] . Some time later, the construction of an analogous set of
nonlocal conserved charges using the pure spinor formulation of the
superstring [ 45 , 46 , 246 ] on AdS @xmath was given in [ 247 ] . For
further developments, we refer the reader to Refs. [ 11 , 18 , 119 , 19
, 110 , 50 , 238 , 31 , 12 , 273 , 72 , 97 , 98 , 13 , 167 , 131 , 111 ,
219 , 55 ] , for example. ⁶ ⁶ 6 See also Refs. [ 100 , 60 , 136 , 237 ]
. Clearly, the question that arises of what could be the charges in
super Yang-Mills theory. Within the spin chain approach, Dolan et al. [
83 , 84 , 85 ] related these nonlocal charges for the superstring to a
corresponding set of nonlocal charges in the superconformal gauge theory
in the extreme weak coupling limit (see also [ 17 , 15 , 183 , 16 ] ).

Outline and main results

This thesis is devoted to studying different questions related to
supersymmetric gauge theories. The main tool we shall be using is
twistor theory.

In the first chapter, we begin by reviewing some of the basic aspects
and properties of twistor spaces which correspond to flat space-times.
No prior knowledge of twistor geometry is assumed. The unifying
framework for our discussion is complex flag manifolds, which are
natural generalizations of complex projective spaces. Furthermore, after
having presented the concepts of supermanifolds, supervector bundles,
etc., we explain the extension of twistor geometry to supertwistor
geometry. As otherwise it would carry us too far afield from the main
thread of development, we present the material only to that extent which
is of need in later applications. For detailed expositions on the
subject, we refer to the books [ 121 , 166 , 171 , 196 , 259 ] .

In the second chapter, we give a first application by discussing
self-dual super Yang-Mills theory and some related self-dual models. In
particular, we start by describing the equivalence of the Čech and
Dolbeault approaches to holomorphic vector bundles over supermanifolds.
This lies somehow in the heart of the twistor approach to gauge
theories. After that, we give a detailed explanation of the Penrose-Ward
transform for @xmath -extended self-dual super Yang-Mills theory
including appropriate superfield expansions, etc. By replacing
supertwistor space by certain weighted projective superspaces, we
develop Penrose-Ward transforms for truncations of self-dual super
Yang-Mills theories. As the spaces under consideration will always be
Calabi-Yau supermanifolds, we are also able to write down appropriate
action principles. The discussion of the second part of this chapter is
based on the work done together with Alexander Popov [ 208 ] .

The third chapter is devoted to the twistor construction of certain
supersymmetric Bogomolny models in three space-time dimensions. In [ 73
] , it was shown that scattering amplitudes of @xmath super Yang-Mills
theory which are localized on holomorphic curves in supertwistor space
can be reduced to amplitudes of @xmath super Yang-Mills theory in three
dimensions which are localized on holomorphic curves in a supersymmetric
extension of mini-twistor space. Note that the simplest of such curves
in mini-twistor space is the Riemann sphere which coincides with the
spectral curve of the BPS @xmath monopole. Note also that every static
@xmath monopole of charge @xmath may be constructed from an algebraic
curve in mini-twistor space [ 113 ] , and an @xmath monopole is defined
by @xmath such holomorphic curves [ 184 ] . The corresponding string
theory after this reduction is the topological B model on
mini-supertwistor space with @xmath not quite space-filling D3-branes
(defined analogously to the D5-branes in the six-dimensional case) and
additional D1-branes wrapping holomorphic cycles in mini-supertwistor
space. It is reasonable to assume that the latter correspond to
monopoles and substitute the D-instantons in the case of supertwistor
space. In [ 73 ] , also a twistor string theory corresponding to a
certain massive super Yang-Mills theory in three dimensions was
described. The target space of the underlying B model is a Calabi-Yau
supermanifold obtained from mini-supertwistor space by a deformation of
its complex structure. The goal of this chapter is to complement the
discussion given in [ 73 ] . In particular, we show that the B model
with only the D3-branes included corresponds to a field theory on
mini-supertwistor space obtained by a reduction of holomorphic
Chern-Simons theory on supertwistor space. We show that this field
theory is a holomorphic BF-type theory ⁷ ⁷ 7 These theories were
introduced in [ 206 ] and considered, e.g., in [ 126 , 27 ] . which in
turn is equivalent to a supersymmetric Bogomolny model. This model can
be understood as the BPS equations of @xmath super Yang-Mills theory in
three dimensions. The action functional of holomorphic BF theory on
mini-supertwistor space is not of Chern-Simons type, but one can
introduce a Chern-Simons type action on the correspondence space of
mini-supertwistor space. This space admits a so-called Cauchy-Riemann
structure. After enlarging the integrable distribution defining this
Cauchy-Riemann structure by one real direction to a distribution @xmath
, one is led to the notion of @xmath -flat vector bundles over the
correspondence space. These bundles take over the role of holomorphic
vector bundles, and they can be defined by a @xmath -flat connection
one-form @xmath [ 213 ] . The condition of @xmath -flatness of @xmath
can be derived as the equations of motion of a theory we shall call
partially holomorphic Chern-Simons theory. This theory can be obtained
by a dimensional reduction of holomorphic Chern-Simons theory on
supertwistor space. We prove that there are one-to-one correspondences
between equivalence classes of holomorphic vector bundles subject to
certain triviality conditions over mini-supertwistor space, equivalence
classes of @xmath -flat vector bundles over the correspondence space and
gauge equivalence classes of solutions to supersymmetric Bogomolny
equations in three dimensions. In other words, the moduli spaces of all
three theories are bijective. By deforming the complex structure on
mini-supertwistor space, which in turn induces a deformation of the
Cauchy-Riemann structure on the correspondence space, we obtain a
similar correspondence but with additional mass terms for fermions and
scalars in the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations. The twistorial
description of the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations has the nice
feature of yielding novel methods for constructing explicit solutions.
For simplicity, we restrict our discussion to solutions where only
fields with helicity @xmath and a Higgs field are nontrivial. The
corresponding Abelian configurations give rise to the Dirac
monopole-antimonopole systems. For the non-Abelian case, we present two
ways of constructing solutions: first, by using a dressed version of the
Penrose transform and second, by considering a nilpotent deformation of
the holomorphic vector bundle corresponding to an arbitrary seed
solution of the ordinary Bogomolny equations. The third chapter is based
on the work done together with Alexander Popov and Christian Sämann [
210 ] .

The fourth chapter deals with a discussion of full super Yang-Mills
theories on four-dimensional space-time. In particular, we review
Witten’s [ 262 ] and Manin’s [ 166 ] constructions of Penrose-Ward
transforms relating gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the @xmath
-extended super Yang-Mills equations to certain equivalence classes of
holomorphic vector bundles over superambitwistor space which admit an
extension to a @xmath -th order formal neighborhood.

As indicated above, there exist infinitely many nonlocal conserved
charges in @xmath super Yang-Mills theory. So far, they have been
formulated within the spin chain approach [ 83 , 84 , 85 ] which is
perturbative in nature. Note that field theoretic expressions for these
charges at zero ’t Hooft coupling are known and were also given in [ 83
, 84 ] . It is therefore reasonable to consider the problem of
constructing such charges from first principles. As a modest step, one
may first study a simplification of the theory – namely its self-dual
truncation. It will be the purpose of the fifth chapter to use twistor
theory for studying infinite-dimensional algebras of hidden symmetries
in @xmath -extended self-dual super Yang-Mills theories. Here, we
generalize the results known for the self-dual Yang-Mills equations [
198 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 244 , 81 , 75 , 202 , 204 , 205 , 125 , 171 ] . In
particular, we will first consider deformation theory of holomorphic
vector bundles over supertwistor space. Using the Penrose-Ward
transform, we relate these infinitesimal deformations to symmetries of
the self-dual super Yang-Mills equations. After some general words on
Riemann-Hilbert problems, hidden symmetries and related algebras and
using also a cohomological classification, we exemplify our discussion
by constructing Kac-Moody symmetries which come from affine extensions
of the gauge algebra. In addition, we consider affine extensions of the
superconformal algebra to obtain super Kac-Moody-Virasoro-type
symmetries. The existence of such algebras originates from the fact that
the full group of continuous transformations acting on the space of
holomorphic vector bundles over supertwistor space is a semi-direct
product of the group of local holomorphic automorphisms of the
supertwistor space and of the group of one-cochains with respect to a
certain covering with values in the sheaf of holomorphic maps of
supertwistor space into the gauge group. See [ 204 ] for a discussion in
the purely bosonic setting. By focusing on a certain Abelian subalgebra
of the affinely extended superconformal algebra, we introduce a family
of generalized supertwistor spaces. These manifolds, being parametrized
by certain integers, then allow us to introduce truncated self-dual
super Yang-Mills hierarchies. Such a hierarchy consists of a finite
system of partial differential equations, where the self-dual super
Yang-Mills equations are embedded in. The lowest level flows of such a
hierarchy represent space-time translations. Furthermore, one may also
consider the asymptotic limit to obtain the full hierarchy. Indeed, the
existence of such a hierarchy allows us to embed a given solution into
an infinite-parameter family of new solutions. This generalizes the
results known for the self-dual Yang-Mills equations [ 169 , 241 , 170 ,
4 , 127 , 171 ] . We remark that such symmetries of the latter equations
are intimately connected with one-loop maximally helicity violating
amplitudes [ 23 , 66 , 67 , 220 , 104 ] . As for certain values of the
parameters the generalized supertwistor spaces become Calabi-Yau, we are
also able to give action principles for the truncated hierarchies. In
addition, we also construct infinitely many nonlocal conservation laws
in self-dual super Yang-Mills theory which are associated with the
symmetries in question (see [ 4 ] in the context of the self-dual
Yang-Mills hierarchy). The discussion of the fifth chapter is based on [
269 , 270 ] .

Finally, we give a short summary of the results derived in this thesis
and close with an outlook.

Conventions

In the sequel, we shall be using the standard abbreviations YM theory
and SYM theory for Yang-Mills theory and super Yang-Mills theory,
respectively. We also abbreviate holomorphic Chern-Simons theory by hCS
theory. In addition, the reader may find a list with symbols which are
most frequently used throughout this work at the end of this thesis.

Disclaimer

I apologize in advance to those people whose names were either mentioned
incorrectly or not mentioned at all. I have tried to track down all the
literature related to the topics discussed below but nevertheless
because of the broad fields of twistor theory, integrable systems, etc.,
it might have happened that some of the works slipped through my hands.
If so then simply because of the fact that I was not aware of them.

Hannover, Summer 2006

[.1in] Martin Wolf

] ]

###### Contents

-    \thechapter Supertwistor geometry
    -    1 Twistor spaces
    -    2 Supermanifolds
    -    3 Supertwistor spaces
    -    4 Connections and curvature
    -    5 Real structures
-    \thechapter Self-dual super gauge theory
    -    6 Čech-Dolbeault correspondence
    -    7 Self-dual super Yang-Mills theory
    -    8 Other self-dual models in four dimensions
-    \thechapter Supersymmetric Bogomolny monopole equations
    -    9 Cauchy-Riemann supermanifolds
    -    10 Partially holomorphic Chern-Simons theory
    -    11 Holomorphic BF theory
    -    12 Massive fields
    -    13 Solution generating techniques
-    \thechapter Super Yang-Mills theory
    -    14 @xmath super Yang-Mills theory
    -    15 Thickenings and @xmath super Yang-Mills theory
-    \thechapter Hidden symmetries in self-dual super Yang-Mills theory
    -    16 Holomorphicity and symmetries
    -    17 Explicit examples of hidden symmetry algebras
    -    18 Hierarchies
    -    19 Nonlocal conservation laws
-    Summary and discussion
-    List of symbols
    -    References

## Chapter \thechapter Supertwistor geometry

T his first chapter is intended to give some of the main ideas of
supertwistor geo- metry. The material is presented only to that extent
which is needed in later applications. For pedagogical reasons, we begin
with ordinary twistor geometry. As we will be discussing the twistorial
approach to supersymmetric field theories, we need to generalize this
framework to also include so-called supermanifolds – manifolds
parametrized by @xmath -graded coordinates. We will shortly realize,
however, that for developing these generalizations, it is necessary to
work in a bit more abstract mathematical setting. In due course, we
therefore also present some definitions and notions to simplify
understanding. The reader unfamiliar with the underlying mathematics may
consult, e.g., Refs. [ 24 , 105 , 166 , 260 ] . A thorough introduction
into twistor geometry can be found in the books [ 121 , 166 , 171 , 196
, 259 ] .

### 1 Twistor spaces

#### Flag manifolds.

Let us begin by recalling the definition of a flag manifold. Consider
the complex space @xmath . Then we define its flag manifolds by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where the @xmath s are subspaces of @xmath . Typical examples of such
flag manifolds are the projective space @xmath and the Graßmannian
@xmath . Note that all of these manifolds are compact complex manifolds.
Moreover, they have an equivalent representation as homogeneous spaces.
That is, consider the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath . The subgroup of @xmath which preserves this decomposition is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence we may give an equivalent definition by the quotient

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

From this it rather straightforwardly follows that their dimensionality
is given by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Twistor space.

We now want to use the notion of flag manifolds to introduce fundamental
complex manifolds considered in twistor geometry. In order to describe
field theories in four dimensions, we restrict ourselves to four
dimensions. So, let @xmath be a fixed complex four-dimensional vector
space which we call twistor space. In due course, we shall also endow
@xmath with various real structures. Furthermore, we have a natural
fibration in terms of flag manifolds

  -- -- -- -------------------
           ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -- -- -------------------

together with the canonical projections @xmath for @xmath . In fact, the
double fibration ( \thechapter .3 ) is the first in a row of important
double fibrations in twistor geometry we will encounter throughout this
thesis. We shall now develop some of its basic properties. We follow the
literature and define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .4)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

and call them projective twistor space, compactified complexified
four-dimensional space-time and correspondence space, respectively. At
this point we stress that Minkowski and Euclidean spaces can naturally
be realized as four-dimensional subsets of the complex four-dimensional
manifold @xmath (see Ref. [ 259 ] for a detailed discussion). By virtue
of the double fibration ( \thechapter .3 ), geometric data is
transferred from @xmath to @xmath and vice versa according to the
subsequent proposition (see, e.g., [ 259 ] ):

###### Proposition \thechapter.1.

There is the following correspondence between points and subsets:

  (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------
  (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath

#### Local coordinates.

Next we introduce local coordinates. For this, we let

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

be a coordinate mapping for @xmath . The brackets denote, as usual, the
span. Then we define a coordinate chart on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

We call @xmath affine complexified four-dimensional space-time. Note
that it is simply one of six possible choices of standard coordinate
charts for @xmath . Using the projections @xmath , we may naturally
define the affine parts of @xmath and @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Then we have

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

To see this, let @xmath be homogeneous coordinates on @xmath and @xmath
as above. Then consider the mapping

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which in fact proves ( \thechapter .8 ).

It then follows by our above discussion that the projection @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .9)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Therefore, in terms of these coordinates our double fibration (
\thechapter .3 ) takes the following form:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .10)
  -- -- -- --------------------

Altogether, these considerations allow us to introduce affine
coordinates according to:

-   @xmath : @xmath ,

-   @xmath : @xmath and @xmath with @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath
    denotes the canonical covering of @xmath ,

-   @xmath : @xmath and @xmath ; @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .

The last point deserves a little more attention. Let us denote the
covering of @xmath by @xmath . On the intersection @xmath the
coordinates @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .11)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Hence, the twistor space ⁸ ⁸ 8 By a slight abuse of terminology, we
shall also refer to @xmath as the twistor space. @xmath is a rank two
holomorphic vector bundle over the Riemann sphere. In more details, it
is the total space of

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .12)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath denotes the hyperplane line bundle (the dual of the
tautological line bundle) over @xmath . Moreover, the equations

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .13)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

are also called incidence relations. In a given trivialization,
holomorphic sections of the bundle @xmath are of the form ( \thechapter
.13 ) and are parametrized by the moduli @xmath . In other words, Eqs. (
\thechapter .13 ) make Prop. \thechapter .1. transparent: a fixed point
@xmath corresponds to a null two-plane @xmath and furthermore, a fixed
point @xmath corresponds to a holomorphic embedding of a rational degree
one curve @xmath . To see that these two-planes are indeed null, we
solve ( \thechapter .13 ) for a generic @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .14)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is arbitrary. Here, @xmath denotes a particular solution to
( \thechapter .13 ). By recalling that any null four-vector @xmath can
be decomposed as @xmath for two generic commuting spinors @xmath and
@xmath , we have thus shown that @xmath is totally null. Hence, @xmath
is the space of all null two-planes in @xmath .

#### Remark.

Two remarks are in order. By definition, the projective twistor space
@xmath is the same as @xmath . On this space we may introduce
homogeneous coordinates @xmath Then consider @xmath , where @xmath is
defined by setting @xmath and @xmath . We can cover @xmath by two
coordinate patches, say @xmath and @xmath , for which @xmath and @xmath
, respectively, and introduce the coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which are related on @xmath by ( \thechapter .11 ). This shows that
@xmath is biholomorphic to @xmath .

There is yet another interpretation of @xmath . The Riemann sphere
@xmath can be emdedded into @xmath . The normal bundle of @xmath inside
@xmath is @xmath . Kodaira’s theorem on relative deformation theory [
134 , 135 ] states that if @xmath is a compact complex submanifold of a
complex manifold – not necessarily compact, and if @xmath , where @xmath
is the normal sheaf of @xmath in @xmath , then there exists a @xmath
-parameter family of deformations of @xmath inside @xmath , where @xmath
. In our example,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 We shall often denote a vector bundle and the
corresponding sheaf of sections by the same letter; cf. also footnote 12
. In addition, we shall sometimes write @xmath instead of @xmath .

#### Two other twistor spaces.

Above, we have introduced (projective) twistor space in terms of a
particular double fibration. However, this is not the only possibility
as there is a variety of other twistor spaces which turn out to be
extremely important in later applications. In the remainder of this
section, we pick two examples which again are based on flag manifolds.
Let us consider the following two correspondences:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .16)
  -- -- -- --------------------

The space @xmath is, of course, compactified complexified
four-dimensional space-time. Note that the space @xmath , that is, the
space of all three-dimensional subspaces in @xmath , is naturally dual
to @xmath as we have a natural duality between lines and hyperplanes in
a vector space. For that reason we call @xmath dual projective twistor
space and denote it by @xmath , in the following. The twistor manifold
@xmath is called projective ambitwistor space as it inherits aspects of
the projective and the dual projective twistor spaces. We shall denote
it by @xmath . Then one can prove the following proposition:

###### Proposition \thechapter.2.

There are the following correspondences:

  ----- ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------
  (a)   (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
        (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath
  (b)   (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
        (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath
  ----- ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------

Note that for all these manifolds we have coordinate representations
similar to ( \thechapter .5 ), and we shall develop a suitable notation
for these coordinates as they are needed. We want to conclude this
section by stressing that ambitwistor space @xmath can be regarded as a
submanifold in @xmath as there is an embedding

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .17)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

In fact, @xmath is a degree two hypersurface in @xmath since this
embedding is given by the zero locus

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .18)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath are homogeneous coordinates on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath
, respectively. Eq. ( \thechapter .18 ) is just the orthogonality
relation between the vectors characterizing @xmath and the ones
characterizing @xmath , the latters being normal vectors to the
hyperplanes. The minus sign in ( \thechapter .18 ) has been chosen for
convenience.

### 2 Supermanifolds

So far, we have discussed twistor spaces in the purely even (bosonic)
setting. In the sequel, we extend the discussion to supertwistor spaces.
To do this, let us first present some preliminaries.

#### Graded rings and modules.

The first notions we need are @xmath -rings and modules and some
relations among them. So, let @xmath be a @xmath -graded ring, that is,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We call elements of @xmath even
and elements of @xmath odd. An element of @xmath is said to be
homogeneous if it is either even or odd. The degree (or parity) of a
homogeneous element is defined to be zero if it is even and one if it is
odd, respectively. We denote the degree of a homogeneous element @xmath
by @xmath ( @xmath for parity). We define the supercommutator, @xmath ,
by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .19)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for all homogeneous elements @xmath . The ring @xmath is called
supercommutative if the supercommutator vanishes for all of the ring’s
elements. An important example of such @xmath -graded rings is the
Graßmann algebra over @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .20)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with the @xmath -grading being

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .21)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

An @xmath -module @xmath is a @xmath -graded bimodule which satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .22)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for all homogeneous @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath . An additive mapping
of @xmath -modules, @xmath , is called an even morphism if it preserves
the grading and is @xmath -linear. We denote the group of such morphisms
by @xmath . On the other hand, we call an additive mapping of @xmath
-modules odd if it reverses the grading, @xmath , and is @xmath -linear,
that is, @xmath and @xmath . The group of such morphisms is denoted by
@xmath . Then we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it can be given an @xmath -module structure.

Furthermore, there is a natural mapping @xmath – called the parity map –
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .23)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and by requiring that i) addition in @xmath is the same as in @xmath ,
ii) right multiplication by @xmath is the same as in @xmath and iii)
left multiplication differs by a sign, i.e., @xmath for @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Corresponding to the morphism @xmath , we let @xmath be the
morphism which agrees with @xmath as a mapping of sets. Moreover,
corresponding to the morphism @xmath , we can find morphisms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .24)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and hence @xmath . We stress that @xmath is an @xmath -module itself,
and as such @xmath is, as well. However, @xmath is no longer a @xmath
-graded ring since @xmath , for instance.

Next we need the notion of free @xmath -modules. A free @xmath -module
of rank @xmath is defined to be an @xmath -module isomorphic to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .25)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

This has a free system of generators, @xmath of which are even and
@xmath of which are odd, respectively. We stress that the decomposition
of @xmath into @xmath and @xmath has, in general, no invariant meaning
and does not coincide with the decomposition into even and odd parts,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Only when @xmath , these decompositions are the same.

#### Supermatrices, supertranspose, supertrace and superdeterminant.

Let @xmath be a supercommutative ring and @xmath be a freely generated
@xmath -module. Just as in the commutative case, morphisms between free
@xmath -modules can be given by matrices. The standard matrix format is

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .26)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is said to be even (respectively, odd) if @xmath and @xmath
are filled with even (respectively, odd) elements of the ring while
@xmath and @xmath are filled with odd (respectively, even) elements.
Furthermore, @xmath is a @xmath -, @xmath a @xmath -, @xmath a @xmath -
and @xmath a @xmath -matrix. The set of matrices in standard format with
elements in @xmath is denoted by @xmath . It forms a @xmath -graded
module which, with the usual matrix multiplication, is naturally
isomorphic to @xmath . We denote by @xmath the even invertible
automorphisms of @xmath .

The supertranspose of @xmath is defined according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .27)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the superscript “t” denotes the usual transpose. The
supertransposition satisfies @xmath and @xmath .

We shall use the following definition of the supertrace of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .28)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Clearly, the supertrace of the supercommutator vanishes and the
supertrace of a supertransposed matrix is the same as the supertrace of
the matrix one has started with.

Finally, let @xmath . The superdeterminant is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .29)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the right-hand side is well-defined for @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, it belongs to @xmath , that is, to @xmath . The
superdeterminant satisfies also the usual rules,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

#### Supermanifolds.

We have now all necessary ingredients to give the definition of a
supermanifold. As it will be most convenient for us, we shall follow
Manin [ 166 ] and consider the graded space approach to supermanifolds.
¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We note that the systematic theory of smooth supermanifolds
goes back to the work by Kostant [ 137 ] and Leites [ 156 ] . The idea
is roughly to extend the structure sheaf of a manifold to a sheaf of
supercommutative rings. However, note that there are other approaches
as, e.g., the one by DeWitt [ 77 , 24 ] (see also [ 68 ] for a review).
Furthermore, we stress in advance that the subsequent definition will
not be the most generic one. For a more general discussion, we refer the
interested reader to Ref. [ 166 ] .

###### Definition \thechapter.1.

A complex supermanifold of complex dimension @xmath is a ringed space
@xmath , where @xmath is a topological space of real dimension @xmath ,
and @xmath is a sheaf of supercommutative rings on @xmath such that, if
we let @xmath be the ideal subsheaf in @xmath of all nilpotent elements
in @xmath , the following is fulfilled:

-   @xmath is a complex manifold. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Recall that a ringed space
    @xmath with the property that for each @xmath there is a
    neighborhood @xmath such that there is a ringed space isomorphism
    @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is the sheaf of holomorphic
    functions on @xmath can be given the structure of a complex
    manifold. Moreover, any complex manifold arises in this manner.

-    For each point @xmath there is a neighborhood @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a locally free sheaf of @xmath -modules of purely
    even rank @xmath on @xmath and @xmath denotes the exterior algebra,
    i.e., the tensor algebra modulo the ideal generated by the
    superanticommutator.

We shall call @xmath the body of @xmath . If no confusion arises, we
will not mention the sheaf @xmath explicitly. The latter is also called
the sheaf of holomorphic superfunctions on @xmath or simply structure
sheaf of the supermanifold. Note that a similar definition can also be
given for differentiable supermanifolds. Furthermore, as for purely even
complex manifolds, it will turn out to be useful to consider the sheaf
@xmath of smooth complex-valued superfunctions on @xmath , which is
defined in a similar fashion. Clearly, @xmath is a subsheaf of @xmath .
In the sequel, we shall loosely speak of functions but always mean
superfunctions. Moreover, we will often suppress the explicit appearance
of the dimensionality and simply write @xmath instead of @xmath .

Let @xmath be local coordinates on @xmath and @xmath be basis sections
of @xmath . Then @xmath is an even-odd system of coordinates for the
space @xmath . Any @xmath can thus be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .30)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is a multiindex and the @xmath s are local functions on
@xmath .

Let us give a first example of a supermanifold: let @xmath be a rank
@xmath holomorphic vector bundle over an ordinary complex manifold
@xmath and @xmath the sheaf of sections of @xmath . @xmath Then @xmath
is a supermanifold by the very definition, since @xmath is locally free.
Such a supermanifold is called globally split. A particular example is
@xmath defined by @xmath . Note that due to a theorem by Batchelor [ 26
] , any differentiable supermanifold is globally split. This is
basically because of the existence of a partition of unity. The reader
should be warned that, in general, complex supermanifolds are not
globally split.

#### Vector bundles.

As for ordinary manifolds, we need the notions of tangent and cotangent
bundles. Since these are just special vector bundles and in view of our
later discussion it is certainly worth stating some more general words
on vector bundles. The idea to define a holomorphic supervector bundle
over a complex supermanifold @xmath is to use the notion of a locally
free sheaf of rank @xmath , which is defined to be a sheaf of @xmath
-modules locally isomorphic to @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12 Remember the following
fact: Let @xmath be a purely even complex manifold. Then there is a
one-to-one correspondence between rank @xmath locally free sheaves
@xmath of @xmath -modules on @xmath and rank @xmath holomorphic vector
bundles @xmath over @xmath . In fact, if @xmath is an open covering of
@xmath and if @xmath trivializes @xmath , then the group of holomorphic
sections of @xmath over @xmath is @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath is a
locally free sheaf of @xmath -modules and if @xmath is the explicit
isomorphism, then on any @xmath we may define @xmath matrices of
holomorphic functions according to @xmath which give the transition
functions of a holomorphic vector bundle @xmath . In the following, we
shall suppress the prefix super: thus, vector bundle means supervector
bundle. Next let @xmath be a holomorphic mapping of complex
supermanifolds, that is, @xmath is defined to be the pair @xmath , where
@xmath is a continuous mapping of topological spaces and @xmath is a
morphism of sheaves of rings: for any open subset @xmath in @xmath there
is a morphism @xmath . Note that @xmath is also called the zeroth direct
image sheaf of the sheaf @xmath . By the pull-back via @xmath of a
vector bundle @xmath over @xmath , we mean the locally free sheaf of
@xmath -modules

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .31)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) denotes the topological inverse
sheaf of @xmath (respectively, of @xmath ). For instance, @xmath is the
sheaf on @xmath defined by the presheaf

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the obvious restriction mappings. It is characterized by the
property that the stalk @xmath for all @xmath . For a complex vector
bundle, replace @xmath by @xmath .

The tangent sheaf @xmath of a complex supermanifold @xmath is then the
sheaf of local vector fields, that is, the superderivations of the ring
of functions. It is locally free – in fact, it is a locally free sheaf
of @xmath -modules – and of rank equal to the dimension of @xmath . Let
@xmath be local coordinates on @xmath . Then @xmath is freely generated
by its sections @xmath . The cotangent sheaf @xmath is defined to be

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .32)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the sheaf of local morphisms from @xmath . There is also
an obvious differential @xmath with the property @xmath for @xmath .

#### Remark.

In the sequel, we shall only be dealing with locally free sheaves.
Therefore, we will often not make any notational distinction between
such sheaves and the vector bundles corresponding to them, and we also
use the two objects interchangeably.

### 3 Supertwistor spaces

Now we want to use the above machinery for generalizing the twistor
spaces of Sec. 1 to supertwistor spaces.

#### Flag supermanifolds.

For the sake of concreteness, let us consider @xmath . Then we define
the flag superspace ¹³ ¹³ 13 See also Ref. [ 120 ] . @xmath to be the
set of all @xmath -tuples @xmath of free submodules of @xmath satisfying
@xmath and @xmath . This naturally generalizes our definition (
\thechapter .1 ). In fact, one can also introduce suitable coordinate
systems and thus a suitable structure sheaf which makes this set into a
complex supermanifold. As in the purely even setting, we can give an
equivalent definition by considering the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath , where @xmath . Let now @xmath be the unitary automorphisms
of @xmath . ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Hermitian conjugation is defined by composing
supertransposition and complex conjugation. The subgroup of @xmath which
preserves this decomposition is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence we may write the quotient

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .33)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

One can actually show that @xmath has real dimension @xmath . Then it is
a rather straightforward exercise to determine the dimension of a flag
supermanifold. So, we leave it to the interested reader. Note that flag
supermanifolds are, in general, not globally split [ 166 ] .

#### Supertwistor space.

Similarly to our discussion in Sec. 1 , we let @xmath be of the form
@xmath . We call this space @xmath -extended supertwistor space [ 95 ] .
Then we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .34)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

This time we call them projective supertwistor space, compactified
complexified four-dimensional antichiral superspace-time and
correspondence space, respectively. Therefore, the double fibration (
\thechapter .3 ) becomes:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .35)
  -- -- -- --------------------

Note that @xmath where @xmath is the tautological sheaf on @xmath .
Furthermore, Prop. \thechapter .1. generalizes accordingly.

###### Proposition \thechapter.3.

There is the following geometric correspondence:

  (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------
  (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath

In the following, we shall abbreviate @xmath for any ordinary manifold
@xmath . As before, we may introduce local coordinates. Eventually, one
finds

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .36)
  -- -- -- --------------------

together with

-   @xmath : @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath ,

-   @xmath : @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with @xmath on @xmath , where
    @xmath denotes again the canonical covering of @xmath ,

-   @xmath : @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ; @xmath , with @xmath and
    @xmath .

Again, the last point shows that @xmath is a rank @xmath holomorphic
vector bundle

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .37)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Moreover, the relations

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .38)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

explicitly say that a fixed point @xmath corresponds to a null @xmath
-dimensional subspace of @xmath . By analogy with the purely even
setting, we shall refer to those as super null planes of dimension
@xmath in @xmath . Hence, @xmath is the space of super null planes of
@xmath . On the other hand, a fixed point @xmath corresponds to a
holomorphic embedding of a rational curve @xmath . Before closing this
paragraph, we would like to stress that the argumentation of 1 also
applies here.

#### Two other supertwistor spaces.

Above, we have introduced the (projective) supertwistor space. Let us
now also generalize the other two twistor spaces given in 1 : the dual
projective supertwistor space and the projective superambitwistor space,
respectively. So, let us consider the following two double fibrations:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .39)
  -- -- -- --------------------

The space @xmath is compactified complexified four-dimensional chiral
superspace-time, which is naturally dual to @xmath . Note also that the
space @xmath is naturally dual to @xmath . For that reason we call
@xmath dual projective supertwistor space and denote it by @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath is compactified complexified superspace-time and
obviously, we have the natural fibration:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .40)
  -- -- -- --------------------

The manifold @xmath is called projective superambitwistor space and we
shall denote it by @xmath . Then one can show:

###### Proposition \thechapter.4.

There are the following correspondences:

  ----- ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------
  (a)   (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
        (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath
  (b)   (i)    point in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
        (ii)   @xmath            @xmath   point in @xmath
  ----- ------ ----------------- -------- -----------------

Note that for all these manifolds we can construct coordinate
representations similar to those given in 3 . As before, we shall
develop suitable notation for these coordinates as we need them.

Finally, we want to stress that also the projective superambitwistor
space @xmath can be viewed as a degree two hypersurface in @xmath . In
fact, if we let @xmath be homogeneous coordinates on @xmath and @xmath
on @xmath , respectively, then @xmath is given by @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .41)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and @xmath is the ideal subsheaf in @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .42)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Furthermore, we have abbreviated

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .43)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

### 4 Connections and curvature

So far, we have been dealing with just supermanifolds and vector
bundles. Next we want to introduce some additional geometric structure,
such as connections. This will then allow us to talk about curvature and
characteristic classes.

#### Connections and curvature.

As we have already mentioned in 2 , the notion of a holomorphic vector
bundle over a complex supermanifold @xmath is equivalent to the notion
of a locally free sheaf @xmath of @xmath -modules. Then a connection
@xmath is an even morphism of sheaves

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .44)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

satisfying the Leibniz formula

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .45)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is a local holomorphic function on @xmath and @xmath is a
local section of @xmath . Let @xmath be local coordinates on @xmath and
@xmath be generated by @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .46)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and ( \thechapter .45 ) reads as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .47)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Locally, @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .48)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath .

As usual, @xmath induces the curvature

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .49)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath denotes the exterior algebra, i.e., it is the tensor
algebra modulo the ideal generated by the superanticommutator. Here, we
have just introduced one version of a holomorphic de Rham complex on
supermanifolds. There are other possible ways; see, e.g., Ref. [ 166 ]
for details. Note that the above definitions carry naturally over to
complex vector bundles.

#### Integral forms and Berezin integral.

In the purely even setting, differential forms are objects which can be
integrated over. However, in the case of supermanifolds, the situation
is more subtle. First, let us introduce the holomorphic Berezinian. Let
@xmath be a complex supermanifold with tangent sheaf @xmath . The
holomorphic Berezinian line bundle, @xmath , or holomorphic Berezinian
for short, is defined to be the line bundle over @xmath having
holomorphic super Jacobians as transition functions. Thus, it can be
considered as the natural extension of the canonical sheaf (sheaf of
sections of the canonicle bundle) on a purely even complex manifold.
Then integral forms are defined to be sections of the sheaf

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .50)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Thus, @xmath and if @xmath is @xmath dimensional with local coordinates
@xmath , then @xmath is locally of the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .51)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is some local section of @xmath . Sections of @xmath are
also called holomorphic volume forms. A complexification @xmath of
@xmath splits into a direct sum @xmath . Clearly, this then implies that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .52)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Let now @xmath be a differentiable supermanifold with local coordinates
@xmath . Furthermore, suppose that @xmath is connected and given an
orientation. Let @xmath , that is, the volume forms with compact
support. Then @xmath is locally

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .53)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where the @xmath s are local functions on @xmath . We define the Berezin
integral as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .54)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

For a more general volume form with compact support, we define the
integral by using a partition of unity and the additivity property of
the integral. Furthermore, if we let @xmath be the integral @xmath
-forms with compact support, then such a form can be hooked into a
differential @xmath -form with compact support, i.e., an element of
@xmath , to give an element of @xmath which, by virtue of the above
formula, can be integrated over @xmath .

#### Remark.

Two things are worth mentioning. First of all, integral forms can be
given the structure of a complex, since one may introduce a mapping
@xmath with @xmath . Therefore, one can discuss cohomology of integral
forms [ 166 ] . Another issue concerns the integration theory on
supermanifolds. In general, one is interested in objects which can be
integrated over immersed sub(super)manifolds @xmath of some
supermanifold @xmath . One way of doing this is to introduce so-called
@xmath -densities. They are sections of @xmath , where @xmath is the
tautological sheaf on the relative Graßmannian @xmath . Then if @xmath
is an immersion of supermanifolds and @xmath a density on @xmath , one
can canonically define a volume form @xmath on @xmath . We shall not go
into further details at this point and refer the reader to the book by
Manin [ 166 ] for a nice discussion of these aspects. We also refer to
the work by Bernstein and Leites [ 53 , 54 ] who generalized the
integration theory of volume forms for the first time.

#### Formal Calabi-Yau supermanifolds.

Given a rank @xmath complex vector bundle @xmath over a complex
supermanifold @xmath , we define the @xmath -th Chern class of @xmath to
be

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .55)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is (up to an overall factor) the curvature of @xmath . The
first few Chern classes are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .56)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The total Chern class is then @xmath . Note that in a similar fashion,
one may also introduce the @xmath -th Chern character according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .57)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

As in the purely even setting, one may prove the following useful
result: for a short exact sequence of complex vector bundles over @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .58)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

we have

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .59)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In particular, this formula yields

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .60)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

More details about Chern classes, Chern characters, etc. can be found,
e.g., in the book by Bartocci et al. [ 24 ] .

Furthermore, the total Chern class of a complex supermanifold @xmath is
defined to be the total Chern class of @xmath . In this case, we shall
simply write @xmath . In the purely even case, we have a relation
between the first Chern class of a vector bundle and its determinant
line bundle. In fact, both agree (up to a sign). The question is whether
we have an extension of this relation to our present setting. The analog
of the determinant line bundle is, as we have already seen above, the
superdeterminant line bundle – the Berezinian line bundle. Using
splitting principle arguments, one may indeed deduce that the first
Chern class of @xmath for some vector bundle @xmath coincides, again up
to a sign, with the first Chern class of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .61)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the sign depends on whether @xmath is of rank @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively. When talking about @xmath , we shall use our old notation
@xmath .

###### Definition \thechapter.2.

Let @xmath be a complex supermanifold. Then @xmath is called a formal
Calabi-Yau supermanifold if it fulfills the following equivalent
conditions:

-    The first Chern class of @xmath vanishes.

-    The holomorphic Berezinian of @xmath is trivial.

-    There exists a globally defined and nowhere vanishing holomorphic
    volume form.

Before we will discuss some examples, let us point out an important
issue: in contrast to ordinary Calabi-Yau manifolds, formal Calabi-Yau
supermanifolds do not necessarily admit Ricci-flat metrics – even if one
assumes compactness. For some expositions on this issue, see Refs. [ 229
] and [ 215 , 274 , 216 , 222 , 157 ] .

Let us now discuss some examples. First, consider the projective
superspace @xmath with @xmath . To compute the total Chern class @xmath
, we use the short exact sequence

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .62)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

as we have to take equivalence classes with respect to overall
rescalings. Here, @xmath denotes the dual tautological sheaf on @xmath .
Note that the above sequence is nothing but a @xmath -graded extension
of the Euler sequence. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The proof of ( \thechapter .62 ) is a
straightforward extension of the one given in the purely even setting.
The proof of the Euler sequence for @xmath can be found in, e.g., [ 105
] . Using our relations given in 4 , we find

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which immediately implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .63)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath . Thus, we may conclude that our supertwistor space @xmath
becomes a formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold if and only if @xmath .

A similar argumentation can be given for superambitwistor space @xmath
as introduced in 3 . There, it was shown that @xmath can be realized as
a hypersurface in @xmath . Thus, we have a short exact sequence of
sheaves

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .64)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the normal sheaf of @xmath in @xmath . In fact, @xmath ,
where @xmath is the ideal subsheaf ( \thechapter .42 ). ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 See
also our discussion given in 15 . Then a short calculation reveals that
( \thechapter .64 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .65)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Hence, @xmath is a formal
Calabi-Yau supermanifold. Furthermore, it has been shown [ 186 , 7 ]
that @xmath and @xmath are related in some sense by mirror symmetry. For
related aspects of mirror symmetry see also Refs. [ 140 , 8 , 34 , 199 ,
214 , 141 ] .

Before coming to our next topic, let us illustrate a final example given
by LeBrun [ 146 ] . Let @xmath be some ordinary complex manifold. As we
have seen in 2 , @xmath is a complex supermanifold, where @xmath is a
rank @xmath locally free sheaf of @xmath -modules. The holomorphic
Berezinian of @xmath is then given by @xmath where @xmath is the
canonical sheaf (sheaf of sections of the canonical bundle) on @xmath .
Next one can show that there is a short exact sequence of @xmath
-modules on @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .66)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the sheaf of first-order jets for @xmath . ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 For
a proof, see, e.g., Ref. [ 166 ] . Let now @xmath be some complex
three-dimensional manifold which admits a spin structure. Then @xmath
can be extended to a formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold of dimension @xmath
by setting @xmath since from the above sequence we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence @xmath is trivial. Therefore, we can conclude that @xmath is a
formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. For instance, the supertwistor space
@xmath fits into this construction scheme, since @xmath and hence @xmath
, as can most easily be deduced from the Euler sequence ( \thechapter
.62 ).

### 5 Real structures

Up to now, we have only dealt with complex (super)twistor spaces. In
order to discuss real gauge theories, that is, gauge theories living on
either Euclidean or Minkowski spaces (or conformal compactifications
thereof) with some unitary group as gauge group, we need to put certain
real structures on the supertwistor space @xmath and its dual @xmath .
This in turn induces real structures on all the supermanifolds appearing
in our double fibrations. Therefore, our first goal is to choose proper
coordinates on @xmath and @xmath as well as on the supermanifolds
participating in ( \thechapter .40 ). Recall that in 3 and 3 we have
already given partial results on this matter.

#### Local coordinates.

In 3 , we have denoted the coordinates on @xmath by @xmath and on @xmath
by @xmath , respectively. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 In fact, they are just homogeneous
coordinates for the projectivized versions. Furthermore, in the same
paragraph we also discussed the canonical bilinear form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .67)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

as an element of @xmath . Consider the double fibration ( \thechapter
.40 ),

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .68)
  -- -- -- --------------------

and recall that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . According to 3 , local
coordinates on @xmath are @xmath . In a similar fashion, one may take
@xmath as local coordinates on @xmath . A @xmath -flag in @xmath is the
same thing as a pair of @xmath -dimensional subspaces in @xmath and
@xmath , orthogonal with respect to the bilinear form ( \thechapter .67
). Making use of the identifications

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .69)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

as discussed in 3 in the case of the supertwistor space together with
the orthogonality relation induced by ( \thechapter .67 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .70)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where summation over repeated indices is implied. This equation can
generically be solved by, e.g., putting

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .71)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

We may thus take @xmath as local coordinates on @xmath , with the
obvious projections @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .72)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Clearly, by virtue of the discussion given in 3 and of the double
fibration ( \thechapter .68 ), @xmath are defined on @xmath .

#### Euclidean signature.

As we shall see in the next chapter, the supertwistor space will play a
key role in discussing self-dual SYM theories. As the corresponding
equations of motion are natural extensions of the self-dual YM
equations, we are interested in their formulation in an Euclidean
setting. Though not being subject of the present discussion, it is also
possible to formulate them in the case of split signature. For details
see, e.g., [ 207 ] .

Let us introduce the @xmath -tensors according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .73)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which satisfy @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, define

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .74)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

For the choice @xmath (the most interesting one for our purposes),
Euclidean signature will be induced by the antiholomorphic involution

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .75)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for the coordinates @xmath on @xmath . Here, summation over repeated
indices is implied and bar denotes complex conjugation. Note that
reality of the odd coordinates for Euclidean signature can only be
imposed if @xmath is even [ 138 , 160 ] ; the @xmath and @xmath cases
are obtained by suitable truncations of the @xmath case. Furthermore, we
adopt the convention

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .76)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath are any of the coordinates @xmath . The extension of the
involution @xmath to any holomorphic function @xmath is defined to be

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .77)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Using ( \thechapter .75 ) together with the incidence relations (
\thechapter .69 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .78)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for the local coordinates @xmath on @xmath . The fixed point set of
these involutions then defines antichiral Euclidean superspace @xmath
with @xmath . One may choose the following parametrization:

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .79)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with real @xmath . Hence, the metric is of Euclidean type. Note that
later on, we shall also choose parametrizations different from (
\thechapter .79 ).

#### Minkowski signature.

Besides self-dual SYM theories, we are also interested in full SYM
theories which are most interesting when considered on Minkowski
space-time. In this situation, the superambitwistor space plays the
central role in the discussion.

Minkowski signature is induced by the antiholomorphic involution

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .80)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

on @xmath , where bar denotes, as before, complex conjugation. This
time, however, we choose

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .81)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath are any of the coordinates on @xmath . The extension to
holomorphic functions is then given analogously as for @xmath .

Next using Eqs. ( \thechapter .69 ) together with the conditions (
\thechapter .71 ), we immediately arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .82)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The fixed point set

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .83)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

together with the parametrization

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .84)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for real @xmath , yields a metric of Minkowski signature, that is,
@xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Self-dual super gauge theory

A fter these introductory words on (super)twistor spaces, we shall now
discuss a first application. In the introduction we have already seen
that the twistor approach to gauge theory involves certain holomorphic
vector bundles over spaces appearing in a double fibration like (
\thechapter .35 ). As is well known, holomorphic vector bundles can be
described within two different approaches: the Čech and the Dolbeault
pictures. Both pictures, however, turn out to be equivalent -- and each
of it has its own advantages and disadvantages. In the sequel, we shall
be using both on equal footing. Therefore, we first describe the
equivalence of both pictures in a more general setting and then discuss
as a first example self-dual SYM theory ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 See Ref. [ 231 , 248 ,
249 , 250 ] for an earlier account on self-dual SYM theory. and some
related models.

### 6 Čech-Dolbeault correspondence

#### Čech cochains, cocycles and cohomology.

Let us recall some basic definitions already adopted to complex
supermanifolds. Consider a complex supermanifold @xmath with an open
covering @xmath . Furthermore, we are interested in smooth maps from
open subsets of @xmath into some Lie (super)group @xmath as well as in a
sheaf @xmath of such @xmath -valued functions. A @xmath -cochain of the
covering @xmath with values in @xmath is a collection @xmath of sections
of the sheaf @xmath over nonempty intersections @xmath . We will denote
the set of such @xmath -cochains by @xmath . We stress that it has a
group structure, where the multiplication is just pointwise
multiplication.

We may define the subsets of cocycles @xmath . For example, for @xmath
they are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .1)
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

These sets will be of particular interest. We remark that from the first
of these two definitions it follows that @xmath coincides with the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the group of global sections of the sheaf @xmath . Note that in
general the subset @xmath is not a subgroup of the group @xmath .

We say that two cocycles @xmath are equivalent if @xmath for some @xmath
. The set of equivalence classes induced by this equivalence relation is
the first (pointed) Čech cohomology set and denoted by @xmath . If the
@xmath s are all Stein – in case of supermanifolds @xmath we need @xmath
to be covered by Stein manifolds – we have the bijection

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

otherwise one takes the inductive limit. To sum up, we see that, for
instance, the elements of @xmath with @xmath classify rank @xmath
locally free sheaves of @xmath -modules up to isomorphism. Hence, @xmath
is the moduli space of holomorphic vector bundles over @xmath with
complex rank @xmath .

#### Dolbeault cohomology.

Let @xmath be a complex supermanifold and consider a rank @xmath complex
vector bundle @xmath . Furthermore, we let

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

be the differential @xmath -forms on @xmath . In spirit of our
discussion given in 4 , we have a natural antiholomorphic exterior
derivative @xmath . A @xmath -connection on @xmath is defined by a
covariant differential

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

satisfying the Leibniz formula; see also Eq. ( \thechapter .45 ).
Locally, it is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath . The complex vector bundle @xmath is said to be
holomorphic if the @xmath -connection is flat, that is, if the
corresponding curvature vanishes,

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

In other words, @xmath defines a holomorphic structure on @xmath . Note
that ( \thechapter .6 ) is also called equation of motion of holomorphic
Chern-Simons (hCS) theory.

Let @xmath be the sheaf of solutions to ( \thechapter .6 ). The group
@xmath , where @xmath , is acting on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath , and without changing the holomorphic structure on @xmath
. Therefore, the Dolbeault cohomology set

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

parametrizes all different holomorphic structures on the complex vector
bundle @xmath .

#### Equivalence of Čech and Dolbeault pictures.

Let us now show that the above approaches to holomorphic vector bundles
are actually equivalent. This fact may be understood as a non-Abelian
generalization of Dolbeault’s theorem.

###### Theorem \thechapter.1.

Let @xmath be a complex supermanifold with an open Stein covering @xmath
and @xmath be a rank @xmath complex vector bundle over @xmath . Then
there is a one-to-one correspondence between @xmath and the subset of
@xmath consisting of those elements of @xmath representing vector
bundles which are smoothly equivalent to @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for some @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath be a rank @xmath complex vector bundle represented by
@xmath . Furthermore, consider the subset of @xmath consisting of those
elements @xmath obeying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath . Due to Eq. ( \thechapter .6 ), elements @xmath of @xmath are
locally of the form @xmath and glued together according to the above
formula. Hence, @xmath determines a zero-cochain @xmath with the above
property. This @xmath can in turn be used to define the transition
functions of a rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, @xmath . Clearly, the bundle @xmath defined by this @xmath is
smoothly equivalent to @xmath . Conversely, given @xmath as transition
functions of a holomorphic vector bundle @xmath which is smoothly
equivalent to @xmath , the @xmath s can always be written in the above
form and hence, one can reconstruct a differential @xmath -form @xmath
such that @xmath .

Bijectivity is shown by virtue of a short exact sequence of sheaves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined on any open subset @xmath on @xmath by @xmath
with @xmath . The map @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath which by
construction vanishes. The above sequence induces an exact sequence of
cohomology sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition, @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) parametrizes holomorphic
(respectively, smooth) vector bundles over @xmath . The kernel of @xmath
coincides with the subset of @xmath whose elements are mapped into the
class of @xmath representing holomorphic vector bundles which are
smoothly equivalent to @xmath . By virtue of the exactness of the
cohomology sequence, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

#### Remark.

In the following, we shall mostly be interested in complex vector
bundles which are trivial as smooth bundles. Furthermore, we also
restrict our discussion to rank @xmath complex vector bundles, although
it straightforwardly generalizes to rank @xmath .

### 7 Self-dual super Yang-Mills theory

Subject of this section is the discussion of @xmath -extended self-dual
SYM theory. We first present the Čech approach to holomorphic vector
bundles over supertwistor space and derive in this setting the field
equations of self-dual SYM theory on four-dimensional space-time.
Second, we reconsider the whole discussion in the Dolbeault picture. The
latter then also allows us to formulate appropriate action principles
for both, hCS theory on supertwistor space and self-dual SYM theory on
Euclidean four-dimensional space in the case of maximal supersymmetry,
that is, for @xmath .

#### Penrose-Ward transform.

Let us consider the double fibration ( \thechapter .36 ) and recall that
@xmath , i.e.,

  -- -- -- -------------------
           ( \thechapter .9)
  -- -- -- -------------------

where @xmath is the supertwistor space given by ( \thechapter .37 ) and
@xmath . Recall also the form of the two projections @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .10)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

We denote the coverings of @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Consider a rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle @xmath
and its pull-pack @xmath as defined in 2 . These bundles are
characterized by the transition functions @xmath on the intersection
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath . For notational simplicity, we shall use
the same letter, @xmath , for the transition functions of both bundles
in the following course of discussion. By definition of a pull-back,
@xmath is constant along @xmath . The relative tangent sheaf ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 If
one has a fibration @xmath , the relative tangent sheaf @xmath (sheaf of
vertical vector fields) is defined by the following short exact
sequence: @xmath @xmath is of rank @xmath and freely generated by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .11)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Here, we have again abbreviated @xmath and @xmath . In the sequel, we
shall write @xmath . ²¹ ²¹ 21 Here, we have just introduced the letter
@xmath as abbreviation for the relative tangent sheaf. However, it can
be put in a general context of integrable distributions as subsheaves of
the tangent sheaf. See 10 for details. Therefore, the transition
functions of @xmath are annihilated by the vector fields ( \thechapter
.11 ). Letting @xmath and @xmath be the anti-holomorphic parts of the
exterior derivatives on the supertwistor space and its correspondence
space, respectively, we have @xmath . Hence, the transition functions of
@xmath are also annihilated by @xmath .

As indicated, we assume that the bundle @xmath is smoothly trivial and
moreover @xmath -trivial, that is, holomorphically trivial when
restricted to any projective line @xmath . These conditions imply that
there exists some smooth @xmath -valued functions @xmath , which define
trivializations of @xmath over @xmath , such that @xmath can be
decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .12)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .13)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that in particular this formula implies that the @xmath s depend
holomorphically on @xmath . Applying the vector fields ( \thechapter .11
) to ( \thechapter .12 ), we realize that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must be – by an extension of Liouville’s theorem – at most linear in
@xmath . Therefore, we may introduce a Lie-algebra valued one-form
@xmath which has components only along @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .14)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

In fact, @xmath defines a relative connection

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .15)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which is flat. Here, @xmath are the relative differential one-forms on
the correspondence space.

Eqs. ( \thechapter .14 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .16)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The compatibility conditions for this linear system read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .17)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where we have defined the covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .18)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Eqs. ( \thechapter .17 ) are the constraint equations of @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM theory. Note that the first of those equations
represents the self-duality equation for the gauge potential @xmath ,
since

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .19)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) is symmetric in its indices.
Furthermore, @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) represents the
anti-self-dual (respectively, the self-dual) part of the field strength.
By virtue of ( \thechapter .17 ), the anti-self-dual part is put to
zero.

Next let us briefly discuss how to obtain the functions @xmath in (
\thechapter .16 ) from a given gauge potential. Formally, a solution is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .20)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Here, “ @xmath ” denotes the path-ordering symbol and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .21)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The contour @xmath is any real curve within an isotropic two-plane
@xmath from a point @xmath to a point @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .22)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

for @xmath ; the choice of the contour plays no role, since the
curvature is zero when restricted to the two-plane. Furthermore, @xmath
are some free parameters.

In 5 , we introduced an antiholomorphic involution @xmath corresponding
to Euclidean signature. Upon extending this involution to @xmath , that
is, upon requiring

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .23)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where dagger denotes Hermitian conjugation, one ends up with real
self-dual SYM fields. In particular, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .24)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath has been defined in ( \thechapter .74 ). This reduces the
gauge group @xmath to the unitary group @xmath . Unless otherwise
stated, we shall implicitly assume that ( \thechapter .23 ) has been
imposed. If one in addition requires that @xmath , the structure group
is reduced further to @xmath .

Before we are discussing the field expansions of the superfields @xmath
and @xmath , let us give some integral formulas

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .25)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the contour @xmath encircles @xmath . In fact, these contour
integrals give the explicit form of the Penrose-Ward transform.

#### Field expansions, field equations and action functional.

Let us stick to the @xmath case. The others are then obtained by
suitable truncations. Recall that the field content of @xmath self-dual
SYM theory consists of a (self-dual) gauge potential @xmath , four
positive chirality spinors @xmath , six scalars @xmath , four negative
chirality spinors @xmath and an anti-self-dual two-form @xmath , all in
the adjoint representation of @xmath . The circle refers to the lowest
component in the superfield expansions of the corresponding superfields
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
constraint equations ( \thechapter .17 ) can formally be solved by
setting

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .26)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Using Bianchi identities, we find the remaining fields

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .27)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

respectively. Here, we introduced the common abbreviation @xmath and
parentheses mean normalized symmetrization. Next we follow the
literature [ 107 , 108 , 76 ] and impose the transversal gauge,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .28)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

in order to remove the superfluous gauge degrees of freedom associated
with the odd coordinates @xmath . ²² ²² 22 See also Ref. [ 14 ] for a
more general setting. Putting it differently, this reduces the allowed
gauge transformations to ordinary gauge transformations. Furthermore,
this leads to the recursion operator @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .29)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Again by virtue of Bianchi identities, one arrives after a somewhat
lengthy calculation at the following set of recursion relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .30)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where, as before, parentheses mean normalized symmetrization while the
brackets denote normalized antisymmetrization of the enclosed indices.
²³ ²³ 23 Note that these equations resemble the supersymmetry
transformations, but nevertheless they should not be confused with them.
These equations determine all superfields to @xmath -st order, provided
one knows them to @xmath -th order in the odd coordinates. At this
point, it is helpful to present some formulas which simplify this
argumentation a lot. Consider some generic superfield @xmath . Its
explicit @xmath -expansion looks as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .31)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Furthermore, we have @xmath , where the bracket @xmath is a composite
expression of some superfields. For example, we have @xmath , with
@xmath . Let now

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .32)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Then we find by induction

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .33)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In case the recursion relation of @xmath was given by @xmath , as it
happens to be for @xmath , then @xmath and the superfield expansion is
of the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .34)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Using these expressions, one obtains the following results for the
superfields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .35)
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Upon substituting the superfield expansions ( \thechapter .35 ) into the
constraint equations ( \thechapter .17 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .36)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which are the @xmath self-dual SYM equations. The equations for less
supersymmetry are obtained from those by suitable truncations. We have
also introduced the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .37)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

We stress that Eqs. ( \thechapter .36 ) represent the field equations to
lowest order in the superfield expansions. With the help of the
recursion operator ( \thechapter .29 ), one may verify that they are in
one-to-one correspondence with the constraint equations ( \thechapter
.17 ); see also Ref. [ 76 ] for a detailed discussion.

Furthermore, one easily checks that the above field equations can be
derived from the following action functional:

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .38)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which has first been introduced by Siegel [ 232 ] .

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

Let us now try to understand the twistor analog of the action functional
( \thechapter .38 ). So far, we have worked in the Čech approach to
holomorphic vector bundles. In particular, we started with a smoothly
trivial holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over supertwistor space and
additionally required holomorphic triviality along any @xmath ; for the
sake of concreteness, we again stick to the @xmath case. As we have
learned in the previous section, there is another equivalent approach –
the Dolbeault approach. To switch to this picture, we need to find
@xmath , since @xmath is assumed to be smoothly trivial. Moreover,
within this approach we shall be able to write down an action functional
on supertwistor space yielding the functional ( \thechapter .38 ) after
performing suitable integrations. Up to now, it is not known how to
formulate an appropriate action principle within the Čech approach. This
is mainly due to the fact that the Čech approach makes the construction
manifestly on-shell: certain holomorphic functions (the transition
functions) on supertwistor space yield solutions to the equations of
motion of @xmath SYM theory via contour integrals of the form (
\thechapter .25 ).

First, let us make a more careful analysis of the real structure @xmath
as introduced in 5 . There we have seen that the fixed point set @xmath
– cf. also Eqs. ( \thechapter .78 ) – is a real slice @xmath
corresponding to Euclidean superspace. When restricting to @xmath , we
have the diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .39)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In fact, the map from @xmath with coordinates @xmath to @xmath with
coordinates @xmath is explicitly given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .40)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .41)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

These relations define a (smooth) projection

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .42)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Therefore, we may conclude that in the Euclidean setting no double
fibration like ( \thechapter .9 ) is needed. It is rather enough to
restrict the discussion to the nonholomorphic fibration ( \thechapter
.42 ). This, however, is a very special feature of the present setting
and we shall find other examples where double fibrations – even if
reality conditions are imposed – are inevitable.

Let us continue with the fibration ( \thechapter .42 ). The vector
fields ( \thechapter .11 ) which generate the relative tangent sheaf
@xmath do now, together with @xmath , generate the antiholomorphic
tangent sheaf @xmath , since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be rewritten
according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .43)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .44)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .45)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

This makes it obvious that @xmath . The matrix @xmath has been defined
in ( \thechapter .74 ). A short calculation reveals that the sheaf of
differential @xmath -forms on @xmath is, for instance, freely generated
by the sections

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .46)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which, in fact, are dual to @xmath . Here, we have introduced

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .47)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Thus, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .48)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where, as before, @xmath are the two sets covering the supertwistor
space.

After this digression, we can now proceed as in 7 and discuss
holomorphic vector bundles @xmath over @xmath which are smoothly trivial
and in addition @xmath -trivial. Eventually, one again finds a linear
system of the form ( \thechapter .16 ), that is,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .49)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath . But this time, @xmath and @xmath (and, of course, @xmath
, which is absent in the present gauge) are interpreted as components of
a differential @xmath -form @xmath , where the bundle @xmath is smoothly
equivalent to @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is nothing but a special case of Thm. \thechapter .1. Note that

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .50)
  -- -- -- --------------------

by smooth triviality of @xmath . By following the analysis of 7 , one
again reproduces the equations of motion of @xmath self-dual SYM theory.
So, we do not repeat the argumentation at this point.

Instead, we shall now change the trivialization of @xmath . In fact,
there exist matrix-valued functions @xmath such that ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 Recall
that @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .51)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

From ( \thechapter .51 ) it then follows that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .52)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is a globally well-defined matrix-valued function generating a gauge
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath            ( \thechapter .53)
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Thus, we end up with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .54)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which is gauge equivalent to ( \thechapter .49 ).

The compatibility conditions of the linear system ( \thechapter .54 )
are, of course, the field equations of hCS theory on the supertwistor
space @xmath . On @xmath , they read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .55)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

As in 7 , we now have to find the explicit superfield expansions of the
components @xmath and @xmath , respectively. However, their form is
fixed by the geometry of supertwistor space. Recall that @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -valued. Together with the fact that the
@xmath s take values in the bundle @xmath , this determines the
dependence of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath and @xmath [ 207 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .56)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Here, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is again the field
content of @xmath self-dual SYM theory. Note that, of course, the above
expansions are unique only up to gauge transformations generated by
group-valued functions which may depend on @xmath and @xmath . Also the
absence of terms to zeroth and first order in @xmath in the expansion of
@xmath is due to the existence of a gauge in which @xmath vanishes
identically. Moreover, not all coefficient fields are independent
degrees of freedom. Some of them are composite expressions,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .57)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which follow upon substituting the field expansions ( \thechapter .56 )
into the second equation of ( \thechapter .55 ). Again we have
abbreviated @xmath . The field expansions ( \thechapter .56 ) together
with the first equation of ( \thechapter .55 ) eventually reproduce (
\thechapter .36 ).

Now we have all ingredients to give the twistor analog of the action
functional ( \thechapter .38 ). In fact, we have just seen that the
equations of motion of hCS theory,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

reproduce the equations of motion of @xmath self-dual SYM theory.
Luckily, as was discussed in 4 of the previous chapter, the supertwistor
space @xmath is a formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. In particular, this
means that it admits a globally defined nowhere vanishing holomorphic
volume form @xmath . On the patches @xmath of @xmath , it is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .58)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Assuming that @xmath contains no antiholomorphic odd components and does
not depend on @xmath (see our above discussion), we may write down [ 264
, 266 ]

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .59)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the submanifold of @xmath constrained by @xmath . The
action functional ( \thechapter .59 ) of hCS theory represents the
twistor analog of ( \thechapter .38 ) we were looking for. Upon
substituting the field expansions ( \thechapter .56 ) into ( \thechapter
.59 ), integrating over the odd coordinates and over the Riemann sphere,
we eventually end up with ( \thechapter .38 ).

#### Summary.

Even though we have restricted our above discussion to the @xmath case,
one may equally well talk about the cases with less supersymmetry, i.e.,
the cases with @xmath . Of course, then the whole story is restricted to
the level of the equations of motion, as there are no appropriate action
principles. Nevertheless, we may collect all the things said above and
summarize as follows:

###### Theorem \thechapter.2.

There is a one-to-one correspondence between gauge equivalence classes
of local solutions to the @xmath -extended self-dual SYM equations on
four-dimensional space-time and equivalence classes of holomorphic
vector bundles @xmath over supertwistor space @xmath which are smoothly
trivial and holomorphically trivial on any projective line @xmath .

Putting it differently, by Thm. \thechapter .1. we let @xmath be the
moduli space of hCS theory on @xmath for vector bundles @xmath smoothly
equivalent to @xmath . Furthermore, we denote by @xmath the moduli space
of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory obtained from the solution
space by quotiening with respect to the group of gauge transformations.
Then we have a bijection

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .60)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

### 8 Other self-dual models in four dimensions

Above we have related @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory to hCS
theory on supertwistor space @xmath . The @xmath case turned out to be
very special in the sense of allowing to write down action functionals
for self-dual SYM and hCS theories. Clearly, the reason is the formal
Calabi-Yau property of @xmath . The natural question one may now pose is
that of extending the above approach to other geometries but at the same
time keeping the formal Calabi-Yau property. One such class of
geometries is weighted projective superspaces [ 266 , 208 ] . In fact,
they are natural extensions of the projective superspace @xmath . The
following discussion is based on the work done together with Alexander
Popov [ 208 ] .

#### Weighted projective superspaces.

First, consider ordinary weighted projective spaces. They are defined by
some @xmath -action on the complex space @xmath . By letting @xmath be
coordinates on @xmath , we define the weighted projective space @xmath
for @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .61)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the @xmath -action is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .62)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Clearly, what we have just defined is a toric variety and as such it
need not be a manifold. In general, there may be nontrivial fixed points
under coordinate identifications leading to singularities. However, we
shall ignore this subtlety at this point and assume that the generic
expression ( \thechapter .61 ) is a complex manifold. Anyhow, our later
discussions will be unaffected by this issue since, in spirit of our
above discussion, we shall be considering only certain subsets which are
always manifolds.

In analogy to @xmath from Chap. \thechapter , we define the weighted
projective superspace @xmath for @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .63)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Furthermore, by extending the Euler sequence ( \thechapter .62 ) to the
present setting (see, e.g., [ 122 ] for the purely even case), one may
readily deduce that the first Chern class is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .64)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath . Hence, for appropriate numbers @xmath and @xmath , the
weighted projective superspace @xmath becomes a formal Calabi-Yau
supermanifold. Note also that with this definition, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

For the sake of concreteness, let us now consider an open subset of
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .65)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

This space can be identified with

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .66)
  -- -- -- --------------------

and as such, it can be covered by two patches, which we denote by @xmath
. Obviously, for the particular combination @xmath , it becomes a formal
Calabi-Yau supermanifold. In the following, we shall only be interested
in this case. Let @xmath be homogeneous coordinates on @xmath . Since
the body of @xmath is the twistor space @xmath , we may take as local
coordinates ( \thechapter .15 ) together with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .67)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which are related by @xmath and @xmath on the intersection @xmath . Note
that as even coordinates on @xmath either @xmath or @xmath can be used
if proper reality conditions as those discussed in 5 and in 7 ,
respectively, have been imposed. Therefore, we can again take @xmath and
@xmath of ( \thechapter .44 ) as even generators of the antiholomorphic
tangent sheaf @xmath .

Having given all the ingredients, we may now consider hCS theory on
@xmath . Let @xmath be a smoothly trivial rank @xmath complex vector
bundle over @xmath equipped with a holomorphic structure @xmath , that
is, @xmath is subject to ( \thechapter .6 ). Furthermore, by virtue of
the twistor approach, we shall assume that there exists a gauge in which
the component @xmath is zero. This corresponds to the holomorphic
triviality on any @xmath of the holomorphic vector bundle which is
associated to any solution of hCS theory. The equations of motion (
\thechapter .6 ) of hCS theory on the patches @xmath of @xmath are again
given by ( \thechapter .55 ), since there exists a gauge in which @xmath
does neither contain antiholomorphic odd components nor depend on @xmath
. Let us now discuss particular examples.

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

Consider the case @xmath and @xmath , where the fermionic coordinates
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -valued, respectively.
Therefore, the components @xmath and @xmath of the @xmath -form @xmath
are again @xmath - and @xmath -valued. As before, this fixes the
dependence of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath and @xmath up to gauge
transformations. In particular, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .68)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath has been defined in ( \thechapter .45 ). As before, not all
component fields are independent degrees of freedom. Upon substituting
the above expansions into ( \thechapter .55 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .69)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The field equations resulting from ( \thechapter .55 ) are then easily
obtained to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .70)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

As one may check, these equations follow also from the action functional

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .71)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which can be obtained from ( \thechapter .59 ) by integration over the
odd coordinates and over the sphere @xmath . Note that this action has
an obvious supersymmetry the transformation laws being

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .72)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath is a constant (anticommuting) spinor. The action describes
a truncation of @xmath self-dual SYM theory for which all the scalars
and three of the dotted and three of the undotted fermions are put to
zero.

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

Now we consider the case @xmath , i.e., the odd coordinates @xmath take
values in @xmath . The equations of motion of hCS theory on @xmath have
the same form ( \thechapter .55 ). Again, the functional dependence on
@xmath and @xmath is fixed up to gauge transformations by the geometry
of @xmath . That is, this dependence has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .73)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

together with

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .74)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The remaining nontrivial equations read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .75)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath has been introduced in ( \thechapter .37 ). The associated
action functional is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .76)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and can be obtained from ( \thechapter .59 ). Note that formally (
\thechapter .76 ) looks as the bosonic truncation of the self-dual
@xmath SYM theory, i.e., all the spinors and four of the six scalars of
self-dual @xmath SYM theory are put to zero. However, in ( \thechapter
.76 ) the parity of the scalars @xmath is different, as they are
Graßmann odd. To understand their nature, note that in the expansions (
\thechapter .73 ) we have two Graßmann odd vectors @xmath which satisfy
the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .77)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

following from ( \thechapter .55 ). Solutions to these equations
describe tangent vectors @xmath (with assigned odd parity) to the
solution space of the self-duality equations @xmath [ 263 , 245 ] .
However, due to the first equation of ( \thechapter .74 ) (which solves
the first equation of ( \thechapter .77 ) and reduces the second to
@xmath ), the @xmath s are projected to zero in the moduli space of
solutions to the equations @xmath . By choosing @xmath , we remain with
the equations

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .78)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which can be obtained from the Lorentz-invariant Siegel action [ 232 ]

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .79)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

describing self-dual YM theory.

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

Finally, we want to discuss the case in which the odd coordinate @xmath
has weight four and @xmath weight zero, i.e., we consider @xmath .
Proceeding as in the previous two paragraphs, we obtain the following
field expansions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .80)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

together with the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .81)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The field equations of this theory read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .82)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

In this case, the action functional from which these equations arise is

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .83)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

This time, the multiplet contains a space-time vector @xmath and an
anti-self-dual two-form @xmath which are both Graßmann odd. Such fields
are well known from topological YM theories [ 263 , 245 ] . In this
respect, the model ( \thechapter .82 ), ( \thechapter .83 ) can be
understood as a truncated self-dual sector of these theories. One may,
of course, also consider more than just two fermionic coordinates in
order to enlarge the multiplet. This may lead to other truncations of
topological YM theories. We will come to related issues when dealing
with (truncated) self-dual SYM hierarchies in Chap. \thechapter . Note
that the above constructions have been formalized in [ 222 ] in the
context of exotic supermanifolds.

## Chapter \thechapter Supersymmetric Bogomolny monopole equations

A pproximately two decades ago, it has been conjectured by Ward [ 256 ,
257 , 258 ] that all integrable models in less than four space-time
dimensions can be obtained from the self-dual YM equations in four
dimensions. Typical examples of such systems are the nonlinear
Schrödinger equation, the Korteweg-de Vries equation, the sine-Gordon
model, etc. All of these models follow from the self-dual YM equations
by incorporating suitable algebraic ansätze for the self-dual gauge
potential followed by a dimensional reduction. Also the Bogomolny
monopole equations on @xmath , describing static Yang-Mills-Higgs
monopoles in the Prasad-Sommerfield limit, may be added to this list. In
fact, Hitchin showed [ 113 ] that the Bogomolny monopole equations can
be described by using twistorial methods. He constructed a twistor space
– the so-called mini-twistor space – corresponding to @xmath .
Geometrically, it is the space of oriented lines in @xmath .
Furthermore, he then gave the construction of a Penrose-Ward transform
relating equivalence classes of certain holomorphic vector bundles over
mini-twistor space to gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the
Bogomolny monopole equations. Our subsequent discussion is devoted to an
extension of Hitchin’s approach to a supersymmetric setting. It is based
on the work done together with Alexander Popov and Christian Sämann [
210 ] . We will obtain the mini-supertwistor space, which leads us to a
twistorial description of the supersymmetrized Bogomolny model. To jump
ahead of our story a bit the mini-supertwistor space can be considered
as an open subset of the weighted projective superspace @xmath and as
such it is a formally Calabi-Yau; cf. also 8 . Furthermore, on the way
of our discussion we will meet with the notion of Cauchy-Riemann
structures (see, e.g., Ref. [ 143 ] for the purely even case) which
naturally generalize the notion of complex structures. This allows us to
use tools familiar from complex geometry.

### 9 Cauchy-Riemann supermanifolds

The supersymmetric Bogomolny monopole equations we are interested in are
obtained from the four-dimensional @xmath self-dual SYM equations by a
dimensional reduction @xmath . In this section, we study in detail the
meaning of this reduction on the level of the supertwistor space. Note
that we shall always be working in the real setting as discussed in 7 .
In particular, we find that the supertwistor space @xmath , when
interpreted as the real manifold @xmath , reduces to the space @xmath .
As a complex manifold, however, @xmath reduces to the rank @xmath
holomorphic vector bundle @xmath . Due to this difference, the twistor
correspondence gets more involved. For instance, we need a double
fibration. We also show that @xmath can be equipped with so-called
Cauchy-Riemann structures.

#### Dimensional reduction @xmath.

It is well known that the Bogomolny equations on @xmath describing BPS
monopoles [ 58 , 212 ] can be obtained from the self-dual YM equations
on @xmath by demanding the components of a gauge potential to be
independent of @xmath and by putting the four-component of the gauge
potential to be the Higgs field [ 168 , 113 , 21 ] . Obviously, one can
similarly reduce the @xmath self-dual SYM equations ( \thechapter .36 )
on @xmath by imposing the @xmath -invariance condition on all the fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the supermultiplet and obtain supersymmetric Bogomolny equations on
@xmath . Recall that both @xmath self-dual SYM theory and @xmath SYM
theory have an @xmath R-symmetry group. In the case of the full @xmath
SYM theory, the R-symmetry group and supersymmetry get enlarged to
@xmath and @xmath supersymmetry by a reduction from four to three
dimensions, cf. Ref. [ 73 ] . However, the situation in the
dimensionally reduced @xmath self-dual SYM theory is more involved since
there is no parity symmetry interchanging left-handed and right-handed
fields, and only the @xmath subgroup of @xmath is manifest as an
R-symmetry of the Bogomolny model.

Recall that on @xmath we may use the complex coordinates @xmath
satisfying the reality conditions induced by ( \thechapter .78 ) or the
real coordinates @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

This choice differs from the one given in ( \thechapter .79 ) by a
change of coordinates. However, it is most convenient for our subsequent
discussion. It will also yield a better comparability with related
literature.

Translations generated by the vector field @xmath are isometries of
@xmath and by taking the quotient with respect to the action of the
Abelian group

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

generated by @xmath , we obtain the superspace @xmath . Recall that the
eight odd complex coordinates @xmath satisfy certain reality conditions
induced by ( \thechapter .78 ). The vector field @xmath is trivially
lifted to @xmath and therefore the supertwistor space, considered as the
smooth supermanifold @xmath , is reduced to @xmath . In other words,
smooth @xmath -invariant functions on @xmath can be considered as “free”
smooth functions on the supermanifold @xmath .

Recall that the rotation group @xmath of Euclidean four-dimensional
space is locally isomorphic to @xmath . Upon dimensional reduction to
three dimensions, the rotation group @xmath of @xmath with @xmath is
locally @xmath , which is the diagonal group @xmath . Therefore, the
distinction between undotted, i.e., @xmath , and dotted, i.e., @xmath ,
indices disappears. This implies that one can relabel the bosonic
coordinates @xmath by @xmath and split them as

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

into symmetric

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

and antisymmetric

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

parts. More abstractly, this splitting corresponds to the decomposition
@xmath of the irreducible real vector representation @xmath of the group
@xmath into two irreducible real representations @xmath and @xmath of
the group @xmath . For future use, we also introduce the derivations

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

which read explicitly as

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Altogether, we thus have

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

#### Holomorphic reduction @xmath.

The vector field @xmath yields a free twistor space action of the
Abelian group @xmath which is the real part of the holomorphic action of
the complex group @xmath . In other words, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .9)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

in the coordinates @xmath for @xmath on @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .10)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is a holomorphic vector field on @xmath . Similarly, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .11)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath . For holomorphic functions @xmath on
@xmath we clearly have @xmath , and therefore @xmath -invariant
holomorphic functions on @xmath can be considered as “free” holomorphic
functions on a reduced space @xmath obtained as the quotient space of
@xmath by the action of the complex Abelian group @xmath generated by
@xmath .

In the purely even case, the space @xmath was called mini-twistor space
[ 113 ] and we shall refer to @xmath as the mini-supertwistor space. To
sum up, the reduction of the supertwistor correspondence induced by the
@xmath -action is described by the following diagram:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .12)
  -- -- -- --------------------

Here, “ @xmath ” symbolizes projections generated by the action of the
groups @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is the canonical projection. The
projection @xmath will be described momentarily.

#### Geometry of mini-supertwistor space.

It is not difficult to see that the functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .13)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

are constant along the @xmath -orbits in @xmath and thus descend to the
patches @xmath covering the (orbit) space @xmath . On the overlap @xmath
, we have

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .14)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which coincides with the transformation laws of canonical coordinates on
the total space

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .15)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

of the holomorphic vector bundle

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .16)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Clearly, this space is a formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. Hence, it
comes with a globally well-defined nowhere vanishing holomorphic volume
form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .17)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The body of this supermanifold is the mini-twistor space [ 113 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the space @xmath can be considered as an open subset of the
weighted projective superspace @xmath .

The real structure @xmath (cf. our discussion given in 5 ) on @xmath
induces a real structure on @xmath acting on local coordinates by the
formula

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .18)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the matrix @xmath has been defined in ( \thechapter .74 ). From (
\thechapter .18 ), one sees that @xmath has no fixed points in @xmath
but leaves invariant projective lines @xmath defined by the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            @xmath            ( \thechapter .19)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

for fixed @xmath . Here, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are coordinates on
@xmath and @xmath denote again the canonical patches covering @xmath .

By using the coordinates ( \thechapter .4 ), we can rewrite (
\thechapter .19 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .20)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the explicit form of @xmath has been given in 1 . In fact, Eqs. (
\thechapter .20 ) are the incidence relations which lead to the double
fibration

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .21)
  -- -- -- --------------------

where @xmath , @xmath is again the canonical projection onto @xmath and
the projection @xmath is defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .22)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are given in ( \thechapter .20 ).
The diagram ( \thechapter .21 ), which is a part of ( \thechapter .12 ),
describes the following proposition:

###### Proposition \thechapter.1.

There exist the following geometric correspondences:

  ------ -------------------------- -------- ---------------------------
  (i)    point @xmath in @xmath     @xmath   oriented @xmath in @xmath
  (ii)   @xmath -invariant @xmath   @xmath   point @xmath in @xmath
  ------ -------------------------- -------- ---------------------------

#### Cauchy-Riemann supermanifolds.

Consider the double fibration ( \thechapter .21 ). The correspondence
space @xmath is the smooth @xmath -dimensional supermanifold. As it is
of “wrong” dimensionality, it cannot be a complex supermanifold but it
can be understood as a so-called Cauchy-Riemann (CR) supermanifold,
i.e., as a partially complex supermanifold. Recall that a CR structure
on a smooth supermanifold @xmath of real dimension @xmath is a locally
direct subsheaf @xmath of rank @xmath of the complexified tangent sheaf
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath is involutive (integrable), i.e.,
@xmath is closed with respect to the Lie superbracket. Of course, the
distribution @xmath is integrable if @xmath is integrable. The pair
@xmath is called a CR supermanifold of dimension @xmath , of rank @xmath
and of codimension @xmath . In particular, a CR structure on @xmath in
the special case @xmath is a complex structure on @xmath . Thus, the
notion of CR supermanifolds generalizes that of complex supermanifolds.

Given a CR supermanifold @xmath , we let @xmath be the sheaf of
complex-valued smooth differential @xmath -forms. Then we define locally
free subsheaves of @xmath -modules by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .23)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Furthermore, we set @xmath . Clearly, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now define complex-valued differential @xmath -forms @xmath on @xmath
according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .24)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Then we can introduce a natural family of @xmath -operators, i.e.,
@xmath by requiring that the diagrams

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                    @xmath            @xmath            
                    @xmath            @xmath            
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath            @xmath            
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath            @xmath            
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath            @xmath            
                    @xmath            @xmath            
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

should commute.

#### Cauchy-Riemann supertwistors.

Let us now come back to our example ( \thechapter .21 ). On the manifold
@xmath , one can introduce several CR structures. For instance, we may
choose

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .25)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for the distribution

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .26)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Another one is obtained by setting

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .27)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .28)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In the following, we shall suppress the explicit appearance of @xmath .
In spirit of LeBrun’s [ 143 ] , we call @xmath the CR supertwistor
space. ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 In the purely even case, a CR five-dimensional manifold
can be constructed as a sphere bundle over an arbitrary
three-dimensional manifold with conformal metric [ 143 ] . Clearly, all
the criteria for a CR structure are satisfied for our above two choices
and moreover, in both cases the CR structures have rank @xmath .

Let us denote the covering of @xmath by @xmath . Up to now, we have used
the coordinates @xmath or @xmath on the two patches @xmath . More
appropriate for the distribution ( \thechapter .28 ) are, however, the
coordinates ( \thechapter .19 ) together with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .29)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

In terms of the coordinates ( \thechapter .4 ) and @xmath , we can
rewrite ( \thechapter .19 ) and ( \thechapter .29 ) concisely as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .30)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the factors @xmath have been given in ( \thechapter .45 ). Note
that @xmath is real and all the other coordinates in ( \thechapter .30 )
are complex. The relations between the coordinates on @xmath follow
directly from their definitions ( \thechapter .30 ).

The coordinates @xmath and @xmath have already appeared in ( \thechapter
.20 ) since @xmath is a complex subsupermanifold of @xmath . Recall that
formulas ( \thechapter .22 ) together with ( \thechapter .30 ) define a
projection

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .31)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

onto mini-supertwistor space @xmath . The fibers over points @xmath of
this projection are real one-dimensional spaces @xmath parametrized by
@xmath . Note that the pull-back to @xmath of the real structure @xmath
on @xmath given in ( \thechapter .18 ) reverses the orientation of each
line @xmath , since @xmath .

In order to clarify the geometry of the fibration ( \thechapter .31 ),
we note that the body @xmath of the supermanifold @xmath can be
considered as the sphere bundle

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .32)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

whose fibers at points @xmath are spheres of unit vectors in @xmath [
113 ] . Since this bundle is trivial, its projection onto @xmath is
obviously @xmath . Moreover, the complex two-dimensional mini-twistor
space @xmath can be described as the space of all oriented lines in
@xmath . That is, any such line @xmath is defined by a unit vector
@xmath in the direction of @xmath and a shortest vector @xmath from the
origin in @xmath to @xmath , and one can show [ 113 ] that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .33)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The fibers of the projection @xmath are the orbits of the action of the
group @xmath on @xmath given by @xmath for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .34)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Recall that @xmath is a (real) hypersurface in the twistor space @xmath
. On the other hand, @xmath is a complex two-dimensional submanifold of
@xmath and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we have in the supertwistor case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The formulas given in ( \thechapter .19 ) and ( \thechapter .29 ),
respectively, define a coordinate transformation @xmath on @xmath . From
corresponding inverse formulas defining the transformation @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .35)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

as well as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .36)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath . Thus, when working in the coordinates @xmath on @xmath ,
we will use the even vector fields @xmath with @xmath and the odd vector
fields @xmath together with their complex conjugates @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Note that the vector field @xmath is real!

Hence, we learn that when using the coordinates @xmath , the CR tangent
sheaf @xmath is freely generated by

  -- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .37)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------------------

while @xmath is generated by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .38)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

It is not too difficult to see that forms dual to the vector fields (
\thechapter .37 ) and ( \thechapter .38 ) are

  -- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .39)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .40)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath has been given in ( \thechapter .74 ). The exterior
derivative @xmath on @xmath reads as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .41)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note again that @xmath and @xmath are both real. To homogenize the
notation later on, we shall also use @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.

### 10 Partially holomorphic Chern-Simons theory

We have discussed how mini-supertwistor and CR supertwistor spaces arise
via dimensional reductions from supertwistor space of four-dimensional
space-time. Subject of this section is the discussion of a
generalization of Chern-Simons theory and its relatives to this setup.
We call the theory we are about to introduce partially holomorphic
Chern-Simons theory or phCS theory for short. Roughly speaking, this
theory is a mixture of Chern-Simons and holomorphic Chern-Simons (hCS)
theory on the CR supertwistor space @xmath which has one real and two
complex even dimensions. This theory is a reduction of hCS theory on
@xmath . As we will show below, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the moduli space of solutions to the equations of motion of phCS
theory on @xmath and the moduli space of solutions to the
supersymmetrized Bogomolny equations on @xmath , quite similar to Thm.
\thechapter .2. for @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory.

#### Partially flat connections.

Let @xmath be a smooth supermanifold of real dimension @xmath and @xmath
the complexified tangent sheaf of @xmath . A locally direct subsheaf
@xmath is integrable if i) @xmath has constant rank @xmath and ii)
@xmath and @xmath are closed under the Lie superbracket. Note that a CR
structure is the special case of an integrable distribution @xmath with
@xmath .

For any smooth function @xmath on @xmath , let @xmath denote the
restriction of @xmath to @xmath , i.e., @xmath is the composition

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .42)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath denotes the sheaf of smooth complex-valued differential
one-forms dual to @xmath ; cf., e.g., Rawnsley’s discussion for the
purely even case [ 213 ] . The operator @xmath can be extended to act on
relative differential @xmath -forms denoted by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .43)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Let @xmath be a complex vector bundle over @xmath . A connection on
@xmath along the distribution @xmath – a @xmath -connection – is an even
morphism of sheaves

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .44)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

satisfying the Leibniz formula

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .45)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is a local section of @xmath and @xmath is a local smooth
function. This @xmath -connection extends to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .46)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath . Locally, @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .47)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the standard @xmath -valued @xmath -connection one-form @xmath has
components only along the distribution @xmath . As usual, @xmath
naturally induces

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .48)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which is the curvature of @xmath . We say that @xmath is flat, if @xmath
. For a flat @xmath , the pair @xmath is called a @xmath -flat vector
bundle. In particular, if @xmath is a CR structure then @xmath is a CR
vector bundle. Moreover, if @xmath is the integrable sheaf @xmath on
some complex supermanifold @xmath then the @xmath -flat complex vector
bundle @xmath is a holomorphic bundle.

#### Field equations on the CR supertwistor space.

Consider the CR supertwistor space @xmath and a distribution @xmath
generated by the vector fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath from the CR
structure @xmath and @xmath . This distribution is integrable since all
conditions described in 10 are satisfied, e.g., the only nonzero
commutator is

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .49)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and therefore @xmath is closed under the Lie superbracket. Also,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .50)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is of (real) rank @xmath and hence integrable. The vector field @xmath
is a basis section for @xmath over the patches @xmath . Note that
mini-supertwistor space @xmath is a subsupermanifold of @xmath
transversal to the leaves of @xmath and furthermore, @xmath . Thus, we
have an integrable distribution @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .51)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

on the CR supertwistor space @xmath and we will denote by @xmath its
part generated by the even vector fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .52)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Let @xmath be a trivial rank @xmath complex vector bundle over @xmath
and @xmath a @xmath -connection one-form on @xmath with @xmath given by
( \thechapter .51 ). Consider now the subspace @xmath of @xmath which is
parametrized by the same even coordinates but only the holomorphic odd
coordinates of @xmath , i.e., on @xmath , all objects are holomorphic in
@xmath . As it was already noted, the mini-supertwistor space is a
formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. In particular, this ensures the
existence of a holomorphic volume form on @xmath . Moreover, @xmath and
the pull-back @xmath of this form is globally defined on @xmath .
Locally, on the patches @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .53)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

This well-defined integral form allows us to integrate on @xmath by
pairing it with elements from @xmath . Assume that @xmath neither
contains antiholomorphic odd components nor depends on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .54)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

that is, @xmath . Now, we introduce a CS-type action functional

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .55)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .56)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is the @xmath -part of the exterior derivative @xmath on @xmath .

The action ( \thechapter .55 ) leads to the CS-type field equations

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .57)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which are the equations of motion of partially holomorphic Chern-Simons
(phCS) theory. In the nonholonomic basis @xmath of the distribution
@xmath over @xmath , these equations read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .58)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where the components @xmath have been defined in ( \thechapter .54 ).

#### Equivalence to supersymmetric Bogomolny equations.

Note that from ( \thechapter .37 ) and ( \thechapter .38 ), it follows
that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .59)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and therefore @xmath , @xmath and @xmath take values in the bundles
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Together with the definitions
( \thechapter .54 ) of @xmath and the fact that the @xmath s are @xmath
-valued, this determines the dependence of @xmath on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath to be

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .60)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with the abbreviation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .61)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and

  -- -- -------- -- --------------------
        @xmath      ( \thechapter .62)
  -- -- -------- -- --------------------

The expansions ( \thechapter .61 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ) are defined
up to gauge transformations generated by group-valued functions which
may depend on @xmath and @xmath . In particular, it is assumed in this
twistor correspondence that for solutions to ( \thechapter .58 ), there
exists a gauge in which terms of zeroth and first order in @xmath are
absent in @xmath . Recall that in the Čech approach, this corresponds to
the holomorphic triviality of the bundle defined by such solutions when
restricted to projective lines. Putting it differently, we consider a
subset in the set of all solutions of phCS theory on @xmath , and we
will always mean this subset when speaking about solutions to phCS
theory.

Note that in ( \thechapter .61 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ), all
coefficient fields @xmath depend only on @xmath . Furthermore, not all
of them represent independent degrees of freedom. Upon substituting the
superfield expansions ( \thechapter .61 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ) into
the first two equations of ( \thechapter .58 ), we find the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .63)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

showing that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are composite fields.
Furthermore, the field @xmath can be decomposed into its symmetric part,
denoted by @xmath , and its antisymmetric part, proportional to @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .64)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Hence, we have recovered the covariant derivative @xmath and the
(scalar) Higgs field @xmath . Defining

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .65)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

we have thus obtained the supermultiplet in three dimensions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall again abbreviate @xmath . Eqs. ( \thechapter .58 ) together
with the field expansions ( \thechapter .61 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ),
the constraints ( \thechapter .63 ) and the definitions ( \thechapter
.64 ) and ( \thechapter .65 ) yield the maximally supersymmetrically
extended Bogomolny monopole equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .66)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which can also be derived from Eqs. ( \thechapter .36 ) by demanding
that all the fields in ( \thechapter .36 ) are independent of the
coordinate @xmath . Here, we have introduced the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .67)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that ( \thechapter .53 ) can be rewritten as @xmath , where the
differential one-forms @xmath have been given in ( \thechapter .39 ).
Substituting this expression and the expansions ( \thechapter .61 ) and
( \thechapter .61 ) into the action ( \thechapter .55 ), we arrive after
a straightforward calculation at the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .68)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

producing ( \thechapter .66 ).

#### PhCS theory in the Čech description.

Our starting point in 10 was to consider a trivial complex vector bundle
@xmath over @xmath endowed with a @xmath -connection. Such a @xmath
-connection @xmath on @xmath is flat if @xmath solves Eqs. ( \thechapter
.57 ), and then @xmath is a @xmath -flat bundle in the Dolbeault
description. As for holomorphic vector bundles (cf. Sec. 6 ), one may
turn to the Čech description of @xmath -flat bundles in which the
connection one-form @xmath disappears and all the information is hidden
in a transition function. In fact, let @xmath be a rank @xmath complex
vector bundle over some smooth supermanifold @xmath and denote by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .69)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

the moduli space of phCS theory, where @xmath is the sheaf of solutions
to ( \thechapter .57 ) and @xmath , as before. Furthermore, we shall
need the subsheaf @xmath of @xmath -functions on @xmath , that is,
@xmath for @xmath as well as the sheaf @xmath . Quite generically, we
may then state the following theorem:

###### Theorem \thechapter.1.

Let @xmath be a smooth supermanifold with an open Stein covering @xmath
and @xmath be a rank @xmath complex vector bundle over @xmath . Then
there is a one-to-one correspondence between @xmath and the subset of
@xmath consisting of those elements of @xmath representing vector
bundles which are smoothly equivalent to @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for some @xmath .

The proof is similar to the one of Thm. \thechapter .1. For that reason,
we shall omit it here and instead continue with our example.

Consider our smoothly trivial vector bundle @xmath from above. Since the
@xmath -connection one-form @xmath is flat, it is given as a pure gauge
configuration on each patch and we have

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .70)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

together with the gluing condition

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .71)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for the trivial bundle @xmath . Therefore, we can define a @xmath -flat
complex vector bundle @xmath with the canonical flat @xmath -connection
@xmath and the transition function

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .72)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The condition @xmath reads explicitly as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .73)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Recall that the vector fields appearing in the first line generate the
antiholomorphic distribution @xmath , which is the chosen CR structure.
In other words, the bundle @xmath is holomorphic along the
mini-supertwistor space @xmath and flat along the fibers of the
projection @xmath as follows directly from second line of ( \thechapter
.73 ). Let us now additionally assume that @xmath is @xmath -trivial,
that is, holomorphically trivial when restricted to any projective line
@xmath given by ( \thechapter .20 ). Recall that this assumption was
already used in ( \thechapter .62 ). As before, this extra ingredient
guarantees the existence of a gauge in which the component @xmath of
@xmath vanishes. Hence, there exist @xmath -valued functions @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .74)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .75)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is a matrix-valued function generating a gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .76)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which acts on the gauge potential according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .77)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

In this new gauge, one generically has @xmath .

Note that ( \thechapter .70 ) can be rewritten as the following linear
system of differential equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .78)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The compatibility conditions of this linear system are Eqs. (
\thechapter .58 ). This means that for any solution @xmath to (
\thechapter .58 ), one can construct solutions @xmath to ( \thechapter
.78 ) and, conversely, for any given @xmath obtained via a splitting (
\thechapter .72 ) of a transition function @xmath , one can construct a
solution ( \thechapter .70 ) to ( \thechapter .58 ).

Similarly, Eqs. ( \thechapter .77 ) can be rewritten as the gauge
equivalent linear system

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .79)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Note that due to the holomorphicity of @xmath in @xmath and the
condition @xmath on @xmath , the components @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
must take the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .80)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with @xmath -independent superfields @xmath and @xmath . Introducing the
first-order differential operators @xmath and @xmath , we arrive at the
following compatibility conditions of the linear system ( \thechapter
.79 ):

  -- -- -------- -------- --------------------
        @xmath            ( \thechapter .81)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------------------

These equations also follow from ( \thechapter .57 ) after substituting
the expansions ( \thechapter .80 ). These equations can be understood as
the constraint equations of our supersymmetric Bogomolny model. In fact,
proceeding as in 7 , we can derive all the superfields together with
their field expansions and the equations of motion they are subject to.
Eventually, one finds ( \thechapter .66 ). So, let us only sketch this
way.

Eqs. ( \thechapter .81 ) can equivalently be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .82)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note that the first equation in ( \thechapter
.81 ) immediately shows that @xmath and thus the contraction of the
first equation of ( \thechapter .82 ) with @xmath gives @xmath . The
Bianchi identities for the differential operators @xmath and @xmath
yield in a straightforward manner further field equations, which allow
us to identify the superfields @xmath and @xmath with the spinors @xmath
and the scalars @xmath , respectively. Moreover, @xmath is given by
@xmath and @xmath is defined by @xmath . Collecting the above
information, one obtains the equations of motion for the superfields
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which take the
same form as ( \thechapter .66 ) but with all the fields now being
superfields. Thus, the projection of the superfields onto the zeroth
order components of their @xmath -expansions gives ( \thechapter .66 ).

To extract the physical field content from the superfields, we need
their explicit expansions in powers of @xmath . For this, one again
imposes the transversal gauge condition ( \thechapter .28 ). The
constraint equations ( \thechapter .82 ) together with the Bianchi
identities yield the recursion relations analogously to Eqs. (
\thechapter .30 ). In fact, one simply needs to dimensionally reduce (
\thechapter .30 ) to obtain the recursion relations for the present
setting. Then by iterating the equations one may compute the superfield
expansions. Furthermore, as in 7 one deduces the one-to-one
correspondence between the constraint equations ( \thechapter .82 ) and
the field equations ( \thechapter .66 ). We shall come back to this
issue when dealing with explicit solution construction algorithms for
Eqs. ( \thechapter .66 ) in Sec. 13 .

### 11 Holomorphic BF theory

In the preceding section, we have defined a theory on the CR
supertwistor space @xmath entering into the double fibration (
\thechapter .21 ) which we called partially holomorphic Chern-Simons
theory. We have shown that this theory is equivalent to a supersymmetric
Bogomolny-type Yang-Mills-Higgs theory in three Euclidean dimensions.
The purpose of this section is to show, that one can also introduce a
theory (including an action functional) on mini-supertwistor space
@xmath , which is equivalent to phCS theory on @xmath . Thus, one can
define at each level of the double fibration ( \thechapter .21 ) a
theory accompanied by a proper action functional and, moreover, these
three theories are all equivalent.

#### Field equations of hBF theory on @xmath.

Consider the mini-supertwistor space @xmath . Let @xmath be a trivial
rank @xmath complex vector bundle over @xmath with a connection one-form
@xmath . Assume that its @xmath -part @xmath contains no antiholomorphic
odd components and does not depend on @xmath , that is, @xmath and
@xmath . Recall that on @xmath we have a holomorphic volume form @xmath
which is locally given by ( \thechapter .17 ). Hence, we can define a
holomorphic BF (hBF) type theory – as introduced and discussed in Refs.
[ 206 , 126 , 128 , 27 ] – on @xmath with the action

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .83)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Here, @xmath is a scalar field in the adjoint representation of the
group @xmath , @xmath is the antiholomorphic part of the exterior
derivative on @xmath and @xmath the @xmath -part of the curvature
two-form. The space @xmath is the subsupermanifold of @xmath constrained
by @xmath .

The equations of motion following from the action functional (
\thechapter .83 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .84)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

These equations as well as the Lagrangian in ( \thechapter .83 ) can be
obtained from Eqs. ( \thechapter .57 ) and the Lagrangian in (
\thechapter .55 ), respectively, by imposing the condition @xmath and
identifying

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .85)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that @xmath behaves on @xmath as a scalar. Thus, ( \thechapter .84
) can be obtained from ( \thechapter .57 ) by demanding invariance of
all fields under the action of the group @xmath from 9 such that @xmath
.

#### Čech description.

When restricted to the patches @xmath , Eqs. ( \thechapter .84 ) can be
solved by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .86)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is a holomorphic @xmath -valued function on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .87)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

On the intersection @xmath , we have the gluing conditions

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .88)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

as @xmath is a trivial bundle. From ( \thechapter .88 ), we learn that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .89)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

can be identified with the holomorphic transition function of a bundle
@xmath with the canonical holomorphic structure @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .90)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

i.e., @xmath and @xmath . Note that the pull-back @xmath of the bundle
@xmath to the space @xmath can be identified with the bundle @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .91)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with the transition function @xmath if one additionally assumes that
@xmath is @xmath -trivial, that is, holomorphically trivial on any
@xmath . Recall that the transition functions of the bundle @xmath do
not depend on @xmath and therefore they can always be considered as the
pull-backs of transition functions of a bundle @xmath over @xmath .

#### Moduli space.

By construction, @xmath is a @xmath -valued function generating trivial
infinitesimal gauge transformations of @xmath and therefore it does not
contain any physical degrees of freedom. Remember that solutions to the
first equation of ( \thechapter .84 ) are defined up to gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .92)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

generated by smooth @xmath -valued functions @xmath on @xmath . Clearly,
the transformations ( \thechapter .92 ) do not change the holomorphic
structure @xmath on the bundle @xmath . On infinitesimal level, the
transformations ( \thechapter .92 ) take the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .93)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with @xmath and such a field @xmath , solving the second equation of (
\thechapter .84 ), generates holomorphic transformations such that
@xmath . Their finite version is

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .94)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and for a gauge potential @xmath given by ( \thechapter .86 ), such a
@xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .95)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

#### Summary.

Collecting all the things derived in the preceding sections, we may now
summarize our discussion as follows:

###### Theorem \thechapter.2.

The are one-to-one correspondences between equivalence classes of @xmath
-trivial holomorphic vector bundles @xmath over mini-supertwistor space
@xmath , equivalence classes of @xmath -trivial @xmath -flat vector
bundles @xmath over CR supertwistor space @xmath – all being smoothly
trivial – and gauge equivalence classes of local solutions to the
maximally supersymmetrized Bogomolny monopole equations on @xmath .

By virtue of Thms. \thechapter .1. and \thechapter .1. , we let i)
@xmath be the moduli space of hBF theory on @xmath for vector bundles
@xmath smoothly equivalent to @xmath and ii) @xmath be the moduli space
of phCS theory on @xmath for vector bundles @xmath smoothly equivalent
to @xmath , respectively. Then we have the bijections

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .96)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath denotes the moduli space of the supersymmetric Bogomolny
monopole equations on @xmath obtained from the solution space by
quotiening with respect to the group of gauge transformations.

Pictorially, we have established the following diagram:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

### 12 Massive fields

In [ 73 ] (see also the subsequent work [ 74 ] ), Chiou et al. developed
a twistor string theory corresponding to a certain massive SYM theory in
three dimensions. It was argued, that the mass terms in this theory
arise from coupling the R-symmetry current to a constant background
field when performing the dimensional reduction. In this section, we
want to study the analogous construction for the supersymmetric
Bogomolny model which we discussed in the previous sections. We focus on
the geometric origin of the additional mass terms by discussing the
associated twistor description. More explicitly, we establish a
correspondence between holomorphic bundles over the deformed
mini-supertwistor space introduced in [ 73 ] and solutions to massive
supersymmetric Bogomolny equations in three dimensions.

#### Mini-supertwistor and CR supertwistor spaces as vector bundles.

We start from the observation that mini-supertwistor space @xmath can be
considered as the total space of a rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle
over mini-twistor space @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .97)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The mini-twistor space @xmath is covered by two patches, say @xmath ,
with coordinates @xmath and @xmath . The additional fiber coordinates in
the vector bundle @xmath over @xmath are the Graßmann variables @xmath .
For later convenience, we rearrange them into the vector @xmath . On
@xmath , we have the relation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .98)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with the transition function

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .99)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The CR supertwistor space @xmath is a CR vector bundle, i.e., it has a
transition function annihilated by the vector fields @xmath , @xmath
from the distribution @xmath on @xmath , over the CR twistor space
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .100)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with complex fiber coordinates @xmath over the patches @xmath covering
@xmath . Recall that we have the double fibration

  -- -- -- ---------------------
           ( \thechapter .101)
  -- -- -- ---------------------

in the purely even case and the transition function of the vector bundle
( \thechapter .100 ) can be identified with

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .102)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

i.e., we have the same transformation ( \thechapter .98 ) relating
@xmath to @xmath on @xmath . Note that our notation often does not
distinguish between objects on @xmath and their pull-backs to @xmath .

Thus, we arrive at the diagram

  -- -- -- ---------------------
           ( \thechapter .103)
  -- -- -- ---------------------

combining the double fibrations ( \thechapter .21 ) and ( \thechapter
.101 ).

#### Deformed mini-supertwistor and CR supertwistor spaces.

Let us define a holomorphic vector bundle

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .104)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with complex coordinates @xmath on the fibers over @xmath which are
related by the transition function

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .105)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

on the intersection @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .106)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

For reasons which will become more transparent in the later discussion,
we demand that @xmath is traceless and Hermitian. It is also assumed
that @xmath is constant.

This supermanifold @xmath was introduced in [ 73 ] as the target space
of twistor string theory ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 For this, @xmath has to be a formal
Calabi-Yau supermanifold, which is the reason underlying the above
restriction to @xmath . which corresponds by our subsequent discussion
to a SYM theory in three dimensions with massive spinors and both
massive and massless scalar fields. In the following, we provide a
twistorial derivation of analogous mass terms in our supersymmetric
Bogomolny model and explain their geometric origin.

Consider the rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle ( \thechapter .104 )
and its pull-back

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .107)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

to the space @xmath from the double fibration ( \thechapter .101 ). Note
that the supervector bundle @xmath is smoothly equivalent to the
supervector bundle @xmath since in the coordinates @xmath on @xmath ,
the pulled-back transition function @xmath can be split

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .108)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Here,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .109)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

are matrix-valued functions well-defined on the patches @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Remember that @xmath and @xmath are related by (
\thechapter .106 ) and their pull-backs to @xmath (which we denote again
by the same letter) are related by the transition function ( \thechapter
.108 ). Therefore, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .110)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

From this we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .111)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath are the fiber coordinates of the bundle ( \thechapter .100
) related by ( \thechapter .98 ) on the intersection @xmath .

The fibration @xmath can also be understood in the Dolbeault picture. It
follows from ( \thechapter .111 ) that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .112)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Recall that the vector fields @xmath generate an integrable distribution
@xmath together with the operator

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .113)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which annihilates the transition function ( \thechapter .108 ) of the
bundle ( \thechapter .107 ). Due to formulas ( \thechapter .108 ) and (
\thechapter .112 ), the vector bundle @xmath with canonical @xmath -flat
connection @xmath is diffeomorphic to the vector bundle @xmath with the
@xmath -flat connection @xmath the components @xmath of which are given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .114)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

In other words, we have an equivalence of the following data:

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .115)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

By construction, the connection one-form @xmath , given explicitly in (
\thechapter .114 ), is a solution to the field equations

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .116)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

of phCS theory on @xmath , which are equivalent via the arguments of 10
to the Bogomolny equations on @xmath . Due to this correspondence, (
\thechapter .114 ) is equivalent to a solution of the Bogomolny
equations with vanishing YM gauge potential @xmath and constant Higgs
field

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .117)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which takes values in the Lie algebra @xmath of the R-symmetry group
@xmath . Thus, the data ( \thechapter .115 ) are equivalent to the
trivial vector bundle @xmath together with the differential operator

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .118)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

encoding the information about the matrix @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .119)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Note that the gauge potential @xmath corresponding to ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 Here,
@xmath with @xmath are the components of the ordinary gauge potential in
three dimensions. @xmath in a different basis and the Higgs fields
@xmath considered in Sec. 10 can be combined with @xmath and @xmath into
the fields

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .120)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

acting on the tensor product @xmath of the (adjoint) representation
space @xmath of the gauge group and the representation space @xmath of
the R-symmetry group.

For the sake of completeness, we note that the deformed complex vector
bundle @xmath with the transition function @xmath from ( \thechapter
.105 ) and the holomorphic structure

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .121)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

is smoothly equivalent to the bundle @xmath with the transition function
@xmath from ( \thechapter .99 ) and the holomorphic structure defined by
the fields @xmath and @xmath with the components

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .122)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The fields @xmath and @xmath obviously satisfy the field equations

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .123)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

of hBF theory on @xmath . By repeating the discussion of Sec. 11 , one
can now show the equivalence of the data

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .124)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which extends the equivalences described in ( \thechapter .119 ).

#### The deformed CR supertwistor space as a supermanifold.

For developing a twistor correspondence involving the deformed CR
supertwistor space @xmath , the description of @xmath as a rank @xmath
complex vector bundle with a constant gauge potential ( \thechapter .114
) which twists the direct product of even and odd spaces is not
sufficient. We rather have to interpret the total space of @xmath as a
supermanifold with deformed CR structure and deformed distribution
@xmath .

Let us begin with the vector fields on @xmath . Remember that a
covariant derivative along a vector field on the base space of a bundle
can be lifted to a vector field on the total space of the bundle. In our
case of the bundle ( \thechapter .107 ), the lift of ( \thechapter .112
) reads as

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .125)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

To see the explicit form of the vector fields corresponding to the
integrable distribution

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .126)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

on @xmath , it is convenient to switch to the coordinates @xmath by the
formulas

  -- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .127)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- ---------------------

By a straightforward calculation, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .128)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .129)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

and @xmath and @xmath were given in ( \thechapter .37 )–( \thechapter
.40 ) and @xmath . Actually, the formulas ( \thechapter .127 ) and their
inverses define a diffeomorphism between the supermanifolds @xmath and
@xmath which have different integrable distributions @xmath and @xmath
(and different CR structures).

Next we need the vector fields on @xmath . In the above discussion, we
used a transformation from the coordinates @xmath to the coordinates
@xmath on @xmath , which are (pulled-back) sections of @xmath . The
corresponding splitting of the transition function was given in (
\thechapter .108 )–( \thechapter .110 ). One can find a similar
splitting of the transition function ( \thechapter .105 ) also on the
complex supermanifold @xmath and obtain new coordinates @xmath , which
are sections of @xmath , as well. Explicitly, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which yields the formulas

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .130)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

From this and ( \thechapter .106 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .131)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and these coordinates have the desired property. Furthermore, in the
@xmath -part of the differential

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .132)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where we introduced @xmath for clarity, we see explicitly the
deformation of the complex structure from @xmath to @xmath . Note that
the coordinates @xmath can be pulled-back to @xmath , and there they are
related to the coordinates @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .133)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

#### Mass-deformed Bogomolny equations from phCS theory on @xmath.

Now we have all ingredients for discussing phCS theory on deformed CR
supertwistor space @xmath . The deformed mini-supertwistor space @xmath
fits into a double fibration

  -- -- -- ---------------------
           ( \thechapter .134)
  -- -- -- ---------------------

similarly to the undeformed case @xmath . Recall that we had a
holomorphic integral form on @xmath locally defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .135)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

One can extend @xmath to a nonvanishing holomorphic volume form

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .136)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

on @xmath if and only if @xmath [ 73 ] . This is the reason why we
imposed this condition from the very beginning. Similarly to the
discussion of phCS theory on @xmath in Sec. 11 , we consider a
subsupermanifold @xmath of @xmath which is defined by the constraints
@xmath . Clearly, the latter equations are equivalent to @xmath and
therefore @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath . Note that the pull-back of
the holomorphic integral form ( \thechapter .136 ) to @xmath coincides
with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .137)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which is due to ( \thechapter .111 ) and the tracelessness of @xmath .

From here on, we proceed as in Sec. 11 and consider a trivial rank
@xmath complex vector bundle over the CR supertwistor space @xmath with
a connection @xmath along the integrable distribution @xmath defined in
( \thechapter .126 ) and ( \thechapter .128 ). By assuming that @xmath
and @xmath , we may define the action functional

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .138)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

of deformed phCS theory. The equations of motion keep the form (
\thechapter .57 ) up to relabeling @xmath by @xmath and in components
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .139)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where the vector fields ( \thechapter .129 ) have already been
substituted. The dependence of the components @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is of the same form as the one given in ( \thechapter .61 ) but
with coefficient functions obeying @xmath -deformed equations.

Substituting the expansions of the form ( \thechapter .61 ) for @xmath
and our vector fields @xmath into ( \thechapter .139 ), we obtain
mass-deformed supersymmetric Bogomolny equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .140)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Eqs. ( \thechapter .139 ) show that, as in the undeformed case (
\thechapter .58 ), some of the fields appearing in the expansions of
@xmath are not independent degrees of freedom but composite fields. In
fact, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .141)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Finally, upon substituting our superfield expansions for @xmath into the
action ( \thechapter .138 ) and integrating over the odd coordinates and
over the Riemann sphere, we end up with

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .142)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath is the action functional for the massless supersymmetric
Bogomolny equations as given by ( \thechapter .68 ).

#### Summary.

We have described a one-to-one correspondence between gauge equivalence
classes of local solutions to the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations
with massive fermions and scalar fields and equivalence classes of
@xmath -flat bundles over the CR supertwistor space @xmath which are
holomorphically trivial on each @xmath . We have also described a
one-to-one correspondence between the equivalence classes of @xmath
-flat complex vector bundles over @xmath and of holomorphic vector
bundles over the deformed mini-supertwistor space @xmath . The
assumption that these bundles become holomorphically trivial on
projective lines translates in the Dolbeault description into a
one-to-one correspondence between gauge equivalence classes of solutions
to the field equations of i) hBF theory on the deformed
mini-supertwistor space @xmath , ii) phCS theory on the CR supertwistor
space @xmath and iii) massive supersymmetric Bogomolny model on
Euclidean three-dimensional space @xmath .

In fact, this section’s discussion can be understood as a corollary of
Thm. \thechapter .2. : complex structure deformations on the
mini-supertwistor space induce, for appropriately chosen CR structures,
CR structure deformations on the CR supertwistor space and, of course,
vice versa. Our above discussion is the translation of Thm. \thechapter
.2. to this deformed setting.

### 13 Solution generating techniques

In the preceding sections, we have presented in detail the relations
between supersymmetric Bogomolny monopole equations on the Euclidean
space @xmath and field equations of phCS theory on the CR supertwistor
space @xmath as well as hBF theory on the mini-supertwistor space @xmath
. We have shown that the moduli spaces of solutions to the field
equations of these three theories are bijective. Furthermore, we
introduced mass-deformed versions of these field theories. In this
section, we want to show how the twistor correspondences described in
the previous sections can be used for constructing explicit solutions to
the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations. In fact, any solution to the
standard Bogomolny equations given as a pair @xmath of a gauge potential
and a Higgs field can be extended to a solution including the remaining
fields of the supersymmetrically extended Bogomolny equations in a
nontrivial fashion. The subsequent discussion is devoted to this issue.
However, we are not considering this task in full generality but merely
give some flavor of how the algorithms work. For simplicity, we also
restrict ourselves to the case when only the fields @xmath and @xmath
are non-zero. In this case, the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations (
\thechapter .66 ) simplify to

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .143)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

First, we discuss Abelian solutions to these equations, which correspond
to Dirac monopole-antimonopole systems. After this, we present two
algorithms which generate non-Abelian solutions.

#### Abelian solutions.

In the Abelian case, the system ( \thechapter .143 ) simplifies further
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .144)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

It is convenient to rewrite these equations in terms of the real
coordinates @xmath on @xmath with @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .145)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

From the second equation of ( \thechapter .145 ), it follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .146)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and from third one, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .147)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the sign in ( \thechapter .147 ) was chosen to match the fact that
in four dimensions, @xmath corresponds to an anti-self-dual two-form
with components @xmath and helicity @xmath , where @xmath are the ’t
Hooft tensors. Here, @xmath and @xmath are a vector and a scalar,
respectively. Therefore, Eqs. ( \thechapter .145 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .148)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

It is well known that the first equation describes Dirac monopoles while
the second one Dirac antimonopoles (see, e.g., Atiyah et al. [ 21 ] and
references therein). Thus, the action ( \thechapter .68 ) with only the
fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being non-zero can be considered as a
proper action for the description of monopole-antimonopole systems.

Let us consider a configuration of @xmath Dirac monopoles and @xmath
antimonopoles located at points @xmath with @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Moreover, we assume for simplicity that @xmath for @xmath
. Such a configuration is then described by the fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .149)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where @xmath and @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .150)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .151)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Here, @xmath and @xmath denote the following two regions in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath               ( \thechapter .152)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------------------

and bar stands for complex conjugation. Note that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .153)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and the configuration ( \thechapter .149 ), ( \thechapter .150 ) has
delta-function sources at the points @xmath with @xmath .

#### Non-Abelian solutions via a contour integral.

For the gauge group @xmath , one can consider the Wu-Yang point monopole
[ 271 ] and its generalizations to configurations describing @xmath
monopoles and @xmath antimonopoles [ 209 ] . This solution, which is
singular at points @xmath , @xmath , is a solution to Eqs. ( \thechapter
.143 ) for @xmath -valued fields. However, it is just an Abelian
configuration in disguise, as it is equivalent to the multi-monopole
configuration ( \thechapter .149 ), ( \thechapter .150 ) [ 209 ] .

One can construct true non-Abelian solutions to ( \thechapter .143 ) as
follows. Let us first consider a configuration @xmath and @xmath . Then
from ( \thechapter .143 ) one obtains the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .154)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

All solutions to this equation can be described in the twistor approach
[ 194 ] via a contour integral

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .155)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath is a Lie-algebra valued meromorphic function of @xmath and
@xmath holomorphic in the vicinity of the curve @xmath . From (
\thechapter .155 ) it follows that nontrivial contributions to @xmath
are only given by those @xmath which define elements of the cohomology
group @xmath . It is easy to see that ( \thechapter .155 ) satisfies (
\thechapter .154 ) due to the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which appears after pulling the derivatives @xmath under the integral.

Consider now a fixed solution @xmath of the Bogomolny equations given by
the first line of ( \thechapter .143 ). One may take, e.g., the @xmath
BPS monopole [ 212 , 58 ] . In the twistor approach, we can find
functions @xmath solving the linear system

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .156)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which is equivalent to the linear system of phCS theory. These @xmath
are known explicitly for many cases, e.g., for our chosen example of the
@xmath BPS monopole, they have been given by Ward in [ 254 , 255 ] .
Using @xmath , we can introduce dressed fields @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .157)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath is chosen as above. One can straightforwardly check that
with this choice,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .158)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and therefore the configuration @xmath satisfies ( \thechapter .143 ).
The explicit form of a @xmath for a given @xmath and @xmath is obtained
by performing the contour integral ( \thechapter .157 ) along @xmath
after a proper choice of the Lie-algebra valued function @xmath . Recall
that the configuration @xmath will be real, i.e., the fields will take
values in the Lie algebra @xmath , if the matrix-valued functions @xmath
in ( \thechapter .156 ) satisfy the reality condition as the one induced
by ( \thechapter .23 ) and @xmath . Imposing a proper reality condition
on the function @xmath will ensure the skew-Hermiticity of @xmath .

#### Solutions via nilpotent dressing transformations in the Čech
approach.

In this section, we will present a novel algorithm for constructing
solutions to Eqs. ( \thechapter .143 ) based on the twistor description
of hidden symmetry algebras in the self-dual SYM theory in four
dimensions [ 269 ] – cf. our discussion presented in Chap. \thechapter .
Recall that we have described a one-to-one correspondence between
equivalence classes of transition functions of @xmath -flat vector
bundles over the CR supertwistor space @xmath obeying certain triviality
conditions and gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the
supersymmetric Bogomolny equations on @xmath . We can, however,
associate with any open subset @xmath an infinite number of classes of
transition functions, which in turn yield an infinite number of gauge
equivalence classes of solutions to the supersymmetric Bogomolny
equations. Therefore, one naturally meets with a possibility of
constructing new solutions from a given one, that is, with dressing
transformations. In the remainder of this chapter, we discuss a
particular example of such a construction but first we briefly introduce
some necessary background material. At this stage, we present the latter
in a more applied formulation and without precise mathematical
terminology. For a more thorough exposition, we refer to Chap.
\thechapter , where also a Čech cohomological interpretation of the
underlying structure is given.

We consider the linear system ( \thechapter .79 ), which can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .159)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .160)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

as before. ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 Note that the first and third equations of (
\thechapter .79 ) are equivalent to

@xmath

respectively, which together imply @xmath . From arguments similar to
those used subsequent to ( \thechapter .79 ), we have @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath -independent superfields @xmath and @xmath . The
compatibility conditions for the linear system ( \thechapter .159 ) are
Eqs. ( \thechapter .81 ). From this linear system one also derives that
@xmath is @xmath -flat, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .161)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The key idea is to study infinitesimal deformations of the transition
function @xmath of the @xmath -flat vector bundle preserving (
\thechapter .161 ) and the triviality properties discussed above. More
explicitly, given such a function @xmath (with @xmath ), we consider

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .162)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath represents some generic infinitesimal deformation. Note
that any infinitesimal @xmath -flat deformation (that is, preserving (
\thechapter .161 )) is allowed since for small perturbations, the
trivializability property of the bundle @xmath on the holomorphic curves
@xmath is preserved (cf. Chap. \thechapter ). Upon introducing the
Lie-algebra valued function

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .163)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and linearizing ( \thechapter .162 ), we have to find a splitting

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .164)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the Lie-algebra valued functions @xmath can be extended to
holomorphic functions in @xmath , which yields

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .165)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

To find these @xmath from @xmath means to solve the infinitesimal
Riemann-Hilbert problem. Clearly, such solutions are not unique, as we
have the freedom

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .166)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with @xmath , where the function @xmath is independent of @xmath . This
freedom can be used to preserve the transversal gauge condition (
\thechapter .28 ). The preservation of this gauge is in fact needed in
order to compare the deformed superfields and the ones one has started
with as one wishes to derive the induced transformations of the
component fields.

Linearizing ( \thechapter .159 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .167)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where we have introduced the operators @xmath and @xmath . From (
\thechapter .159 ), ( \thechapter .161 ) and ( \thechapter .162 ) it
follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .168)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and we eventually arrive at the formulas

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .169)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the contour is @xmath . Thus, the consideration of infinitesimal
deformations of the transition function of some @xmath -flat vector
bundle over the CR supertwistor space @xmath obeying certain triviality
conditions gives by virtue of the integral formulas ( \thechapter .169 )
infinitesimal deformations of the components @xmath and @xmath , which
satisfy – by construction – the linearized constraint equations (
\thechapter .82 ) and thus the supersymmetric Bogomolny equations (
\thechapter .66 ). Once again, we have a one-to-one correspondence
between equivalence classes of local solutions, with equivalence induced
on the gauge theory side by infinitesimal gauge transformations and on
the twistor side by transformations of the form @xmath , where the
@xmath s are functions globally defined on @xmath and annihilated by all
vector fields from the distribution @xmath . Putting it differently, we
have just presented the “infinitesimal” version of Thm. \thechapter .2.
.

Let us now exemplify our discussion by describing how to construct
explicit solutions to ( \thechapter .143 ). Consider a @xmath -flat
vector bundle @xmath of rank @xmath which is holomorphically trivial
when restricted to any projective line @xmath . Assume further that a
transition function @xmath of @xmath is chosen such that all the fields
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath vanish identically, i.e., we start
with the field equation

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .170)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Without loss of generality, we may assume that the transition function
of @xmath can be split as @xmath , where the @xmath s do not depend on
the fermionic coordinates @xmath .

Suppose now that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .171)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath . Considering vector bundles subject to the reality
conditions induced by ( \thechapter .23 ), one restricts the
perturbations to those preserving these conditions. In our example, they
read explicitly as

  -- -- -- ---------------------
           ( \thechapter .172)
  -- -- -- ---------------------

with @xmath . For illustrating reasons and to simplify equations, we
shall be continuing with ( \thechapter .171 ). Then a short calculation
reveals that any splitting ( \thechapter .164 ) is of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .173)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with @xmath . Introducing the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .174)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

we find

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .175)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where we have used the fact that @xmath is totally symmetric. In
addition, we defined

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .176)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The functions @xmath can be Laurent-expanded as ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .177)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .178)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Combining the expansion

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .179)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

with ( \thechapter .173 )–( \thechapter .178 ), we therefore find

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .180)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and a similar expression for @xmath .

At this point, we have to choose an @xmath to preserve the transversal
gauge. Explicitly, a possible @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .181)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Let us justify this result. In ( \thechapter .166 ), we noticed a
freedom in splitting the Lie-algebra valued function @xmath and we
claimed that it can be used to guarantee the transversal gauge condition
( \thechapter .28 ) which, of course, translates to the requirement
@xmath . In fact, from the second equation of ( \thechapter .167 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .182)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where we have inserted ( \thechapter .179 ). The contraction of these
equations with @xmath yields the constraints

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .183)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Here, we used the fact that @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and
recalled the definition @xmath . Thus, a splitting ( \thechapter .166 )
with an @xmath satisfying ( \thechapter .183 ) yields a deformation of
the gauge potential which respects the transversal gauge condition. In
our present example, Eqs. ( \thechapter .183 ) simplify to

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .184)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Since our particular deformation ( \thechapter .171 ) is of fourth order
in the odd coordinates, we may assume that @xmath . Then, after some
algebraic manipulations, the expansions of @xmath given by ( \thechapter
.180 ) together with ( \thechapter .184 ) and the ansatz for @xmath lead
to ( \thechapter .181 ).

The perturbations @xmath and @xmath are obtained from Eqs. ( \thechapter
.169 ) according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .185)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .186)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Remember that @xmath . Consider now the expansions

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .187)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where the brackets @xmath are composite expressions of some superfields,
cf. also our discussion given in 7 . Since our particular deformation of
the transition function implies that @xmath , the resulting deformations
of @xmath and @xmath are of the form @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
In transversal gauge, the explicit superfield expansions of @xmath and
@xmath show that @xmath . Together with the recursion relations (
\thechapter .30 ) (of course, applied to the present setting obtained
via dimensional reduction), they moreover imply that the variation of
all higher order terms than of fourth (respectively, of third) order of
@xmath (respectively, of @xmath ) in the @xmath -expansions vanish.
Hence, from ( \thechapter .187 ) we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .188)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Comparing these equations with ( \thechapter .185 ) and the @xmath
-expansions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given earlier, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .189)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

together with the field equations

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .190)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Since Eqs. ( \thechapter .143 ) are linear in @xmath , we hence have
generated a solution to ( \thechapter .143 ) starting from a solution to
the first equation of ( \thechapter .143 ), that is, we may identify
@xmath with @xmath . Thus, knowing the explicit splitting @xmath , we
can define functions @xmath which then in turn yield @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Super Yang-Mills theory

M ain subject of this chapter is the twistorial description of the
maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in four space-time
dimensions, that is, of @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) SYM theory [ 101
, 62 ] . Notice that @xmath and @xmath SYM theories represent the same
physical theory. The only difference between both formulations lies in
what part of the R-symmetry group is made manifest: for @xmath it is
@xmath while for @xmath it is just the subgroup @xmath . The twistor
description of @xmath SYM theory dates back to Witten’s work [ 262 ]
done in the late 70ies of the last century. The idea is roughly to
discuss equivalence classes of certain holomorphic vector bundles over
superambitwistor space @xmath which in turn are in one-to-one
correspondence with gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the @xmath
SYM equations. The superambitwistor description involving @xmath does
not yield the @xmath SYM equations directly. That is why we want to
focus on the @xmath formulation of @xmath SYM theory. Moreover, in this
respect it is worth mentioning that Manin [ 166 ] generalized the
theorems of Witten [ 262 ] and Isenberg et al. [ 124 ] by showing that
there is a one-to-one correspondence between equivalence classes of
certain holomorphic vector bundles over superambitwistor space @xmath –
for @xmath – which admit an extension to a @xmath -th formal
neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath and gauge equivalence classes of
solutions to the @xmath -extended SYM equations in four dimensions. We
first discuss @xmath SYM theory and then briefly comment on SYM theories
with less supersymmetry.

### 14 @xmath super Yang-Mills theory

Let us begin our discussion by recalling that in 3 we have defined
superambitwistor space @xmath in terms of flag supermanifolds. In
particular, @xmath is participating in the following double fibration:

  -- -- -- -------------------
           ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -- -- -------------------

Moreover, we have shown that superambitwistor space can be viewed as a
hypersurface in @xmath determined by the zero locus

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath are homogeneous coordinates on @xmath . In order to be able
to continuing as in the preceding two chapters, we first need to give
local coordinates at each stage of ( \thechapter .1 ).

#### Local coordinates.

In 5 , we have already introduced local coordinates on @xmath . In
particular, we had @xmath on @xmath . As in Chap. \thechapter , we are
now making use of the two projections @xmath to introduce the affine
parts of @xmath and @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Analogously to ( \thechapter .8 ), one may show that

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

This makes it obvious that @xmath can be covered by four coordinate
patches which we denote by @xmath , with @xmath . Letting @xmath and
@xmath be local coordinates on

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) are the canonical patches covering
@xmath (respectively, @xmath ), we thus may take

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .6)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

In the sequel, we shall collectively denote them by @xmath on the patch
@xmath .

Next we need coordinates on @xmath . By our above construction, @xmath
is an open subset of @xmath and as such it can be viewed as a degree two
hypersurface in @xmath – in fact, @xmath . Here, @xmath represents the
supertwistor space as given in ( \thechapter .37 ) and @xmath is the
dual supertwistor space

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

As before, we denote the covering of @xmath by @xmath and moreover, that
of @xmath by @xmath . Then the product @xmath is covered by four patches
according to

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

and we may set

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .9)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Let now @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) be local coordinates on @xmath
(respectively, on @xmath ), that is, we take

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .10)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .11)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The induced coordinates on @xmath are then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath            ( \thechapter .12)
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which are transformed on nonempty intersections @xmath in an obvious way
which is obtained from the transformation laws on @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Of course, these coordinates are not independent as they
are subject to (cf. Eq. ( \thechapter .2 ))

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .13)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath together with @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath . Note that there is no summation over @xmath .

Altogether, we therefore obtain the following double fibration

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .14)
  -- -- -- --------------------

together with the two holomorphic projections

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .15)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

cf. also our discussion presented in 1 , 3 and 5 . In these equations,
we have used the notation @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

In fact, Eqs. ( \thechapter .15 ) illustrate Prop. \thechapter .4. : a
fixed point @xmath corresponds to a super null line @xmath and
furthermore, a fixed point @xmath corresponds to a holomorphic embedding
of @xmath . To see that @xmath is null, we solve

  -- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .16)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------------------

for a generic @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .17)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary. Here, @xmath denotes a
particular solution to ( \thechapter .16 ). This shows that @xmath is
null. Hence, @xmath is the space of all super null lines in @xmath .

#### Remark.

Though we are mainly interested in @xmath , let us again stick to
generic values of @xmath . In Secs. 1 and 3 , we have seen that the
supertwistor space @xmath is an open subset in @xmath describing small
deformations of the Riemann sphere @xmath inside @xmath . In fact, a
similar argument can be given for @xmath . Let us consider the following
sequence of embeddings:

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .18)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Then we have an exact sequence

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .19)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the normal sheaf of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath that of
@xmath in @xmath . In particular, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, pr @xmath are again the two projections from @xmath to the first
and second factors and @xmath is the sheaf of sections of the divisor
line bundle of the diagonal @xmath . Thus, @xmath denotes the normal
sheaf of @xmath in @xmath . In fact, @xmath is a rank @xmath holomorphic
vector bundle over @xmath and moreover, @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .20)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The sequence ( \thechapter .20 ) induces a long exact cohomology
sequence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .21)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

As before, we let @xmath and @xmath be homogeneous coordinates on @xmath
. An element of @xmath is described by a @xmath -tuple @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are even homogeneous bidegree @xmath respectively,
bidegree @xmath polynomials in @xmath while @xmath and @xmath are odd
polynomials of bidegree @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .22)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Clearly, this mapping is surjective. Hence, the sequence ( \thechapter
.21 ) splits to give a short exact sequence

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .23)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Using Künneth’s formula ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 Recall the following fact. Let @xmath
be a holomorphic vector bundle over @xmath for @xmath . Furthermore,
denote the two projections from @xmath to @xmath by pr @xmath and
consider the bundle @xmath . Künneth’s formula then says:

@xmath

, one readily verifies that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .24)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

for @xmath . By virtue of ( \thechapter .23 ), we therefore find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .25)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Similarly, one may show that @xmath (cf. Eqs ( \thechapter .24 )).

#### Penrose-Ward transform.

After having presented the setup, we shall now come to the description
of @xmath SYM theory. For this, we consider the double fibration (
\thechapter .14 ) together with a rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle
@xmath which is characterized by the transition functions @xmath and its
pull-back @xmath to the supermanifold @xmath . We denote again the
pulled-back transition functions by the same letter @xmath . By
definition of a pull-back, the transition functions @xmath are constant
along @xmath . The relative tangent sheaf @xmath is of rank @xmath and
freely generated by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .26)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .27)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with @xmath and @xmath . Hence, the transition functions of @xmath are
annihilated by the vector fields ( \thechapter .26 ). Clearly, they are
also annihilated by @xmath .

Next we want to assume that the vector bundle @xmath is smoothly trivial
and in addition @xmath -trivial, i.e., holomorphically trivial when
restricted to any submanifold ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 See also Prop. \thechapter .4.
@xmath . Together, these conditions imply that there exist some @xmath ,
which define trivializations of @xmath , such that @xmath can be
decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .28)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .29)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In particular, @xmath depends holomorphically on @xmath and @xmath .
Applying the vector fields ( \thechapter .26 ) to ( \thechapter .28 ),
we realize that by virtue of an extension of Liouville’s theorem to
@xmath , the expressions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must be at most linear in @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, we may
introduce a relative connection one-form @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .30)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .31)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The compatibility conditions for the linear system ( \thechapter .31 )
read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .32)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where we have introduced

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .33)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Eqs. ( \thechapter .32 ) are the constraint equations of @xmath SYM
theory.

Next let us discuss how to obtain the functions @xmath in ( \thechapter
.31 ) from a given gauge potential. Formally, a solution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .34)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Here, “ @xmath ” denotes the path-ordering symbol and

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .35)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the basis @xmath is dual to @xmath . It is explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .36)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The contour @xmath is a any real curve within a super light ray @xmath
from a point @xmath to a point @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .37)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

for @xmath ; the choice of the contour plays no role, since the
curvature is zero when restricted to the super light ray. Furthermore,
@xmath are some free parameters.

Before discussing the superfield expansions of the above gauge
potentials, let us say a few words about reality conditions. So far, we
have entirely worked in a complex setting. However, we eventually want
to discuss real @xmath SYM theory on Minkowski space. In order to
achieve this, we need to extend our in 5 introduced antiholomorphic
involution @xmath to @xmath , that is, we have to require

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .38)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

on appropriate intersections. In these equations, we have used the
shorthand notation @xmath . Upon imposing ( \thechapter .38 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .39)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

and hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .40)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

as desired. In this case, the gauge group @xmath is reduced to the
unitary group @xmath and as we have seen in 7 , the additional
requirement @xmath yields @xmath .

#### Remark.

If @xmath is independent of say @xmath then one may assume without loss
of generality that @xmath and @xmath [ 239 ] . All other transition
functions are obtained from those by virtue of the cocycle conditions.
In this case, the linear system ( \thechapter .31 ) reduces to that of
self-dual SYM theory given in ( \thechapter .16 ). Hence, by assuming
that all transition function are independent of @xmath , one ends up
with self-dual SYM theory. Similarly, by imposing independence of @xmath
, one eventually obtains the anti-self-dual SYM equations.

#### Field expansions, field equations and action functional.

Let us now show that the constraint equations ( \thechapter .32 ) imply
the equations of motion of @xmath SYM theory (and vice versa). The
analysis is, however, basically the same as the one given in 7 , for
instance. Therefore, we shall be rather brief and merely quote results.
More details about the derivation can be found in Harnad et al. [ 107 ,
108 , 109 ] .

Eqs. ( \thechapter .32 ) can be formally solved according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .41)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

It follows then from Bianchi identities that the odd spinor superfields
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .42)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

As before, one imposes the transversal gauge condition

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .43)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

to remove superfluous gauge degrees of freedom associated with the odd
coordinates. This time, the recursion operator takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .44)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

With the help of Bianchi identities one may prove the following
recursion relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .45)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where again @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) represents the self-dual
(respectively, anti-self-dual) part of the field strength. Note that
these equations resemble the supersymmetry transformations, but
nevertheless they should not be confused with them. Now one can start to
iterate these equations to obtain all the superfields order by order in
the odd coordinates. Using formulas similar to Eqs. ( \thechapter .33 )
and ( \thechapter .34 ), one eventually finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .46)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Upon substituting these expansions into the constraint equations (
\thechapter .41 ), we obtain the equations of motion of @xmath SYM
theory

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .47)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .48)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

It can now be shown by induction and with the help of the recursion
operator @xmath that Eqs. ( \thechapter .47 ) are in one-to-one
correspondence with the constraint equations ( \thechapter .41 ). For
details, see [ 107 , 108 , 109 ] .

Finally, it remains to give an appropriate action functional producing
the equations of motion ( \thechapter .47 ). A straightforward
calculation reveals that they can be obtained by varying

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .49)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

#### HCS theory on @xmath.

Using the Dolbeault approach to holomorphic vector bundles, we gave the
twistor interpretation of Siegel’s action functional of @xmath self-dual
SYM theory in 7 . It turned out to be the action functional of hCS
theory on supertwistor space @xmath . The existence of an appropriate
action principle on @xmath was due to the formal Calabi-Yau property of
the latter. As we have seen, also superambitwistor space @xmath is a
formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. Thus, there is a globally well-defined
nowhere vanishing holomorphic volume form. On the patch @xmath , it is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .50)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is any contour encircling @xmath and @xmath , etc. The
problem which prevents us from writing down an action functional like (
\thechapter .59 ) is the “wrong” dimensionality of superambitwistor
space: the holomorphic volume form ( \thechapter .26 ) is a form of type
@xmath while the Chern-Simons form is of type @xmath , as one is again
interested in a subsupermanifold @xmath determined by @xmath . Thus, in
total one obtains a form of type @xmath which, of course, cannot be
integrated over @xmath .

In order to circumvent this problem, Mason et al. [ 174 ] (cf. also Ref.
[ 173 ] ) proposed to instead consider a real codimension @xmath CR
supermanifold ³¹ ³¹ 31 For a definition of a CR supermanifold, see Sec.
9 . in superambitwistor space. Their construction is based on an
Euclidean signature as for Minkowski signature the CR supermanifold
under consideration will no longer be smooth but have singularities. In
this setting it is, however, possible to use the holomorphic volume form
( \thechapter .50 ) to give an action functional for phCS theory (see
also our discussion given in Sec. 10 ) reproducing the action functional
of @xmath SYM theory. Though their construction works for an Euclidean
setting, it remains an open question to find an appropriate twistor
interpretation of ( \thechapter .49 ) in the case of Minkowski
signature.

#### Summary.

Let us now summarize:

###### Theorem \thechapter.1.

There is a one-to-one correspondence between gauge equivalence classes
of local solutions to the @xmath SYM equations on four-dimensional
Minkowski space and equivalence classes of holomorphic vector bundles
@xmath over superambitwistor space @xmath which are smoothly trivial and
holomorphically trivial on any submanifold @xmath .

If we let @xmath be the moduli space of hCS theory on @xmath for vector
bundles @xmath smoothly equivalent to @xmath , we may equivalently write

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .51)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath denotes the moduli space of @xmath SYM theory. The latter
is obtained from the solution space by quotiening with respect to the
group of gauge transformations.

#### Remark.

In Chap. \thechapter , we have described the dimensional reduction of
the supertwistor space and obtained the mini-supertwistor space. In this
setting, we established a correspondence between hBF theory on
mini-supertwistor space and a supersymmetric Bogomolny model in three
dimensions. As for this model, which was obtained by a dimensional
reduction of @xmath self-dual SYM theory, one can establish a twistor
correspondence for the full @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) SYM theory in
three dimensions by using a dimensional reduction of @xmath . In fact,
one can establish:

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .52)
  -- -- -- --------------------

The details about this correspondence, the construction of the field
equations, etc. can be found in [ 223 , 224 ] .

### 15 Thickenings and @xmath super Yang-Mills theory

For the sake of completeness, we shall now briefly talk about SYM
theories with less supersymmetry, that is, for @xmath . In order to
discuss them, we first need the notion of formal neighborhoods. This
will then allow us to provide a twistor formulation of these theories.
However, we stress in advance that we will not prove any of the
subsequent statements but rather quote results.

#### Formal neighborhoods.

Let @xmath be a complex supermanifold and @xmath a sub(super)manifold.
Furthermore, let @xmath be the ideal subsheaf of all holomorphic
functions in @xmath which vanish on @xmath . Then we have a short exact
sequence of sheaves

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .53)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

on @xmath . The sheaf @xmath can then be identified with @xmath .
Generally speaking, there is an isomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .54)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

given by the Taylor expansion of a germ of @xmath at any point of @xmath
. Note that @xmath can be identified with the conormal sheaf of @xmath
in @xmath .

Next we define

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .55)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Then @xmath is called the @xmath -th formal neighborhood of @xmath in
@xmath . Note that @xmath can be expanded according to

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .56)
  -- -- -- --------------------

Putting it differently, the @xmath -th formal neighborhood contains
formal Taylor expansions in the normal sheaf direction up to order
@xmath .

#### Manin’s theorem for @xmath SYM theory.

Let us consider the double fibration

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .57)
  -- -- -- --------------------

as introduced in 3 . Then we may state the following theorem [ 166 ] :

###### Theorem \thechapter.2.

Let @xmath be an open subset of @xmath such that any null line
intersects @xmath in a simply connected set. Then there is a one-to-one
correspondence between equivalence classes of @xmath -trivial
holomorphic vector bundles which admit an extension to a @xmath -th
formal neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath and gauge equivalence classes of
solutions to the @xmath -extended SYM equations on @xmath .

Details about the proof can be found in [ 166 ] . Furthermore, related
aspects such as superfield expansions, etc., are discussed in Refs. [ 92
, 109 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter Hidden symmetries in self-dual super Yang-Mills
theory

T he purpose of this chapter is the discussion of hidden
infinite-dimensional symmetry algebras in @xmath -extended self-dual SYM
theory. The main tools we shall be using are built upon the twistor
correspondence, which we established in Chap. \thechapter .

Since Pohlmeyer’s work [ 198 ] , it has been known that self-dual YM
theory possess infinitely many hidden nonlocal symmetries and hence
infinitely many conserved nonlocal charges. As was shown in [ 69 , 70 ,
71 , 244 , 81 , 75 ] , these symmetries are affine extensions of
internal symmetries with an underlying Kac-Moody structure. For a review
on that matter, we refer also to [ 82 ] . Furthermore, in [ 202 ] affine
extensions of conformal symmetries have been found. As a result, certain
Kac-Moody-Virasoro-type algebras associated with space-time symmetries
were obtained. A systematic investigation of symmetries based on twistor
theory and on Čech and Dolbeault cohomology methods was performed in [
204 ] (see also Refs. [ 205 , 125 ] and the book [ 171 ] ). Therein, all
symmetries of the self-dual YM equations were derived.

One of the goals of this chapter is a generalization of the above
symmetries to the self-dual SYM equations. The subsequent discussion is
based on [ 269 , 270 ] . In particular, we will consider perturbations
of transition functions of holomorphic vector bundles over supertwistor
space. Using the Penrose-Ward transform, we relate these perturbations
to symmetries of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory. After some
general words on hidden symmetry algebras, we exemplify our discussion
by constructing Kac-Moody symmetries which come from affine extensions
of internal symmetries. Furthermore, we also consider affine extensions
of the superconformal algebra resulting in super Kac-Moody-Virasoro-type
symmetries. Moreover, by focussing on certain Abelian subalgebras of the
affinely extended superconformal algebra, we introduce supermanifolds
which we call generalized supertwistor spaces. These spaces then allow
us to introduce so-called hierarchies which describe sets of graded
Abelian symmetries. This generalizes the results known for self-dual YM
theory [ 169 , 241 , 170 , 4 , 171 , 127 ] . We remark that such
symmetries of the latter theory are intimately connected with one-loop
maximally helicity violating amplitudes [ 23 , 66 , 67 , 220 , 104 ] .

### 16 Holomorphicity and symmetries

As indicated, the key idea for studying symmetries within the
supertwistor framework is, for a given Stein covering @xmath of
supertwistor space @xmath , to consider infinitesimal deformations of
the transition functions @xmath of some smoothly trivial rank @xmath
holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over @xmath which in addition is @xmath
- (respectively, @xmath -) trivial. ³² ³² 32 In 13 , we have already
used the idea of infinitesimal deformations for the construction of
solutions to the equations of motion of the supersymmetrized Bogomolny
model. Here, we are going to formalize the things used in that
paragraph. Recall that @xmath . Generically, an infinitesimal
deformation looks as

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Clearly, such perturbations have to obey certain criteria:

-   They must be holomorphic and moreover preserve the cocycle
    conditions, that is, @xmath .

-   They must preserve the holomorphic triviality on any @xmath .

-   In case one is interested in real YM fields, they must in addition
    respect the reality conditions induced by the antiholomorphic
    involution @xmath introduced in 5 .

The first point is not really a restriction. Remember that in Chaps.
\thechapter and \thechapter we have seen that there exists a two-set
Stein covering of @xmath . Therefore, no cocycle conditions appear when
working with this covering. ³³ ³³ 33 In principle, there are
transformations which can change the covering. Then one needs to
consider the common refinement. For details, see [ 204 ] . In the
sequel, we shall only be interested in deformations which preserve the
chosen covering. The second point deserves some discussion. Besides
@xmath , consider the Abelian group (by addition) @xmath , where @xmath
. This group parametrizes infinitesimal deformations of the trivial
bundle @xmath . ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 Note that infinitesimal deformations of an
arbitrary holomorphic vector bundle @xmath are parametrized by @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath , that is, in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of
the trivial bundle @xmath there exists an infinite number of
holomorphically nontrivial bundles @xmath . If we let @xmath be the
restriction of the cohomology group @xmath to @xmath for some fixed
@xmath , then @xmath parametrizes infinitesimal deformations of @xmath
restricted to @xmath . However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which follows from the vanishing of @xmath . This in turn implies that
small enough deformations do not change the trivializability of @xmath
over @xmath . In fact, this is a version of the
Kodaira-Spencer-Nirenberg theorem [ 135 ] . Therefore, point two from
the above list is likewise no restriction on the allowed perturbations.
Altogether, any infinitesimal holomorphic deformation is allowed. The
only restriction one has to implement is point three from the above
list. If not otherwise stated, we shall always assume that our
deformations are compatible with the reality conditions.

#### Kac-Moody symmetries.

Let us consider the nonholomorphic fibration @xmath given by (
\thechapter .42 ). Choose again the canonical covering @xmath of the
supertwistor space. Given a smoothly and @xmath -trivial rank @xmath
holomorphic vector bundle @xmath , we define an action of the
one-cochain group @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath and @xmath . Obviously, the group @xmath acts transitively
on @xmath , since for an arbitrary Čech one-cocycle @xmath one can find
an @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . The stabilizer of the trivial
Čech one-cocycle, given by @xmath , is the subgroup

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

implying that @xmath can be identified with the coset

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Then the moduli space @xmath is given by a double coset space

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where the zero-cochain group acts according to

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

with @xmath .

Let us now study infinitesimal deformations of the transition function
@xmath . Recalling the definition @xmath , we introduce the subsheaves
@xmath and @xmath consisting of those @xmath -valued, respectively,
@xmath -valued smooth functions which are holomorphic in @xmath . We
have a natural infinitesimal action of the group @xmath on the space
@xmath which is induced by the linearization of ( \thechapter .2 ). That
is, we get

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath and @xmath . Then we introduce a @xmath -valued function

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath and @xmath , as before. From Eq. ( \thechapter .7 ) it is
then immediate that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is annihilated by the vector field @xmath . Thus, it
defines an element @xmath . However, any one-cocycle with values in the
sheaf @xmath is a one-coboundary since @xmath . This is an immediate
consequence of the vanishing of @xmath and of the acyclicity of the
sheaf @xmath . Therefore, we have

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .9)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath . Linearizing @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence by virtue of Eqs. ( \thechapter .8 ) and ( \thechapter .9 ) we
find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .10)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In summary, given some @xmath one derives via ( \thechapter .7 )–(
\thechapter .9 ) the perturbations @xmath . Moreover, we point out that
finding such @xmath means to solve the infinitesimal variant of the
Riemann-Hilbert problem. Obviously, the splitting ( \thechapter .9 ), (
\thechapter .10 ) and hence solutions to the Riemann-Hilbert problem are
not unique, as we certainly have the freedom to consider a new @xmath
shifted by functions @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath on the
intersection @xmath , that is, @xmath .

Furthermore, infinitesimal variations of the linear system ( \thechapter
.49 ) yield

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .11)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Substituting ( \thechapter .10 ) into these equations, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .12)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Here, we have introduced the definitions

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .13)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that ( \thechapter .13 ) acts adjointly in ( \thechapter .12 ).
Therefore, ( \thechapter .12 ) together with ( \thechapter .9 ) imply
that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .14)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

One may easily check that the choice @xmath , where @xmath , implies
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Hence, such @xmath define trivial
perturbations. On the other hand, infinitesimal gauge transformations of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some smooth @xmath -valued function on @xmath , imply
(for irreducible gauge potentials) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, such @xmath do not depend on @xmath . In particular, we have
@xmath and hence @xmath .

Finally, we obtain the formulas

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .15)
  -- -- -- --------------------

where the contour @xmath encircles @xmath . We see that generically the
outcome of the transformation @xmath is a highly nonlocal expression
depending on @xmath , i.e., we may write @xmath , where @xmath is a
functional whose explicit form is determined by @xmath .

Summarizing, to any infinitesimal deformation, @xmath , of the
transition function @xmath we have associated a symmetry transformation
@xmath , that is, solutions to the linearized @xmath -extended self-dual
SYM equations. In fact, we have obtained a one-to-one correspondence
between equivalence classes of deformations of holomorphic vector
bundles over supertwistor space which are subject to certain triviality
conditions and gauge equivalence classes of solutions to the linearized
field equations of @xmath -extended SYM theory. Putting it differently,
our above discussion represents the “infinitesimal” version of Thm.
\thechapter .2.

#### Virasoro-type symmetries.

Above we have introduced Kac-Moody symmetries which were generated by
the algebra @xmath . In this paragraph we focus on symmetries, which are
related to the group of local biholomorphisms of supertwistor space
@xmath . We shall only be interested in this subgroup of the
diffeomorphism group of @xmath as generic local diffeomorphisms would
change the complex structure of the supertwistor space. However, this in
turn would induce a change of the conformal structure and a metric on
@xmath as was demonstrated in the purely even setting by Penrose [ 193 ]
and Atiyah et al. [ 20 ] . As we want to discuss symmetries of the
self-dual SYM equations on @xmath , we need to consider those
diffeomorphisms which preserve the complex structure, that is,
biholomorphisms. Let us denote the group of local biholomorphisms by
@xmath . Furthermore, we are again choosing the canonical covering
@xmath of @xmath together with the coordinates @xmath . On the
intersection @xmath , they are related by transition functions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .16)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

To @xmath one associates the algebra @xmath of zero-cochains on @xmath
with values in the tangent sheaf @xmath of supertwistor space. In order
to define an appropriate action of @xmath , let us first consider the
algebra @xmath whose elements are collections of vector fields

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .17)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where we have abbreviated @xmath . In particular, @xmath and @xmath are
elements of the algebra @xmath of holomorphic vector fields on the
intersection @xmath . Thus, @xmath can be decomposed according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .18)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Kodaira-Spencer deformation theory [ 135 ] then tells us that the
algebra @xmath acts on the transition functions @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .19)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which can equivalently be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .20)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Consider a subalgebra

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .21)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

of the algebra @xmath . Then the space

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .22)
  -- -- -- --------------------

is given by the quotient

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .23)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

We stress that the transformations ( \thechapter .19 ) change the
complex structure of @xmath if @xmath , where @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .24)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

is the tangent space (at a chosen complex structure) of the moduli space
of deformations of the complex structure on @xmath .

According to ( \thechapter .20 ), we may define an action of the algebra
@xmath on the transition functions @xmath of holomorphic vector bundles
over supertwistor space by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .25)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

However, as we have just seen, such transformations may change the
complex structure on @xmath . Therefore, we let the algebra @xmath act
on @xmath and @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .26)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

together with Eqs. ( \thechapter .20 ) and ( \thechapter .25 ), i.e.,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .27)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

These transformations do preserve the complex structure on supertwistor
space.

After this digression, we may now follow the lines presented in 16 to
arrive at the formulas ( \thechapter .15 ) for symmetries. We shall not
repeat the argumentation at this point. We refer to symmetries obtained
in this way as Virasoro-type symmetries since they are associated with
the group of local biholomorphisms.

#### All symmetries.

With the help of Čech cohomology and the Penrose-Ward transform, we have
shown how Kac-Moody and Virasoro-type symmetries in @xmath -extended
self-dual SYM theory arise. In the next paragraph, we will make the
symmetry algebras more transparent by proving a theorem relating certain
deformation algebras on the twistor side to symmetry algebras on the
self-dual SYM side. Furthermore, in Sec. 17 we then give explicit
examples of symmetry transformations and corresponding symmetry
algebras. Before dealing with these issues, however, let us summarize
our preceding discussion. In fact, above we have given all possible
continuous symmetry transformations acting on the solution space of the
equations of motion of self-dual SYM theory. If we let @xmath be the
canonical covering of the supertwistor space @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
be the group of local biholomorphisms of @xmath associated with the
algebra @xmath , we may state the following result:

###### Theorem \thechapter.1.

The full group of continuous (symmetry) transformations acting on the
space @xmath of smoothly and @xmath -trivial holomorphic vector bundles
@xmath of rank @xmath is a semidirect product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By virtue of the Penrose-Ward transform, one obtains a corresponding
group action on the solution space of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM
theory in four dimensions.

A proof of this theorem (for @xmath ) can be found in Ref. [ 204 ] . The
argumentation for @xmath goes along similar lines.

#### General symmetry algebras.

So far, we have worked within a quite abstract scheme. Let us now
present a more concrete relationship between certain deformation
algebras and hidden symmetry algebras [ 270 ] . Suppose we are given
some indexed set @xmath of infinitesimal variations @xmath of the
transition function @xmath of our holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over
supertwistor space. Suppose further that the @xmath s satisfy a
deformation algebra of the form

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .28)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where generically @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath denotes the supercommutator.

###### Theorem \thechapter.2.

Given a deformation algebra of the form ( \thechapter .28 ) with
constant @xmath , the corresponding symmetry algebra on the gauge theory
side has exactly the same form modulo possible gauge transformations.

Putting it differently, the linearized Penrose-Ward transform is,
besides being an isomorphism between the tangent spaces of the moduli
spaces @xmath and @xmath (see also Thm. \thechapter .2. ), a Lie algebra
homomorphism. Let us now prove the theorem.

Proof: Let @xmath be a smoothly and @xmath -trivial holomorphic vector
bundle of rank @xmath . Recall that the transition function @xmath can
be split according to @xmath , with @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the infinitesimal parameters of the
transformations @xmath and @xmath , respectively. By virtue of (
\thechapter .12 ), we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath stands symbolically for both components @xmath and @xmath .
Then one easily checks that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath represents any of the covariant derivatives given in (
\thechapter .13 ). Note that we use the notation @xmath and similarly
for @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Next one considers the commutator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using definition ( \thechapter .8 ) and the resulting splitting (
\thechapter .9 ) for the deformations @xmath , one obtains after some
tedious but straightforward algebraic manipulations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath has been introduced above. By assumption, it must also be
equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . By comparing this equation with the previously obtained
result for @xmath , we may conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since by assumption @xmath . Here, @xmath (respectively, @xmath )
belongs to @xmath . Thus, by our above discussion, it represents an
infinitesimal gauge transformation. @xmath

Hence, any Lie-algebra type deformation algebra on the twistor side
yields by virtue of the Penrose-Ward transform a symmetry algebra on the
gauge theory side being of the same form. Furthermore, we also realize
that if @xmath , the algebra on the gauge theory side will generically
no longer close because of the dependence of @xmath on @xmath through
@xmath . In fact, in order to be able to compare @xmath with @xmath
(which will no longer be given by @xmath ) from the above proof, one has
to Laurent-expand @xmath in powers of @xmath . The resulting coefficient
functions will solely depend on @xmath . Therefore, the space-time
derivatives appearing in the transformations ( \thechapter .12 ) will
destroy the “would be” algebra on the self-dual SYM side. As a matter of
fact, if one allows @xmath to depend only on @xmath , no such problems
will occur. That is, the algebra, though modified, will still close.
More details about these issues can be found in the next section when
explicitly dealing with affine extensions of superconformal symmetries.

### 17 Explicit examples of hidden symmetry algebras

By now it is clear that self-dual SYM theory possesses
infinite-dimensional hidden symmetry algebras. To exemplify our
discussion, let us now describe some explicit symmetry algebras. We
begin with affine extensions of internal symmetries and afterwards
discuss affine extensions related to space-time symmetries. As before,
we consider a smoothly and @xmath -trivial rank @xmath holomorphic
vector bundle @xmath over supertwistor space, the latter being covered
by @xmath . The transition function of @xmath is again given by @xmath ,
with @xmath .

#### Kac-Moody symmetries.

The prime example is Kac-Moody symmetries associated with internal
symmetries. Let @xmath be any generator of the gauge group @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .29)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the @xmath s are the structure constants of @xmath . Then we may
define the following infinitesimal deformation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .30)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

It is clearly a holomorphic deformation and moreover, one may readily
check that it preserves the reality condition ( \thechapter .23 ).
Notice that by comparing with Eq. ( \thechapter .7 ), we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

define one-cochains @xmath . For @xmath , the transformations of the
components of the gauge potential turn out to be (after properly fixing
the freedom in solving the infinitesimal Riemann-Hilbert problem; cf.
Eq. ( \thechapter .37 ))

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .31)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Thus, they represent an internal symmetry transformation. Then a short
calculation reveals that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .32)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which is the analytic half of a centerless Kac-Moody algebra @xmath .
One can bring ( \thechapter .32 ) in a more familiar form as follows.
Define @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, let

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .33)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

with some (real) coefficients @xmath to be determined. Next consider

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .34)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

that is, the @xmath -th generator is recursively defined by @xmath -th
one. Then

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .35)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for all @xmath . In fact, this is a direct consequence of Eq. (
\thechapter .32 ) and can be proven by induction with the help of Jacobi
identity for the generators @xmath . As this is rather straightforward,
we leave the explicit verification to the interested reader.

Next we need to find – by means of the discussion of the previous
section – the action of @xmath for @xmath on the components @xmath and
@xmath of the gauge potential. Consider the function @xmath as defined
in ( \thechapter .8 ). We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where in the last step we have introduced the functions @xmath which are
solutions of the Riemann-Hilbert problem for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .37)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

As the @xmath s are holomorphic and nonsingular in @xmath on their
respective domains, we expand them in powers of @xmath on the
intersection @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .38)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Furthermore, Eqs. ( \thechapter .15 ) imply

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .39)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and similarly for @xmath .

Upon substituting the expansions ( \thechapter .38 ) into ( \thechapter
.36 ), we find the following splitting of @xmath into @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .40)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Recall that solutions to the Riemann-Hilbert problem are not unique. For
instance, we could have added to @xmath any smooth function which does
not depend on @xmath . But at the same time we had to add the same
function to @xmath , as well. However, we have learned that such shifts
of “zero-modes” will eventually result in gauge transformations. As we
are not interested in such trivial symmetries, solution ( \thechapter
.40 ) turns out to be the appropriate choice. Note that for @xmath , Eq.
( \thechapter .40 ) is an identity. Expanding the functions @xmath in
powers of @xmath , we obtain for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .41)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that @xmath for all @xmath . Combining these expressions with the
transformation laws ( \thechapter .39 ), we have thus given the action
of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Furthermore, by Thm.
\thechapter .2. we know that the @xmath s satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .42)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

modulo gauge transformations. For an explicit derivation, see also Ref.
[ 269 ] . Following the discussion subsequent to ( \thechapter .32 ), we
eventually arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .43)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for all @xmath modulo gauge transformations. Altogether, we have thus
obtained an infinite-dimensional affine symmetry algebra in @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM theory, which is the analytic half of the affine
Lie algebra @xmath .

#### Virasoro-type symmetries.

Let us now discuss affine extensions of superconformal symmetries.
However, we first need some preliminaries. The superconformal group for
@xmath is locally isomorphic to a real form of the super matrix group
@xmath . In the case of maximal @xmath supersymmetries, the supergroup
@xmath is not semi-simple and the superconformal group is considered to
be a real form of the semi-simple part @xmath . The generators of the
superconformal group are the translation generators @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , the dilatation generator @xmath , the generators of special
conformal transformations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the rotation
generators @xmath and @xmath , the generators @xmath of the R-symmetry
and the generator of the axial symmetry @xmath . The latter one is
absent in the case of maximal @xmath supersymmetries. The superconformal
algebra then takes the following form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .44)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where, as before, parentheses mean normalized symmetrization of the
enclosed indices. As is well known, there is a representation of this
algebra in terms of vector fields on the anti-chiral superspace @xmath
according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .45)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Infinitesimal transformations of the components @xmath and @xmath of the
gauge potential under the action of the superconformal group are given
by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .46)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is any generator of the superconformal group, and @xmath is
the Lie derivative ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 Note that the Lie derivative is defined as
in the purely even setting. In particular, @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath is some local function and @xmath are local vector fields.
Furthermore, one requires that @xmath commutes with the contraction
operator. For any differential one-form @xmath , one may readily verify
the following result:

@xmath

Letting @xmath be @xmath , one sets @xmath . The extra sign has been
chosen for convenience. along the vector field @xmath . Explicitly, Eqs.
( \thechapter .46 ) read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .47)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

It is not too difficult to show that for any generator @xmath as given
in ( \thechapter .45 ), the transformations ( \thechapter .46 ) together
with ( \thechapter .47 ) give a symmetry of the @xmath -extended
self-dual SYM equations ( \thechapter .17 ).

So far, we have given the action of the superconformal group on the
components of the gauge potential on Euclidean superspace. The linear
system ( \thechapter .49 ) is, however, defined on the supertwistor
space @xmath . Therefore, the question is how to lift the action of the
superconformal group to supertwistor space but at the same time
preserving the linear system ( \thechapter .49 ). The answer is at hand.
By our discussion given in Sec. 16 , we have to preserve the complex
structure on @xmath . Recall the diffeomorphism @xmath . Complex
structures on the body @xmath of @xmath are parametrized by a two-sphere
@xmath . The latter can be viewed as the complex projective line @xmath
parametrized by the coordinates @xmath . Then a complex structure @xmath
on @xmath , compatible with ( \thechapter .75 ) and ( \thechapter .79 ),
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .48)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath . Notice that in the present case the corresponding Kähler
two-form @xmath is anti-self-dual, i.e., its components are of the form
@xmath . If we had chosen the @xmath -extended anti-self-dual SYM
equations from the very beginning, the Kähler form would have been
self-dual. On the two-sphere @xmath which parametrizes the different
complex structures of @xmath , we introduce the standard complex
structure @xmath which, for instance, on the @xmath patch is given by
@xmath . Thus, the complex structure on the body @xmath of supertwistor
space @xmath can be taken as @xmath .

Having introduced a complex structure on the even part @xmath of @xmath
, we need to extend the above discussion to the full supertwistor space.
In order to define a complex structure on @xmath , recall that only an
even amount of supersymmetries is possible, i.e., @xmath or @xmath . Our
particular choice of the symplectic Majorana condition induced by (
\thechapter .78 ) allows us to introduce a complex structure on the odd
part @xmath similar to ( \thechapter .48 ), that is,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .49)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Therefore, @xmath will be the proper choice of a complex structure ³⁶ ³⁶
36 Clearly, this choice of the complex structure does not exhaust the
space of all admissible complex structures. However, in the present case
it is enough to restrict ourselves to this class of complex structures.
For more details, see [ 269 ] . on supertwistor space.

We can now answer the initial question: the generators @xmath given by (
\thechapter .45 ) of the superconformal group should be lifted to vector
fields @xmath on supertwistor space such that the Lie derivative of the
complex structure @xmath along the lifted vector fields @xmath vanishes,
i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .50)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Letting @xmath , we can write ( \thechapter .50 ) explicitly as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .51)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

whereas the equations involving @xmath imply that the components @xmath
and @xmath are holomorphic in @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
final expressions for the generators ( \thechapter .45 ) lifted to
supertwistor space @xmath and obeying ( \thechapter .51 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .52)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .53)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Now we can give the infinitesimal transformation of @xmath which
participates in ( \thechapter .49 )

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .54)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is any of the generators given in ( \thechapter .52 ). It
is a straightforward exercise to verify explicitly that the linear
system ( \thechapter .49 ) is invariant under the transformations (
\thechapter .46 ) and ( \thechapter .54 ).

Having collected all necessary ingredients, we can now start with
constructing affine symmetry algebras related to superconformal
symmetries. In order to keep formulas simple, we shall in the remainder
of this section work in the complexified gauge algebra, that is, we drop
the last point from the list given at the beginning of Sec. 16 . It
should be stressed, however, that the subsequent derivation can be
modified for a real gauge algebra without any problems. Let @xmath be
any vector field of ( \thechapter .52 ), with

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .55)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where the @xmath s are the structure constants of the superconformal
group. Then we define the following perturbation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .56)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that the antiholomorphic @xmath -derivative appearing in @xmath
drops out as @xmath is holomorphic. Therefore, Eq. ( \thechapter .56 )
defines a zero-cochain @xmath given by ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 Note that for a real
gauge algebra, @xmath would not be zero but instead be given by @xmath ,
where @xmath represents the antiholomorphic involution ( \thechapter .75
) corresponding to Euclidean signature.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, one may readily check that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .57)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

upon action on @xmath . Here, we have introduced the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .58)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Generally speaking, ( \thechapter .57 ) can be seen as a centerless
Kac-Moody-Virasoro-type algebra.

Next we need to find the action of @xmath on the components @xmath and
@xmath . The derivation ( \thechapter .36 ) gets modified according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .59)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where this time

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .60)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Clearly, the second term of this expression is @xmath -independent,
i.e., it belongs to @xmath . In fact, we have simply shifted all the
“zero-modes” into @xmath . Recall that such shifts are always possible
and eventually result in gauge transformations. Upon substituting (
\thechapter .60 ) into ( \thechapter .15 ) and using Eq. ( \thechapter
.38 ), we find ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 Note that @xmath is a composition of a
superconformal and a particular gauge transformation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .61)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

since @xmath . Similar expressions hold for @xmath . Eq. ( \thechapter
.59 ) yields, after expanding @xmath in powers of @xmath and comparing
with @xmath , the following coefficient functions:

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .62)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that @xmath for @xmath . These coefficients together with the
integral formulas ( \thechapter .15 ) give the action of @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .63)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and similarly for @xmath .

Next we are interested in the underlying algebraic structure. Thm.
\thechapter .2. is not directly applicable, as we now have to deal with
structure functions. Recall that the @xmath s appearing in ( \thechapter
.57 ) are holomorphic functions on @xmath . However, there are only
minor modifications to be made. In proving Thm. \thechapter .2. , we
have introduced the functions @xmath . Their difference is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .64)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .65)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In order to determine @xmath , one expands both sides of Eq. (
\thechapter .64 ) in powers of @xmath and compares coefficients. We are
only interested in @xmath and @xmath , as they determine the action of
@xmath onto the components of the gauge potential. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .66)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath has been inserted. Note that last term in the first line
represents again a gauge transformation. It has been adjusted such that
@xmath . By virtue of ( \thechapter .15 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ), we
finally arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .67)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and similarly for @xmath . In deriving this result, the explicit
dependence of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath has been used. Obviously, the
algebra closes if and only if the coefficient functions are independent
of @xmath – a fact which we have already encountered at the end of Sec.
16 . Therefore, we are left with only a subalgebra of the superconformal
algebra. Indeed, we need to exclude the generators @xmath and @xmath of
special conformal transformations. Let us consider the maximal
subalgebra of the superconformal algebra which contains neither @xmath
nor @xmath . Furthermore, let @xmath denote the corresponding structure
constants. Then we end up with

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .68)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath is the expansion of @xmath defined in ( \thechapter .58 ).

### 18 Hierarchies

In Refs. [ 169 , 241 , 170 , 4 , 171 , 127 ] it was shown that a
solution to the self-dual YM equations can be embedded into an
infinite-parameter family of new solutions by moving it along commuting
flows of a so-called self-dual YM hierarchy. The lowest generators of
the latter are the generators of space-time translations. Putting it
differently, the self-dual YM hierarchy describes infinitely many
Abelian symmetries of the self-dual YM equations associated with
translational symmetries. Our next topic is the generalization of these
ideas to the self-dual SYM equations. For the sake of clarity, we shall
again work in a complex setting, that is, we consider the double
fibration ( \thechapter .9 ). If desired, reality conditions can be
imposed.

#### Generalized supertwistor space.

Consider the Abelian subalgebra of the superconformal algebra which is
spanned by the translation generators @xmath and @xmath . On
supertwistor space, we may use the coordinates @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Expressing the generators @xmath and @xmath in terms of these
coordinates, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .69)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

when acting on holomorphic functions of @xmath on @xmath . Then we may
define local holomorphic vector fields @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .70)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

for @xmath . Clearly, the vector fields @xmath and @xmath are totally
symmetric under an exchange of their dotted indices. As before, we
define a perturbation of the transition function @xmath of a smoothly
trivial holomorphic vector bundle @xmath which is trivial along @xmath
according to ³⁹ ³⁹ 39 Clearly, such a deformation does not preserve the
reality condition @xmath . See also footnote 37 .

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .71)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Next one could pull back @xmath to the correspondence space and solve
the corresponding infinitesimal Riemann-Hilbert problem (which we have
already done in the preceding section) to construct the symmetry
transformations of the components @xmath and @xmath of the gauge
potential. We shall, however, proceed differently and instead consider
the following dynamical system:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .72)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath and @xmath are parameters. These equations can easily be
solved. In fact, the solution to ( \thechapter .72 ) reads as

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .73)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that any point of @xmath can be obtained by a shift of the origin
and hence we may put, without loss of generality, @xmath and @xmath to
zero. Therefore, ( \thechapter .73 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .74)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are interpreted as coordinates on the anti-chiral superspace @xmath
whereas the others are additional moduli sometimes also referred to as
“higher times”.

For finite sums in ( \thechapter .74 ), @xmath , the polynomials

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .75)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

can be regarded as holomorphic sections of the bundle

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .76)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

In the following, we shall call this space generalized supertwistor
space and denote it by @xmath . Note that it can be understood as an
open subset in the weighted projective superspace @xmath ,

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

See also our discussion presented in Sec. 8 . Thus, @xmath is a
compactified version of @xmath . Moreover, for the particular
combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it becomes a formal Calabi-Yau supermanifold. As we shall discuss in
detail below, ( \thechapter .74 ) can then be interpreted as transition
function of a holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over @xmath .

#### Penrose-Ward transform.

Like supertwistor space, also generalized supertwistor space is a part
of a double fibration. For notational convenience, let us denote the
generalized supertwistor space by @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath . Then we find

  -- -- -- --------------------
           ( \thechapter .77)
  -- -- -- --------------------

where the correspondence space is again a direct product @xmath The
natural choice of coordinates on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .78)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Generalized supertwistor space @xmath can be covered by two coordinate
patches, @xmath , and equipped with local coordinates @xmath . On the
intersection @xmath , they are related by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .79)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Hence, the projections @xmath and @xmath in the fibration ( \thechapter
.77 ) act as follows:

  -- -- -------- -------- --------------------
        @xmath            ( \thechapter .80)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------------------

By virtue of these projections, we obtain the following proposition:

###### Proposition \thechapter.1.

There exist the following geometric correspondences:

  (i)    point @xmath in @xmath   @xmath   @xmath in @xmath
  ------ ------------------------ -------- ------------------------
  (ii)   @xmath                   @xmath   point @xmath in @xmath

Let @xmath be a rank @xmath holomorphic vector bundle over @xmath and
@xmath be the pull-back of @xmath to the correspondence space @xmath .
The covering of the latter is denoted by @xmath . These bundles are
defined by transition functions ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 Here, we again use the same
letter @xmath for both bundles. @xmath which are annihilated by the
vector fields

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .81)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

as they freely generate the relative tangent sheaf @xmath . The
derivatives @xmath and @xmath are defined according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .82)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and can be understood as generalizations of ( \thechapter .6 ).

The requirement of smooth triviality of the bundle @xmath allows us to
split the transition function @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .83)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

whereas @xmath -triviality ensures that there exists a @xmath which
belongs to @xmath . Therefore, we may introduce a Lie-algebra valued
one-form such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .84)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

and therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .85)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

We note that for @xmath this system reduces, of course, to the old one
given by ( \thechapter .16 ). Moreover, we have the following symmetry
properties

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .86)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The compatibility conditions for ( \thechapter .85 ) read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .87)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Here, we have defined the first order differential operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .88)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

We remark that the components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

coincide with the components @xmath and @xmath of the gauge potential on
@xmath . In the sequel, we shall refer to ( \thechapter .87 ) as the
truncated @xmath -extended self-dual SYM hierarchy of level @xmath . The
full hierarchy is then obtained by taking the limit @xmath .

From Eqs. ( \thechapter .84 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .89)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where @xmath . As in the previous discussion, Eqs. ( \thechapter .89 )
make the Penrose-Ward transform explicit.

#### Field expansions and field equations.

So far, we have written down the truncated self-dual SYM hierarchies (
\thechapter .87 ) quite abstractly as compatibility conditions of a
linear system. The next step in our discussion is to construct the
equations of motion on superfield level equivalent to ( \thechapter .87
). To do this, we need to identify the field content. At first sight, we
expect to find as fundamental field content (in a covariant formulation)
the field content of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory plus a tower
of additional fields depending on the parameters @xmath and @xmath .
However, as we shortly realize, this will not entirely be true. For
@xmath , we instead find that certain combinations of @xmath play the
role of potentials for a lot of the naively expected fields, such that
those combinations should be regarded as fundamental fields.

In the remainder of this paragraph, we shall for simplicity consider the
case when @xmath and @xmath . To simplify the subsequent formulas, let
us also introduce a shorthand index notation

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .90)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

First, we point out that Eqs. ( \thechapter .87 ) can concisely be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .91)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

which translates to the following superfield definitions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .92)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Note that quite generally we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .93)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .94)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Eq. ( \thechapter .93 ) can be simplified further to

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .95)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Therefore, the first equation of ( \thechapter .92 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .96)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

which are the first two of the superfield equations of motion. We point
out that for the choice @xmath the set ( \thechapter .96 ) represents
nothing but the self-dual YM equations.

Next we consider the Bianchi identity for the triple @xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .97)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

From this equation we deduce another two field equations,

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .98)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

The Bianchi identity for @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .99)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Applying @xmath to ( \thechapter .99 ), we obtain upon
(anti)symmetrization the following two equations of motion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .100)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Furthermore, the Bianchi identity for the combination @xmath shows that
@xmath determines a superfield which is totally antisymmetric in the
indices @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .101)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Upon acting on both sides by @xmath and contracting the dotted indices,
we obtain the field equation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .102)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The application of @xmath to @xmath and symmetrization in @xmath and
@xmath leads by virtue of ( \thechapter .101 ) to a new superfield which
is totally antisymmetric in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .103)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Some algebraic manipulations show that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .104)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where equation ( \thechapter .101 ) and the definition ( \thechapter
.103 ) have been used. From this equation, the equation of motion for
the superfield @xmath can readily be derived. We obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .105)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

As ( \thechapter .101 ) implies the existence of the superfield @xmath ,
definition ( \thechapter .103 ) determines a new superfield @xmath being
totally antisymmetric in @xmath and totally symmetric in @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .106)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

It is easily shown that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .107)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

After some tedious algebra, we obtain from ( \thechapter .107 ) the
formula

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .108)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where definition ( \thechapter .106 ) has been substituted. This
equation in turn implies the equation of motion for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .109)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

which follows after a somewhat lengthy calculation.

Now one can continue this procedure of defining superfields via the
action of @xmath and of finding the corresponding equations of motion.
Generically, the number of fields one obtains in this way is determined
by the parameter @xmath , i.e., the most one can get is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is, as before, totally antisymmetric in @xmath and totally
symmetric in @xmath .

Let us collect the superfield equations of motion for the @xmath
-extended self-dual truncated SYM hierarchy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .110)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where the currents @xmath are determined in an obvious manner. Clearly,
the system ( \thechapter .110 ) contains as a subset the @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM equations. In particular, for the choice @xmath
it reduces to the latter. Altogether, we have obtained the field content
of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory plus a number of additional
fields together with their superfield equations of motion.

However, as we have already indicated, this is not the end of the story.
The system ( \thechapter .110 ), though describing the truncated
hierarchy, contains a lot of redundant information. For that reason, it
should not be regarded as the fundamental system displaying the
truncated hierarchy. In fact, the use of the shorthand index notation (
\thechapter .90 ) does not entirely reflect all of the possible index
symmetry properties of the appearing superfields. In order to
incorporate all possibilities, we instead need to write out the explicit
form of @xmath .

As before, let us impose the transversal gauge condition

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .111)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which again reduces super gauge transformations to ordinary ones. Note
that in ( \thechapter .111 ) only @xmath contributes, since the
fermionic coordinates are totally symmetric under an exchange of their
dotted indices. The condition ( \thechapter .111 ) then allows to define
the recursion operator @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .112)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The third equation of ( \thechapter .92 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .113)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

which states that @xmath does not have a zeroth order component in the
@xmath -expansion while @xmath does. Therefore, we obtain as a
fundamental superfield

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .114)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Note that as @xmath it defines for each @xmath a spin @xmath superfield
of odd parity.

The second equation of ( \thechapter .92 ) reads explicitly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The contraction with @xmath shows that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .115)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the symmetrization is only meant between the @xmath . Therefore,
the superfield @xmath cannot be regarded as a fundamental field – the
superfield ( \thechapter .114 ) plays the role of a potential for the
former.

Next we discuss the superfield @xmath . To decide which combinations of
it are really fundamental, we need some preliminaries. Consider the
index set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which separately is totally symmetric in @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Then we have the useful formula

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .116)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where the parentheses denote, as before, symmetrization of the enclosed
indices and “contraction” means antisymmetrization in the respective
index pair. The @xmath s for @xmath are combinatorial coefficients,
whose explicit form is not needed in the sequel. The proof of (
\thechapter .116 ) is quite similar to the one of the Wick theorem and
we thus leave it to the interested reader.

The third equation of ( \thechapter .92 ) is explicitly given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After contraction with @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .117)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the definition ( \thechapter .114 ) has been inserted. Contracting
this equation with @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .118)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Thus, we conclude that @xmath is a composite field and hence not a
fundamental one. Using formula ( \thechapter .116 ), we may
schematically write

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .119)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

The contraction terms in ( \thechapter .119 ), however, solely consist
of composite expressions due to ( \thechapter .118 ). Therefore, only
the superfield

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .120)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

is fundamental. For each combination @xmath it represents an even
superfield with spin @xmath .

Next we need to consider the superfield defined in ( \thechapter .101 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By extending the formula ( \thechapter .116 ) to the index triple

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by utilizing the symmetry properties of @xmath , one can show, by
virtue of the above arguments, that only the combination

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .121)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

of @xmath remains as a fundamental superfield. It defines for each
@xmath an odd superfield with spin @xmath .

Repeating this procedure, we deduce from the definition ( \thechapter
.103 ) that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .122)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

is fundamental and it represents one ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 Note that @xmath . spin
@xmath superfield which is even. All higher order fields, such as (
\thechapter .106 ), yield no further fundamental fields due to the
antisymmetrization of @xmath , etc. In summary, the fundamental field
content of the truncated self-dual SYM hierarchies is given by

  -- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath            ( \thechapter .123)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- ---------------------

where we assume that @xmath . ⁴² ⁴² 42 For @xmath , the field @xmath
must be replaced by @xmath . All other naively expected fields, which
for instance appear in ( \thechapter .110 ), are composite expressions
of the above fields. Note that the field @xmath can be decomposed
according to

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .124)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Therefore, @xmath can be interpreted as a gauge potential while @xmath
represents a collection of Higgs fields.

It remains to find the superfield equations of motion for the fields (
\thechapter .123 ). This, however, is easily done since we have already
derived ( \thechapter .110 ). By following the lines which led to (
\thechapter .110 ) and by taking into account the definition (
\thechapter .114 ), the system ( \thechapter .110 ) reduces for @xmath
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .125)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

These are the superfield equations of motion for the truncated @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM hierarchy.

Above we have derived the superfield equations of motion. What remains
is to show how the superfields ( \thechapter .123 ) are expressed in
terms of their zeroth order components

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .126)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

and furthermore that the field equations on @xmath (or on @xmath after
reality conditions have been imposed), i.e., those equations which are
obtained from the set ( \thechapter .125 ) by projecting onto the zeroth
order components ( \thechapter .126 ) of the superfields ( \thechapter
.123 ), imply the compatibility conditions ( \thechapter .91 ). We will,
however, be not too explicit in showing this equivalence, since the
argumentation goes along similar lines as those given for the @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM equations. Here, we just want to give the
outline.

In order to write down the superfield expansions, remember that we have
imposed the gauge ( \thechapter .111 ) which led to the recursion
operator @xmath according to ( \thechapter .112 ). Using the formulas (
\thechapter .92 ), ( \thechapter .99 ), ( \thechapter .101 ), (
\thechapter .103 ), ( \thechapter .106 ) and ( \thechapter .115 ), we
obtain the following recursion relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .127)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

An explanation of these formulas is in order. The right hand sides of
Eqs. ( \thechapter .127 ) depend not only on the fundamental fields (
\thechapter .123 ) but also on composite expressions of those fields:
For instance, consider the recursion relation of the field @xmath . The
right hand side of this equation depends on the superfield @xmath .
However, as we learned in ( \thechapter .119 ), it can be rewritten as
the fundamental field @xmath plus contraction terms which are of the
form ( \thechapter .118 ). Similar arguments hold for the other
recursion relations. Therefore, the right hand sides of ( \thechapter
.127 ) can solely be written in terms of the fundamental fields.
However, as these formulas in terms of the fundamental fields look
rather messy, we refrain from writing them down. Note that the field
@xmath appearing in the last recursion relation consists only of
composite expressions of the fields ( \thechapter .118 ). Using Eqs. (
\thechapter .127 ), one can now straightforwardly determine the
superfield expansions by a successive application of the recursion
operator @xmath , since if one knows the expansions to @xmath -th order
in the fermionic coordinates, the recursions ( \thechapter .127 ) yield
them to next order. But again, this procedure will lead to both
unenlightening and complicated looking expressions, so we do not present
them here. Finally, the recursion operator can be used to show the
equivalence between the field equations and the constraint equations (
\thechapter .87 ). This can be done inductively, i.e., one first assumes
that Eqs. ( \thechapter .125 ) hold to @xmath -th order in the fermionic
coordinates, then one applies @xmath to ( \thechapter .125 ), where
@xmath is some properly chosen integer, and shows that they also hold to
@xmath -th order. For more details, see Ref. [ 269 ] .

#### Light-cone gauge.

Let us now give an alternative interpretation of the hierarchy
equations. First, we rewrite the constraint equations ( \thechapter .17
) of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory in light-cone gauge. One of
the interesting issues of this (non-covariant) gauge is that all the
equations for all the fields reduce to equations on a single Lie-algebra
valued superfield @xmath .

To be explicit, assume the following expansion

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .128)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

on @xmath . Here, all @xmath -dependence has been made explicit, i.e.,
@xmath is defined on @xmath . Note that the expansion ( \thechapter .128
) can be obtained from some general @xmath by performing the gauge
transformation @xmath . Upon substituting ( \thechapter .128 ) into (
\thechapter .16 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .129)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Plugging ( \thechapter .129 ) into the constraint equations (
\thechapter .17 ), we find the following set of equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .130)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Let us now come back to the linear system ( \thechapter .85 ) and the
constraint equations ( \thechapter .87 ) of the truncated self-dual SYM
hierarchy. Upon imposing light-cone gauge, that is, upon assuming an
expansion of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .131)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where now @xmath is defined on @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .132)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Therefore, ( \thechapter .87 ) turns into the following system:

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .133)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

Clearly, if @xmath solely depends on space-time coordinates, i.e.,
@xmath is independent of “higher time moduli”, all the extra fields
disappear and the above system reduces to ( \thechapter .130 ).

If we define

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .134)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

the system ( \thechapter .133 ) implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .135)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

If one differentiates these equations with respect to the space-time
coordinates, one realizes that the resulting equations coincide with the
linearized versions of ( \thechapter .130 ). Putting it differently,
some equations of the self-dual SYM hierarchy can be interpreted as
equations on symmetries for the self-dual SYM equations.

#### Summary.

As for @xmath -extended self-dual SYM theory, we may now summarize the
above discussion as follows:

###### Theorem \thechapter.3.

There is a one-to-one correspondence between gauge equivalence classes
of local solutions to the truncated @xmath -extended self-dual SYM
hierarchy of level @xmath on four-dimensional space-time and equivalence
classes of holomorphic vector bundles @xmath over generalized
supertwistor space @xmath which are smoothly trivial and holomorphically
trivial on any projective line @xmath .

#### Example.

Let us now give an explicit example of a truncated hierarchy which also
makes contact with our discussion presented in Sec. 8 . Consider the
truncated @xmath self-dual SYM hierarchy of level @xmath . Its field
equations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .136)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

and follow from ( \thechapter .125 ). The @xmath self-dual SYM
equations, which are the first three equations of ( \thechapter .36 )
(with @xmath ), are by construction a “subset” of ( \thechapter .136 ).
That is, we apply to the last equation of ( \thechapter .136 ) the
operator @xmath and contract with @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Eq. ( \thechapter .115 ) together with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

imply

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .137)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

These equations reduce to the @xmath self-dual SYM equations when the
dotted indices of @xmath and @xmath are chosen to be one. Note that as
@xmath run only from one to two, the last equation of ( \thechapter .136
) can be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .138)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

where we have defined an anti-self-dual differential two-form according
to @xmath . Note that these are exactly the field equations given in (
\thechapter .75 ). Hence, ( \thechapter .75 ) can be interpreted to
describe the @xmath hierarchy of @xmath self-dual SYM theory. Recall
also that in this case we have an appropriate action principle leading
to ( \thechapter .138 ). It is an interesting fact that even though it
is not possible to write down an action functional of @xmath self-dual
SYM theory ( @xmath is not formally Calabi-Yau), it is possible to find
one for a certain hierarchy thereof.

### 19 Nonlocal conservation laws

What remains is to give the nonlocal conservation laws associated with
the symmetry transformations discussed above. In what follows, we use
the ideas of [ 4 ] .

#### Conserved nonlocal currents.

The compatibility conditions of the linear system ( \thechapter .16 )
can equivalently be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .139)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Recall further that @xmath as given in ( \thechapter .8 ) satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .140)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where the covariant derivatives act in the adjoint representation. Then
we may define

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .141)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

where @xmath is a symmetry of ( \thechapter .139 ) given according to (
\thechapter .12 ). Here,“tr” denotes the matrix trace. Notice that this
expression is gauge invariant as both, @xmath and @xmath transform in
the adjoint representation. Now it is a straightforward exercise to show
that

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .142)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

Indeed, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This allows us to associate with any symmetry transformation a conserved
current according to

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .143)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

since

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .144)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

by virtue of Eq. ( \thechapter .142 ). In ( \thechapter .143 ), the
contour @xmath encircles @xmath . It is important to stress that (
\thechapter .143 ) is a superfield. Moreover, Eq. ( \thechapter .143 )
can slightly be rewritten to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------
     @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .145)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------------------

being more in spirit of Penrose’s integral formulas. Recall also that
due to Eqs. ( \thechapter .41 ) and ( \thechapter .62 ), certain
combinations of the coefficients functions @xmath determine the explicit
transformations @xmath and @xmath and hence contribute to the integrals
( \thechapter .143 ) and ( \thechapter .145 ), respectively.

Finally, we stress that one may also associate currents with symmetries
in the following way. Let @xmath be any @xmath -valued function which is
annihilated by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 See also our
discussion given in 13 . Then it is not too difficult to see that @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .146)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

the covariant derivatives act in the adjoint representation. Therefore,
we may take

  -- -------- -- ---------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .147)
  -- -------- -- ---------------------

which is conserved by the above reasoning.

## Summary and discussion

] ]

In this thesis, we have reported on various aspects of supersymmetric
gauge theories within the supertwistor approach. In particular, we first
gave a detailed twistor description of @xmath -extended self-dual SYM
theory. We in addition discussed some related self-dual models which
follow from self-dual SYM theory by suitable reductions. Their twistor
formulation requires certain weighted projective superspaces as twistor
manifolds. As we have shown, all these manifolds are formally Calabi-Yau
thus being naturally equipped with globally well-defined holomorphic
volume forms. This property enabled us to also present appropriate
action functionals for these models. Besides four-dimensional self-dual
models, we also discussed a dimensional reduction to three dimensions.
As a result, we obtained certain supersymmetric Bogomolny models. In
fact, we generalized Hitchin’s twistor construction of non-Abelian
monopoles to a (maximally) supersymmetric setting. In addition,
appropriate action principles on mini-supertwistor space and
Cauchy-Riemann twistor space were given and shown to be equivalent to
the action functional reproducing the field equations of the Bogomolny
model. In connection to this, we were naturally led to the notion of
Cauchy-Riemann supermanifolds and to partially hCS theory. Moreover, we
discussed certain complex structure deformations on mini-supertwistor
space. As a result, we obtained a supersymmetric Bogomolny model in
three space-time dimensions with massive fermionic and scalar fields.
Similar to the massless case, we also derived appropriate action
principles on the twistor manifolds in question. We furthermore
developed novel solution generating techniques by studying infinitesimal
deformations of vector bundles on mini-supertwistor and Cauchy-Riemann
twistor spaces, respectively. The algorithms were then exemplified in
the case where only fields with helicity @xmath and the Higgs field were
nontrivial. As we argued, the corresponding Abelian configurations give
rise to the Dirac monopole-antimonopole systems. The fifth chapter of
this thesis was devoted to the studies of hidden symmetries of @xmath
-extended self-dual SYM theory. We first gave a detailed cohomological
interpretation of hidden symmetries of self-dual SYM theory. We saw how
general deformation algebras on the twistor side are mapped to
corresponding symmetry algebras in self-dual SYM theory. Kac-Moody
algebras as affine extensions of internal symmetries were constructed.
In addition, we discussed affine extensions of space-time symmetries,
that is, we obtained an affinization of the superconformal algebra. The
algebra in question turned out to be of Kac-Moody-Virasoro-type. As was
argued, the existence of such infinite-dimensional algebras of hidden
nonlocal symmetries originates from the fact that the full group of
continuous transformations acting on the space of holomorphic vector
bundles over supertwistor space is a semi-direct product of the group of
local holomorphic automorphisms of the supertwistor space and of the
group of one-cochains with respect to a certain covering with values in
the sheaf of holomorphic maps of supertwistor space into the gauge
group. Besides symmetry algebras, we constructed certain self-dual SYM
hierarchies. The basis of this construction was a generalization of
twistor space. As we saw, such a hierarchy consists of an infinite
system of partial differential equations, where the self-dual SYM
equations are embedded in. As was shown, the lowest level flows of the
hierarchies in question represent supertranslations. Indeed, the
existence of such hierarchies allows us to embed a given solution into
an infinite-parameter family of new solutions. Moreover, a detailed
derivation of the field equations together with the corresponding
superfield expansions for the truncated hierarchies was presented.

However, there are certainly a lot of open issues and questions which
deserve further investigations:

-   An obvious and challenging task is the generalization of the
    constructions given in Chap. \thechapter to the full SYM theory. In
    Chap. \thechapter , we saw how solutions to the field equations of
    @xmath SYM theory are related to certain holomorphic vector bundles
    over superambitwistor space @xmath . In principle, the algorithms
    relating infinitesimal deformations of vector bundles over
    supertwistor space to symmetries being developed for self-dual SYM
    theory in Chap. \thechapter can also be applied to full @xmath SYM
    theory. This is basically because of the vanishing of appropriate
    cohomology groups. Furthermore, as a matter of fact, Thm.
    \thechapter .2. also applies to the full case which is due to the
    structural similarity of the corresponding linear system. Hence,
    once given a suitable deformation algebra (of Lie-algebra type) on
    the twistor side, one automatically has a hidden symmetry algebra in
    full @xmath SYM theory. ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 After having finished this thesis,
    an alternative approach of discussing hidden symmetries of @xmath
    SYM theory in terms of integrable hierarchies has been proposed in [
    211 ] .

-   Besides questions associated with symmetry transformations, etc.,
    one in addition needs to write down the related conserved nonlocal
    currents and charges – not only as superfields but also in
    components. In Chap. \thechapter , we considered particular nonlocal
    conservation laws associated with any symmetry of the field
    equations. It is desirable, to generalize such constructions to the
    full @xmath theory. Presumably, the construction of fermionic
    conserved currents ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 See, e.g., [ 3 ] for such constructions
    in ten-dimensional SYM theory. , that is, currents obeying equations
    of the form @xmath will simplify the discussion, since with the help
    of those one may derive conservation laws of the form @xmath by way
    of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    However, to proceed further (also in view of passing to the quantum
    theory) and to clarify the physical significance of such currents,
    one clearly needs to find their superfield expansions. In addition,
    one should then compute the classical Poisson brackets among the
    corresponding charges. After passing to the quantum regime, a
    challenging task will be to make contact with the quantum symmetry
    algebras considered in [ 83 , 84 ] . Moreover, it would also be
    interesting to see how such quantum symmetry algebras fit into the
    context of twistor string theory [ 266 ] and how they can be
    understood within the recently proposed twistor approach to @xmath
    SYM theory [ 57 ] .

-   Another issue also worthwhile to explore is the construction of
    hidden symmetry algebras and hierarchies of gravity theories, in
    particular of self-dual supergravity (see Ref. [ 233 ] for the case
    of maximal @xmath supersymmetry). ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 In [ 176 ] – [ 180 ] , an
    extension of Penrose’s nonlinear graviton construction [ 193 ] to a
    supersymmetric setting has been discussed. By applying similar
    techniques as those presented in Chap. \thechapter , one will
    eventually obtain hidden infinite-dimensional symmetry algebras of
    the self-dual supergravity equations, generalizing the results known
    for self-dual gravity. See Refs. [ 59 , 240 , 187 , 203 , 130 , 148
    , 87 , 88 ] , for instance.

-   Recall that it was conjectured by Ward [ 256 , 257 , 258 ] that all
    integrable models in less than four space-time dimensions can be
    obtained from self-dual YM theory in four dimensions. Examples are
    the nonlinear Schrödinger equation, the Korteweg-de Vries equation,
    the sine-Gordon model, etc. In particular, they all follow from the
    self-dual YM equations upon implementing suitable algebraic ansätze
    for the gauge potential followed by a dimensional reduction. In a
    similar spirit, the Ward conjecture can be “supersymmetrically”
    extended in order to derive the supersymmetric versions of the
    above-mentioned models. Therefore, it would be of interest to take
    the @xmath -extended self-dual SYM hierarchy presented in Chap.
    \thechapter and to derive the corresponding super hierarchies of
    these integrable systems in less than four dimensions.

-   Finally, we address additional points for further investigations
    being related to noncommutative field theories. In [ 221 ] , we (in
    collaboration with Christian Sämann) considered @xmath SYM theory on
    a nonanticommutative superspace, that is, instead of @xmath we took
    @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Clifford algebra of @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Upon introducing an involution corresponding to Euclidean signature,
    we derived the superfield expansions and the field equations of
    deformed @xmath SYM theory to first order in the deformation
    parameter @xmath . In showing this, we proposed an extension of the
    Seiberg-Witten map [ 226 ] to superspace. Our derivation was based
    on the @xmath formulation of the constraint system. Clearly, one may
    straightforwardly translate our results into the @xmath formulation
    of @xmath SYM theory. It would then be of interest to establish a
    nonanticommutative version of the superambitwistor correspondence.
    In particular, Eqs. ( \thechapter .16 ) induce a nonanticommutative
    structure on superambitwistor space. In addition, generalizing the
    results of [ 174 ] , it should in principle be possible to derive a
    corresponding action functional of deformed @xmath SYM theory which
    is still lacking. Moreover, splitting and dressing methods obtained
    from twistor theory have successfully been applied to the
    construction of solitons and instantons in noncommutative field
    theories. See, e.g., Refs. [ 149 , 150 , 151 , 268 , 118 , 123 , 152
    , 153 , 86 , 261 ] . It would also be interesting to see how the
    solution generating techniques as considered in, e.g., Chap.
    \thechapter need to be generalized to noncommutative field theories.
    Partial results on that matter have already been given in [ 155 ] .
    In addition, the methods used in this thesis might also shed light
    on the question of hidden symmetries in
    noncommutative/nonanticommutative field theories.
