## Acknowledgements

First and foremost, I am immensely indebted to my advisor Ulf Lindström,
without whose help and guidance this thesis could never have come into
being. He has always devoted ample time to answering my questions and
discussing problems whenever I needed to, often at a mere moment’s
notice. I feel he always took great interest in my progress, and offered
lots of support and encouragement, especially at times when I really
needed it.

I have also greatly enjoyed working with both Björn Brinne and Maxim
Zabzine. It has been very stimulating, and their enthusiasm for solving
the mysteries of string theory is infectious to say the least. In
addition they contributed to a social and relaxed atmosphere during my
first two years in Stockholm, as did Tasneem Zehra Husain, who also
added colour and joy to our office in the new building.

Thanks also to Ron Reid-Edwards for providing the office entertainment
during my stay at Queen Mary, and to all the other people there who made
my visit an enjoyable one.

Ansar Fayyazuddin deserves special thanks for being the driving force
behind the study group, which I found incredibly useful, as does Ingemar
Bengtsson for encouraging me to apply to Fysikum in the first place.

Last, but certainly not least, my eternal gratitude goes to mom and dad
for always believing in me, and for their unfailing support through
difficult times, well beyond the call of parental duty, by any
definition.

For Fay,

who brightened my life

for fifteen wonderful years

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Strings
    -    1.2 D-branes
    -    1.3 Outline
    -    1.4 About the thesis
-    2 Moduli spaces
    -    2.1 Introduction
        -    2.1.1 Mirror symmetry
        -    2.1.2 Outline
    -    2.2 Lie algebras
        -    2.2.1 Definitions
        -    2.2.2 Finding the roots
        -    2.2.3 Dynkin diagrams
    -    2.3 @xmath =2 super-Yang-Mills theory
        -    2.3.1 Defining our SYM theory
        -    2.3.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking
        -    2.3.3 The @xmath =2 potential
        -    2.3.4 The SYM moduli space
        -    2.3.5 Singularities
        -    2.3.6 Nonzero FI-terms
    -    2.4 Seiberg-Witten theory
        -    2.4.1 Elliptic fibrations
        -    2.4.2 Connection to physics
        -    2.4.3 Brane picture
    -    2.5 Quiver gauge theory
        -    2.5.1 Effects of orbifolding
        -    2.5.2 Quiver diagrams
    -    2.6 The @xmath =2 Higgs branch
        -    2.6.1 Comparing the moduli spaces
-    3 Boundary conditions
    -    3.1 Introduction
        -    3.1.1 Outline
    -    3.2 The bosonic model
        -    3.2.1 Conserved currents
    -    3.3 The superspace action
        -    3.3.1 Finding the currents
    -    3.4 The ansatz
    -    3.5 Structures on D-branes
    -    3.6 The boundary conditions
    -    3.7 Globally defined conditions
        -    3.7.1 Examples
    -    3.8 The WZW model
        -    3.8.1 Symmetries
        -    3.8.2 The gluing map

Accompanying papers

I: E @xmath Quiver Gauge Theory and Mirror Symmetry ,
C. Albertsson, B. Brinne, U. Lindström and R. von Unge,
JHEP 05 (2001) 021, hep-th/0102038.

II: @xmath supersymmetric nonlinear sigma model with boundaries, I ,
C. Albertsson, U. Lindström and M. Zabzine,
Commun. Math. Phys. 233 (2003) 3, 403-421, hep-th/0111161.

III: @xmath supersymmetric nonlinear sigma model with boundaries, II ,
C. Albertsson, U. Lindström and M. Zabzine,
submitted to Commun. Math. Phys. (2002), hep-th/0202069.

IV: Superconformal boundary conditions for the WZW model ,
C. Albertsson, U. Lindström and M. Zabzine,
JHEP 05 (2003) 050, preprint no. UUITP-05-03, USITP-2003-02,
hep-th/0304013.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

“This sort of thing has cropped up before,

and it has always been due to human error.”

— HAL 9000,   in 2001: A Space Odyssey

Although the film’s supercomputer was referring to a faulty
communications device, its statement turned out to carry universal
truth, much to the dismay of the ill-fated crew of Discovery . And not
only was the fault indeed induced by humans, it was of a fundamentally
different nature than the crew initially thought.

This is characteristic of research in theoretical physics. The quest for
an ultimate theory that will explain all the forces of nature in a
single, beautiful principle, is a typically human one. Besides a
curiosity about the world around us, we are driven by our desire for
aesthetics and simplicity. Sometimes so much so that we are tempted to
make oversimplified assumptions about nature, such as the Aristotelian
“natural state,” or Copernicus’ circular planetary orbits. We may be
unaware of the error, building entire theories on our flawed axioms, and
not until disaster strikes do we realise just how fundamental a mistake
we have made.

It is easy to make such mistakes because nature often turns out to be
much more peculiar than we ever imagined, displaying counterintuitive
effects like the particle-wave duality. At first, such weirdness might
be misconstrued as complications. But going along with it usually in the
end leads to an even simpler picture of the world, bringing us closer to
a unified theory of everything. So as a physicist, one learns to accept
ridiculous ideas just for the sake of argument.

One such “ridiculous idea” constitutes the foundation of string theory.

### 1.1 Strings

The idea is that all elementary particles are actually vibrating
strings.

This was put forward by phycisists in the seventies, after failing to
use string theory to describe the strong interactions (quantum
chromodynamics does a better job of that). It was realised that string
theory unifies gravity with the three forces described by quantum field
theory — electromagnetism, the weak force and the strong force. Because
the basic building blocks are one-dimensional objects, strings, instead
of zero-dimensional point particles, string theory does not suffer from
the divergences of quantum field theory.

The fact that strings are one-dimensional leads to a vast range of
possible string states. Strings can be open (two ends) or closed (ends
joined), and they can oscillate in a multitude of ways. The different
states that arise in this way correspond to different particles. That
is, instead of the plethora of fundamental particles in the Standard
Model, we have only one type of fundamental object; all matter can be
explained as strings in different states.

But string theory is not a simple theory, in any sense of the word. What
keeps string theory a field in development is the fact that it is
technically very difficult, often impossible, to perform exact
calculations. One is frequently forced to approximate, or resort to
hand-waving. Furthermore, string theory is actually not a single theory;
it is five different theories, all individually consistent, but with
different characteristics. Some describe only closed strings, others
both open and closed, the strings may be oriented or unoriented, and the
theories have different symmetries, etc. At first sight these theories
seem to be very far from anything resembling realistic physics. For one
thing, they are in general supersymmetric , i.e. they demand the
existence of superpartners of all observed particles, none of which have
shown up in experiments as yet. Another nuisance is their requirement of
no less than ten spacetime dimensions to live in.

Nevertheless, in the course of time there has been an increasing amount
of order brought to this mess, in the form of symmetries and dualities.
It turns out that the five string theories are related to each other via
various dualities, so that they are manifestly equivalent in different
limits. One nice thing about this is that computations that are
difficult in one picture may become easier in the dual picture. More
interestingly, there is mounting evidence that, at the end of the day,
all these theories are just different limits of one and the same
underlying theory, our holy grail. This is why the understanding of
dualities in string theory is of paramount importance.

### 1.2 D-branes

In the nineties, it was discovered that in addition to strings, string
theory contains other types of extended dynamical objects, called
Dirichlet branes ( D-branes ). The name comes from their function as
hypersurfaces on which open strings can end — an endpoint stuck to a
D-brane obeys Dirichlet conditions. They can be of any dimension as long
as it fits inside the ten dimensions of string theory. D-branes play a
crucial role in relating the different string theories to each other,
primarily via their transformation properties under duality.

One way of dealing with the six surplus spacetime dimensions (since we
experience only four), is to compactify them on tiny spaces, like
wrapping a piece of paper around a pencil. From a distance the paper
then looks one-dimensional, and we are rid of one dimension. Besides
reducing the number of dimensions, this technique has the advantage that
the “compact” part of the string theory shows up as matter in the
noncompact dimensions. We can thus construct the four-dimensional theory
of our choice by compactifying on the appropriate manifold.

In this context D-branes are useful for visualising where in the
ten-dimensional string theory our four-dimensional world fits. If we
choose a D-brane with four spacetime dimensions (a D3-brane), then the
part of string theory that lives on its worldvolume would describe the
physics of the universe as we know it. Of course we would need to break
a lot of symmetries first, especially supersymmetry, but in essence this
is the picture.

### 1.3 Outline

This thesis is divided into two chapters; the first one is concerned
with Paper I, and the second with Papers II–IV.

##### Moduli spaces

The realisation of physics as the worldvolume theory of a D-brane is the
topic of Chapter 2 . After providing some basics concerning Lie
algebras, we discuss the rather multifaceted background of Paper I. The
centre of attention is the space of vacua ( moduli ) in the worldvolume
theory of D3-branes, which splits into different branches depending on
the particular configuration we are looking at. We explain how these
branches of vacua arise, first from a purely field-theoretical point of
view, and then from a string theory perspective. The object of Paper I
was to show the equivalence between the moduli spaces of two different
theories, the E @xmath quiver gauge theory , and the E @xmath
Seiberg-Witten theory , in order to substantiate a conjectured duality
between them. We define these two theories and give a brief account of
the method used to compare the moduli spaces.

##### Boundary conditions

The dynamics of open superstrings is described by the supersymmetric
non-linear sigma model , which is a field theory in two dimensions. The
domain of this model is the two-dimensional worldsheet of the string,
i.e. the surface that the string sweeps out as it moves through
spacetime. Since the string has two ends, this domain has two
boundaries, which by definition are attached to D-branes. So studying
boundary conditions of the sigma model is equivalent to studying the
geometrical properties of D-branes.

In particular, these conditions should be consistent with the way
D-branes transform under duality. For instance, T-duality changes the
dimension of the D-brane, and the duality transformation acting on the
boundary conditions should yield the same result. This was our prime
motivation in deriving the most general boundary conditions possible, in
Papers II–III. More precisely, we derived superconformal boundary
conditions, i.e. conditions for the boundary to respect the super- and
conformal symmetries that are preserved in the bulk of the worldsheet.
Chapter 3 provides some background to that derivation and explains how
it was done. In Paper IV we applied our analysis to the WZW model , a
special case of the nonlinear sigma model; the last section is devoted
to that.

### 1.4 About the thesis

This thesis touches on many different topics, from F-theory to almost
product structures, all of them incredibly rich fields. We will not go
into great depth in any of these subjects, only give a brief review of
those aspects that are directly relevant to the accompanying papers. I
have tried to keep the discussion on a basic level, for the most part
assuming that the reader is not an expert. However, it has proven
unavoidable to sometimes state facts without justification, where an
explanation would be much too involved. I have also tried to make each
chapter selfcontained, but inevitably, Chapter 3 does make use of some
concepts introduced in Chapter 2 .

Moreover, as frequently becomes apparent in string theory, computational
techniques, and even notation, are not of secondary importance. This is
definitely true in the work presented here, where reaching the goal
depended crucially on the method of getting there. Despite this, we will
not linger on technical details, only mention briefly the approach taken
in each case.

The interesting part is after all the conclusions. They clarify but a
small fraction of the huge scientific effort which is string theory, but
I still believe that this theory is the path to follow in our search for
the ultimate principle.

Indeed, there is every indication that string theory is not merely a
misconception, due to human error.

## Chapter 2 Moduli spaces

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will be dealing with four-dimensional supersymmetric
gauge theories and their moduli spaces, realised as worldvolume theories
on D3-branes. The exact worldvolume action (i.e. including massive
fields) on a D-brane is not known, although considerable effort is being
invested in finding it [ 1 , 2 ] . So reliable analysis is possible
strictly in the low-energy effective theories, where only massless
fields are considered. Such theories are described by super-Yang-Mills
theories, which will be our main concern here.

In particular, we are interested in the spaces of vacua in the
Yang-Mills theories. These are obtained by applying the Higgs mechanism
to the scalar potential; this mechanism renders gauge bosons massive via
spontaneous symmetry breaking, and is a candidate for explaining the
origin of mass. In @xmath =2 super-Yang-Mills theory it gives rise to
two moduli space branches, the Coulomb branch and the Higgs branch . In
string theory, this moduli space corresponds to the space transverse to
D-branes sitting in ten dimensions.

To construct four-dimensional theories from string theory, one usually
compactifies the “superfluous” dimensions on very small spaces so that
they become invisible in everyday, low-energy physics. These compact
spaces are subject to a set of restrictions in order that the resulting
theory be consistent; such spaces are known as Calabi-Yau manifolds [ 3
] . A complex-one-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold is topologically
always a torus, while in two complex dimensions all Calabi-Yau manifolds
are topologically equivalent to the K3 surface [ 4 ] . The latter space
has orbifold singularities and is the one relevant to us here. The great
thing about string theory in this context is that it remains
well-behaved even when compactified on singular spaces such as these
orbifolds.

#### 2.1.1 Mirror symmetry

It is believed that most, if not all, Calabi-Yau manifolds have an
associated mirror manifold , i.e. a manifold whose complex structure
moduli are exchanged with the Kähler structure moduli as compared to the
original Calabi-Yau [ 4 ] . This is a very important result since it has
an implication that string theories compactified on two mirror manifolds
are equivalent (dual) to each other. As a consequence, if the moduli
spaces of two conformal field theories make up a mirror pair, then the
corresponding theories are dual to each other [ 3 , 5 ] .

Intriligator and Seiberg [ 6 ] showed how a duality between two
different gauge theories in three dimensions corresponds to a mirror
symmetry between their respective moduli spaces. The two kinds of
theories are, on the one hand, three-dimensional ADE quiver theories (as
constructed by Kronheimer [ 7 ] ), and on the other hand @xmath gauge
theory with ADE global symmetry ( Seiberg-Witten theory ). This mirror
symmetry exchanges the Coulomb branch of one theory with the Higgs
branch of the other, and vice versa. The two branches are in fact
geometrically identical, but the mirror exchange is interesting from a
physics point of view. In particular, the mass parameters (which are
associated with complex structure) of one theory are interchanged with
the Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters (associated with Kähler structure) of
the other theory.

Since the four-dimensional versions of these theories are related to the
three-dimensional ones via compactification, one might suspect that
there is a similar mirror symmetry acting in four dimensions. In fact, a
Higgs-Coulomb identity analogous to that of the three-dimensional case
was confirmed in [ 8 ] , for the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
four-dimensional theories. The remaining two of the strongly coupled
superconformal @xmath =2 theories, @xmath and @xmath , were shown to
also satisfy such Higgs-Coulomb identities, in [ 9 ] and Paper I,
respectively. Just like in three dimensions, the four-dimensional mirror
symmetry would provide a map between mass parameters of one theory and
Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters of the other.

One very useful consequence of such a mirror symmetry is that, since the
Coulomb branch receives quantum corrections but the Higgs branch does
not (due to @xmath =2 supersymmetry), quantum effects in one theory
arise classically in the dual theory, and vice versa. This facilitates
the analysis of nonperturbative phenomena enormously. Although the
@xmath theory does have some interest in itself, for instance in
explaining the @xmath gauge symmetry of the heterotic string, the main
motivation for establishing the moduli space equivalence for @xmath was
to complete the analysis for the whole series of strongly coupled
superconformal @xmath =2 theories. Knowing that there is a true duality
between the quiver theory and the Seiberg-Witten theory, one could use
this to analyse the quantum behaviour of physically more interesting
theories such as @xmath .

#### 2.1.2 Outline

Clearly, some knowledge of simple Lie algebras is required, so we start
by listing some fundamental facts about these in Section 2.2 . We then
move on to discuss @xmath =2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theories in
Section 2.3 , showing how the moduli space of vacua arises as a result
of the Higgs mechanism. Next, we define the two different gauge theories
involved in the duality discussed above, namely Seiberg-Witten theory
(Section 2.4 ) and quiver theory (Section 2.5 ). The latter section ends
with a brief account of the computation done in Paper I.

Before proceeding, however, let us clarify a fundamental point, namely
the difference between “perturbative” and “low-energy effective.” A
theory can be treated perturbatively when the coupling constant is so
small that an expansion in powers of the coupling constant is dominated
by the first few terms. On the other hand, a theory is a low-energy
effective theory when any massive states are so heavy compared to some
fixed energy scale (e.g. the cutoff scale in renormalisation) that they
completely decouple from the theory. Thus, for instance, the
Seiberg-Witten theory is a strongly coupled gauge theory where we have
discarded all massive states and retain only the massless ones.

With that, we are ready to embrace some representation theory.

### 2.2 Lie algebras

Lie algebra theory is an essential instrument in a physicist’s
mathematical toolbox. This is due to the close connection to vector
fields on manifolds, the most important example of which are those on
spacetime. As the name suggests, Lie algebras are the algebras of Lie
groups , which by definition are groups endowed with the properties of a
smooth manifold. Examples of such groups are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The @xmath vector fields on such a manifold form a Lie algebra. We
will be concerned only with simple Lie algebras, i.e. Lie algebras of
finite dimension greater than one and which contain no nontrivial
ideals. The complete list of such algebras is not extensive, but the
only ones relevant to us are: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The first two correspond to the groups @xmath and @xmath
respectively, whereas the @xmath algebras correspond to three
exceptional groups, defined e.g. in [ 10 ] . These groups are usually
referred to collectively as ADE symmetries and, somewhat confusingly, we
sometimes use the algebra notation to denote the corresponding groups.

In this section we give the standard definitions of some Lie algebra
objects that will be useful in the subsequent discussion.

#### 2.2.1 Definitions

The Lie algebra @xmath is related to its Lie group @xmath by the
exponential map @xmath ; i.e. @xmath for any element @xmath . This
defines it as a representation of its Lie group. That is, it is a
homomorphism from @xmath to the group of automorphisms of the tangent
space of @xmath at the identity, @xmath [ 10 ] . It comes equipped with
a Lie bracket , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Lie algebra generators and @xmath are structure
constants. This bracket is a kind of product structure, a bilinear form
mapping any two elements in @xmath to a third. As such it is used to
construct the adjoint representation of the group @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Lie bracket in principle defines the whole, rather rich, structure
of the algebra. In particular, it defines the roots , which are
eigenvalues of @xmath , with @xmath any element in the Cartan subalgebra
@xmath . By a Cartan subalgebra we mean a maximal abelian subalgebra
such that the maps @xmath can be simultaneously diagonalised for all
@xmath . There are two types of roots, positive and negative, which we
denote by @xmath and @xmath , respectively; they are simply related by
@xmath . Any root can be expressed as a linear combination of a number
of simple roots with integer coefficients. Positive roots are written
with positive coefficients and negative roots with negative coefficients
in their simple-root-decomposition. The number of simple roots is equal
to the rank of the Lie algebra; for instance, @xmath has eight simple
roots.

#### 2.2.2 Finding the roots

Roots satisfy a number of conditions which may be used to derive the
full set of positive roots [ 10 ] . As this was exploited in Paper I for
the @xmath roots, we will demonstrate the procedure for that particular
case here, but first we need to define another crucial ingredient in the
Lie algebra setup, the Cartan matrix . This is essentially a matrix of
inner products between simple roots. More precisely, the entries of the
Cartan matrix @xmath associated with the Lie algebra @xmath are defined
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the simple roots, @xmath , and @xmath is the inner
product on @xmath . The diagonal elements are always equal to 2, while
the off-diagonal elements are either zero or negative. For @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To find the full set of (positive) roots, we first choose a root @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the root properties imply that @xmath is another positive root.
Next, we take the inner product of this new root with each of the simple
roots to see which one gives a positive result,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus the next positive root is obtained as @xmath , and so on. One can
show that the resulting set of roots from this algorithm is the full set
[ 10 ] ; for @xmath we find 120 positive roots.

The reader may notice that we are dealing with weights rather than roots
in Paper I. The reason the above procedure is still applicable is as
follows. Corresponding to each representation @xmath of a Lie algebra
@xmath , there is a set of weights, the eigenvalues of @xmath in this
representation. If @xmath is the adjoint representation @xmath , then
the weights are precisely the roots of the Lie algebra. And since the
fundamental representation of @xmath is the same as the adjoint one,
finding the weights of the fundamental representation is in fact
equivalent to finding the roots of @xmath .

#### 2.2.3 Dynkin diagrams

All the structure and properties of any simple Lie algebra can be
encoded in a simple graph called a Dynkin diagram . Such a diagram
consists of a number of nodes linked by edges. Each node corresponds to
a simple root, and the number of edges between each pair of nodes
reflects the value of the inner product between those two simple roots.
There is a direct relation between the entries of the Cartan matrix and
the number of edges @xmath between the simple roots @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath .

This kind of diagram is very powerful as an algebra representation
because, given a Dynkin diagram, you can recover the whole structure of
the corresponding Lie algebra. The @xmath Dynkin diagram is shown in
Fig. 2.1 .

### 2.3 @xmath=2 super-Yang-Mills theory

Yang-Mills theory is essentially a synonym for nonabelian gauge theory.
That is, it is a field theory that is invariant under local (or gauge)
transformations, i.e. spacetime dependent transformations, which form a
nonabelian group. In four dimensions such a theory can be used to
describe three of the four forces of nature at low energy. ¹ ¹ 1 By “low
energy” we mean the kind of energy scale that is available to us in
experiments. These energies can be as high as several hundred GeV in
present-day particle accelerators. When the theory has gauge symmetry
group @xmath , it describes the strong interactions and is known as
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). For @xmath it unifies electromagnetic and
weak interactions in the electroweak theory. Together, QCD and the
electroweak theory constitute the Standard Model, which to date
reproduces all known experimental results of particle physics.

A gauge theory may possess other symmetries in addition to the gauge
symmetry. For example there may be a global symmetry group; that is, the
theory is invariant under some group of spacetime independent
transformations. The intuitive physical picture of such a global
symmetry is as a symmetry acting on added matter, for instance a number
of quarks in QCD.

Another symmetry example is supersymmetry, i.e. a symmetry between
bosons and fermions such that every boson is matched by a fermion (a
“superpartner”) with equal mass and charge. It may seem unmotivated to
introduce such a symmetry, since in experiments we have seen neither
spin-0 particles with the mass of an electron, nor massless spin- @xmath
particles (“photinos”). But the idea is that the low-energy world we
live in has spontaneously broken supersymmetry, while at sufficiently
high energy we would see the supersymmetry manifest. One promising clue
that this might be the case comes from the standard model coupling
constants. The theoretical prediction is that, without supersymmetry,
they all are almost, but not quite, equal, at around @xmath GeV, whereas
inclusion of supersymmetry makes them exactly identical, at an energy of
around @xmath GeV.

If a nonabelian gauge theory is supersymmetric, it is called
super-Yang-Mills (SYM) theory. Such a theory is also invariant under
so-called R-symmetry , which is essentially the symmetry group
transforming the different supersymmetry generators into each other.

We now define the precise type of SYM theories that interest us, before
embarking on an analysis of their vacuum states.

#### 2.3.1 Defining our SYM theory

There are several parameters we need to specify in order to define which
particular type of SYM theory that we are interested in. First, SYM
theory can be defined in any dimension up to ten (see [ 5 ] ,
Appendix B), but the case relevant to us is the four-dimensional one (as
the low-energy effective action on a D3-brane).

We also need to specify the number of supersymmetries, @xmath . Although
the worldvolume theory in Paper I a priori has @xmath = @xmath (see [ 5
] , Chapter 13), this supersymmetry is partially broken by putting the
branes on an orbifold singularity, and we end up with @xmath =2. So we
focus here on @xmath =2 SYM theory.

The next thing to specify is the field content.

##### Field content

A SYM theory contains a number of massless multiplets; the larger,
massive multiplets can always be decomposed into these. The relevant
multiplet in “pure” @xmath = @xmath SYM theory (i.e. there are only
gauge field interactions in the theory, and no matter added by hand) is
a vector multiplet containing gauge fields @xmath ( @xmath labels the
gauge group generators), two spinors @xmath and @xmath , a complex
scalar @xmath and a real auxiliary field @xmath (see [ 5 ] ,
Appendix B.2).

All these fields transform in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group. This means that, under a transformation by an element @xmath of
the gauge group, a field @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, it is said to transform in the fundamental
representation if it transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Hermitian conjugate of @xmath . Finally, @xmath is
said to transform in the antifundamental representation of @xmath if it
transforms as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Sometimes the representations are denoted by fat numbers, so that a
field transforming in the fundamental representation of, say, @xmath ,
is said to transform as @xmath (3 is the dimension of this
representation). The antifundamental analogue is @xmath . Note that a
field transforming in both @xmath and @xmath of @xmath by definition
transforms in the adjoint. Moreover, if a field transforms under a
product of groups, say @xmath , as @xmath , then we call it a
bifundamental field. This notation will be relevant when we discuss
quiver gauge theories in Section 2.5 .

We now add some fundamental matter to our pure @xmath =2 SYM theory.
More precisely, we introduce two hypermultiplets , each of which
consists of a complex scalar field @xmath ( @xmath labels the two
hypermultiplets), a spinor @xmath and a complex auxiliary field ² ² 2
@xmath is called an auxiliary field because it has no kinetic energy
term. That is, its equations of motion are purely algebraic and it can
be expressed in terms of other dynamical fields. @xmath , and they all
transform in the fundamental representation of the gauge group.

#### 2.3.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking

Due to the shape of the potential in @xmath =2 SYM theory, the gauge
symmetry may be spontaneously broken . This happens because, instead of
a unique vacuum with zero energy, there is a whole family of vacua.
Rather than being individually invariant under gauge symmetry
transformations, these vacua are transformed into each other. The
physical system will spontaneously choose one of the vacua, thus
breaking the gauge symmetry. This process goes by the name Higgs
mechanism , a physical example of which is superconductivity (see e.g. [
11 ] , Chapter 8). The gauge-broken theory describes the dynamics of the
chosen vacuum field, which parameterises the moduli space , i.e. the
space of vacua, of the theory.

To illustrate the principle of the Higgs mechanism, we now consider the
bosonic Yang-Mills theory with @xmath gauge symmetry.

##### SU(2) bosonic Yang-Mills

We first write down the Lagrangian and then define the constituent
fields. The Yang-Mills Lagrangian, with one matter (complex scalar)
field @xmath transforming in the fundamental representation of the gauge
group, is (see [ 11 ] , Section 8.3)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath transforms in the fundamental representation of @xmath , we
can write it as a doublet,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are complex functions of the spacetime coordinates @xmath .

The field strength @xmath , where @xmath labels the @xmath generators
@xmath and @xmath are spacetime indices, is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath being the structure constants of the @xmath Lie algebra,
cf. Eq. ( 2.1 ), and @xmath is a coupling constant.

We take the potential @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the real number @xmath is the vacuum expectation value of @xmath .
In the bosonic theory there is nothing that forces us to choose this
particular potential, but in the presence of supersymmetry there will be
restrictions on @xmath , and we choose ( 2.3 ) to make the analogy as
close as possible.

Finally, the covariant derivative of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(summation over @xmath ), where the generators @xmath are taken to be in
the fundamental representation of @xmath ; in terms of the Pauli
matrices, @xmath .

##### The Higgs mechanism

We are interested in the classical vacua of this theory. These are
defined by the vanishing of the potential ( 2.3 ), so any vacuum @xmath
must satisfy @xmath . As mentioned above, the @xmath ’s are not
themselves gauge invariant, but @xmath is, and there is a continuous
family of vacua @xmath related by @xmath transformations. These vacua
parameterise what is called a “flat” direction.

To see where this terminology comes from, consider the @xmath case,
where the vacua (which are now complex numbers) are related to each
other by a @xmath transformation, @xmath . As a function of @xmath , the
potential @xmath then has the shape of a mexican hat, with a minimum at
@xmath , where it vanishes, see Fig. 2.2 . Moving in a radial direction,
either in towards the origin or away from the origin, requires energy,
like climbing up a hill. But moving along the minimum at a fixed
distance from the origin requires no energy since we are moving along
the bottom of the “moat” — this is the flat direction, parameterised by
the continuous spectrum of vacua.

Returning to the @xmath case, we may now use the gauge freedom to rotate
@xmath to a basis where three of its four real components vanish. In
other words, we are fixing the gauge by choosing a particular vacuum.
The action is no longer invariant under @xmath , so we have broken the
gauge symmetry; we have spontaneous symmetry breaking. However, note
that the gauge symmetry is not completely broken. The Lagrangian ( 2.2 )
is still invariant under @xmath transformations, so the gauge group has
been broken from @xmath down to a @xmath subgroup.

We are thus left with one real component in @xmath , which we write as a
sum of a constant part @xmath and a nonconstant part @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If one inserts ( 2.4 ) into the Lagrangian ( 2.2 ) and expands the
latter, one finds that it contains mass terms for the gauge bosons [ 12
] . That is, there are quadratic terms of the form @xmath , where the
mass @xmath is proportional to the parameter @xmath .

In conclusion, spontaneous breaking of the gauge symmetry renders the
gauge bosons massive; in the @xmath case they combine into the W- and
Z-bosons (see [ 11 ] , Section 8.5). The field @xmath in this context is
called a Higgs field , and its vacuum expectation value @xmath is the
Higgs mass .

#### 2.3.3 The @xmath=2 potential

The Higgs mechanism generalises straightforwardly to the supersymmetric
theory. The difference is that supersymmetry imposes constraints on the
form of the action. For instance, the potential cannot be arbitrary, and
in addition the number of scalar fields is restricted.

The action for @xmath =2 SYM theory is much more complicated than the
bosonic one, as it involves all the fields in the vector multiplet (
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) plus any hypermultiplets
@xmath added by hand, as well as their interactions. In superspace
formalism (see Section 3.3 for details) this action looks simpler, but
we omit it here since we do not need to work with it explicitly. For a
pedagogical account of the @xmath =2 @xmath SYM action, see e.g. [ 13 ]
. Here it suffices to say that to find the potential for the scalar
matter fields (which we need for deriving the moduli space), one expands
the action in components and extracts all terms containing the auxiliary
fields @xmath and @xmath . This yields a sum of D-terms and F-terms ,
and then we integrate out @xmath and @xmath by use of their equations of
motion. The result is a potential involving a sum of commutators between
all scalar fields ³ ³ 3 Note that each scalar field is usually
represented by a matrix, so the commutators become matrix commutators.
@xmath and @xmath .

##### Fayet-Iliopoulos terms

However, this is not the whole story. In a supersymmetric gauge theory,
the precise form of the potential depends on the number of @xmath
factors present in the gauge group. This is because supersymmetry allows
an extra term in the action when the gauge group contains a @xmath
factor (see [ 5 ] , Appendix B). This extra term is of the form @xmath ,
with @xmath being the @xmath :th @xmath -component of @xmath , and
@xmath is a real parameter, called the Fayet-Iliopoulos term (FI-term).
Thus the FI-parameter corresponding to the generator @xmath is @xmath
with @xmath running over all the gauge group generators, but with @xmath
only for @xmath , where @xmath labels the @xmath generators.

In @xmath =1 SYM there is only one, real FI-term for each @xmath factor.
@xmath =2 supersymmetry, on the other hand, allows three different
FI-parameters for each @xmath ; this is due to the @xmath R-symmetry
that relates the two supersymmetries. The three FI-terms transform as a
triplet under the @xmath R-symmetry [ 14 ] , and we denote them as a
three-vector @xmath .

##### The potential

Let us finally have a look at the potential for the scalar fields in our
SYM theory:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where a barred index implies Hermitian conjugate, @xmath . The
three-vector @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the quaternion of the @xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath are the Pauli matrices.

Note that each of the @xmath ’s is a matrix of rank equal to that of
@xmath . Similarly @xmath is a three-vector of matrices of rank equal to
@xmath ; the trace in ( 2.6 ) is in the 2 @xmath 2 basis of the Pauli
matrices, not over the matrices @xmath . On the other hand, the trace in
the last term in Eq. ( 2.5 ) is in the @xmath basis, and its effect is
to project @xmath explicitly onto the basis vectors @xmath .

We now use the potential ( 2.5 ) to find the vacuum moduli space.

#### 2.3.4 The SYM moduli space

To find the vacua we set @xmath and solve for the scalars. In a way
analogous to the bosonic analysis, we may fix the gauge and give nonzero
expectation values to the scalars. We thus end up with a low-energy
effective theory with a gauge symmetry that is a subgroup of the
original gauge group @xmath , and massless scalars constituting the
moduli space.

Note that although nonzero expectation values of the scalars break the
gauge symmetry, they leave the supersymmetry unbroken. This is because
any vacuum state with zero energy (which is by definition true for the
Higgs fields) is supersymmetric as a direct consequence of the
supersymmetry algebra [ 15 ] . So in the case at hand, the gauge-fixed
theory also is @xmath =2 invariant, just like its @xmath -symmetric
parent.

What is the geometry of the moduli space? There are a few different
possibilities, depending on the FI-terms. We first study the case where
all the FI-terms vanish; it is then clear from ( 2.5 ) that the
potential cannot vanish when both @xmath and @xmath take generic values.
So we have two possibilities: @xmath and @xmath on the one hand, and on
the other hand @xmath and @xmath . Thus the moduli space consists of two
distinct spaces, or branches .

In the first case, when all hypermultiplets are zero, we find a family
of vacua @xmath that transform into each other under @xmath .
Spontaneous symmetry breaking renders all but one gauge boson massive
and we are left with one massless scalar @xmath . The moduli space is
then complex-one-dimensional, parameterised by the gauge invariant
quantity @xmath . This space, induced by the vector multiplet, is called
the Coulomb branch . It is required by @xmath =2 supersymmetry to be a
rigid special Kähler manifold [ 16 ] ; in a four-dimensional theory it
is @xmath .

Keeping @xmath on the other hand, and giving expectation values to
@xmath defines another branch of the moduli space, called the Higgs
branch , and @xmath =2 supersymmetry requires it to be a hyperkähler
manifold [ 17 ] . This is a real- @xmath -dimensional ( @xmath an
integer) manifold with @xmath holonomy. ⁴ ⁴ 4 The holonomy of a manifold
is the subgroup of @xmath under which a vector transforms as it is
parallel-transported around a closed loop on an @xmath -dimensional
manifold. It comes equipped with three complex structures and three
moment maps .

Actually, the Higgs branch in this particular case has singularities; it
is an orbifold with fixed points. Thus it is not a manifold in the
strict sense; however, it is the singular limit of a hyperkähler
manifold, and as such it possesses all the structure of a smooth
hyperkähler manifold. An example is the K3 orbifold , i.e. the orbifold
limit of a compact complex-two-dimensional hyperkähler manifold with
@xmath holonomy. Or rather, we will be interested in orbifolds of the
form @xmath (where @xmath is a discrete subgroup of @xmath ), which may
be viewed as a local description of a K3 orbifold near one of its
singularities.

#### 2.3.5 Singularities

The appearance of singularities on the moduli space is due to the way we
discard massive fields in the low-energy effective theory of the Higgs
fields. One can show that, if the gauge-fixed scalars (the Higgs fields)
are inserted into the SYM action, most of the gauge fields acquire
masses proportional to the vacuum expectation values of the Higgs fields
[ 13 ] , in analogy with the bosonic case. These gauge fields may then
be neglected in the low-energy effective theory describing the
gauge-fixed (massless) scalars; we say that the gauge bosons have been
“higgsed away.”

The fact that the gauge-fixed theory includes only the massless fields
in the bulk (away from the origin of the moduli space) means that the
moduli space contains a singularity at the origin. The reason is that,
as the Higgs masses (the vacuum expectation values) approach zero, the
formerly massive fields become massless, and thus become relevant in the
theory. Therefore the low-energy effective bulk theory cannot be
accurate near the origin.

This is true classically for both branches; there is a singularity at
the origin of the Higgs branch which coincides with the singularity at
the origin of the Coulomb branch. However, when we pass to the quantum
level, the singularity of the Coulomb branch splits into several
separate singularities depending on the gauge group [ 18 ] . The
physical interpretation of the quantum singularities is not as
straightforward as in the classical case (gauge bosons becoming
massless), but for @xmath SYM it was shown in [ 19 ] that two
singularities arise on the Coulomb branch, and that they correspond to a
pair of dyons (bound states of electric and magnetic charges) becoming
massless (see also [ 13 ] ). Due to @xmath =2 supersymmetry, the Higgs
branch receives no quantum corrections [ 19 , 20 ] .

#### 2.3.6 Nonzero FI-terms

Continuing our investigation of the vacuum moduli space, it remains to
see what happens when all of the FI-terms @xmath are nonzero and
generic. In this case the full potential ( 2.5 ) can vanish only if all
the vector multiplets @xmath are zero, which leaves only the last term,
involving the moment map. The vanishing of this term is commonly
referred to as the D-flatness condition. Since @xmath , we again get a
Higgs branch, except this time it looks a little bit different. It is
again an orbifold, but with its singularity resolved, or “blown up.” In
geometric terms, this blow-up is done essentially by replacing the
singularity with a connected union of intersecting two-spheres
(two-cycles), and the FI-terms parameterise the size of these spheres [
4 ] . The resulting smooth space is then a true hyperkähler manifold,
called an asymptotically locally Euclidean (ALE) space.

The FI-terms are in fact the periods of the hyperkähler structures. This
means that, if we represent the latter as a triplet of two-forms
comprising one Kähler form @xmath and two complex forms @xmath and
@xmath , then they are related to the triplet of FI-parameters as [ 4 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is one of the two-cycles used to blow up the singularity.
Because of this relation we see that the moment maps @xmath play a
crucial role in resolving the Higgs branch singularity, via the
D-flatness condition [ 17 ] .

We summarise the moduli space in Table 2.1 .

Strictly speaking there is also the possibility of having only some of
the @xmath vanish while the rest take generic values. Then a zero
potential does allow both @xmath and @xmath simultaneously, for some
combination of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s [ 14 ] . The resulting moduli
space is then mixed, i.e. a direct product of the Coulomb and Higgs
branches. However, we will not be concerned with this case here.

### 2.4 Seiberg-Witten theory

As explained in Section 2.3.5 , the classical @xmath =2 Coulomb branch
has a singularity at the origin, and as we include quantum corrections
this singularity splits into several singularities. Thus the exact
theory is fundamentally different from the classical approximation. This
is an indication of the fact that perturbation theory cannot be used in
the region near the origin since the theory is strongly coupled there.

However, it is in fact possible to determine the exact low-energy
effective theory, in the sense of calculating its exact complexified
coupling constant ⁵ ⁵ 5 The notation for the real and imaginary parts of
@xmath is a convention. @xmath as a function of the Coulomb branch
moduli. This was first done by Seiberg and Witten [ 19 ] for the @xmath
symmetry-broken @xmath =2 SYM theory (see [ 13 ] for a pedagogical
review); we therefore call this particular theory Seiberg-Witten theory
(SW-theory). The behaviour of @xmath at the singularities depends on the
type of each singularity, which in turn depends on the gauge group and
on any global symmetry of the unbroken SYM theory.

#### 2.4.1 Elliptic fibrations

One may picture @xmath as defining the moduli of a two-torus, with the
real and imaginary parts giving the size of a one-cycle each. Each point
on the Coulomb branch corresponds to a specific value of the coupling
constant, and therefore to a torus of specific dimensions. This
construction amounts to a fibration of the torus over the base space
constituted by the Coulomb branch. We call this fibration the
generalised Coulomb branch , and it is a complex-two-dimensional space
described by the algebraic variety [ 21 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are complex variables and the functions
@xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath whose degrees and
coefficients depend on the type of singularity we are dealing with. The
variable @xmath is the coordinate on the base space @xmath (the Coulomb
branch), while @xmath and @xmath parameterise the tori. This variety may
be viewed as a hypersurface embedded in @xmath , in which case @xmath
are the complex coordinates on @xmath .

Elliptic fibrations like these, where the fibres are tori parameterised
by a complex modulus @xmath and the base space is @xmath , exhibit
singularities that have been classified according to an ADE pattern [ 22
] . There is a countably infinite number of singularities at Im @xmath ;
each such singularity is of type either @xmath or @xmath , for integer
@xmath . In addition there are seven singularities at finite values of
@xmath , of types @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.

When @xmath approaches one of the singularities on the Coulomb branch
the torus fibre degenerates in a specific way depending on the
singularity type. For instance, if the singularity is of type @xmath ,
the torus is “pinched” in @xmath places so that it becomes a necklace of
two-spheres joined at points, as illustrated in Fig. 2.3 . This singular
hypersurface is then described by ( 2.8 ) for some specific polynomials
@xmath and @xmath ; for @xmath , for instance, @xmath goes to zero and
@xmath , so that the algebraic variety becomes @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 Connection to physics

This ADE classification of the fibration ( 2.8 ) is a purely
mathematical result, but due to the interpretation of the torus modulus
@xmath as a coupling constant, it has inspired a line of physics
investigations that has proved very fruitful. The idea is that each of
the singularities listed above corresponds to a four-dimensional @xmath
=2 SYM theory with global symmetry corresponding to the singularity
type. In particular, the interesting theories are the ones at strong
coupling, i.e. at the seven singularities at finite @xmath (Im @xmath
corresponds to weak coupling).

For instance, the original Seiberg-Witten theory, i.e. @xmath =2 SYM
with @xmath gauge group and four hypermultiplets (which has @xmath
global symmetry), fits nicely in this picture as the strongly coupled
theory at the @xmath singularity. The @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
theories (i.e. they have global symmetries @xmath , @xmath and @xmath )
are obtained as certain limits of an @xmath gauge theory with
respectively one, two and three hypermultiplets [ 23 , 24 ] ; these
theories can be derived from the @xmath theory.

The success of this correspondence thus far then prompted the
corresponding computation for the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath theories,
i.e. theories with exceptional global symmetries ⁶ ⁶ 6 As Lagrangian
descriptions do not exist for the exceptional theories, the authors of [
25 , 26 , 27 ] had to resort to more indirect methods of determining the
generalised Coulomb branch. [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] . The existence of such
SW-theories ⁷ ⁷ 7 We extend the name SW-theory to include all the
aforementioned strongly coupled ADE theories. has been shown also via
compactifications of higher-dimensional gauge theories [ 28 ] . The
computation of exceptional varieties is explained in detail in e.g. [ 29
] .

#### 2.4.3 Brane picture

The picture of the coupling constant as a torus parameter has given rise
to the idea of F-theory [ 30 ] . This is a conjectured
twelve-dimensional theory which, when compactified on a four-dimensional
K3 manifold, is equivalent to Type IIB theory compactified on a
two-dimensional manifold such as a sphere or a two-torus. The K3
manifold is a fibration of tori over the two-dimensional manifold, and
the coupling constant @xmath parameterises the fibre tori.

To see how this picture is relevant to us, we need to go into some
detail. Take the two-dimensional base space to be @xmath , parameterised
by the complex coordinate @xmath . Then the K3 manifold is described by
an algebraic variety of the form ( 2.8 ) with @xmath and @xmath being of
degree eight and twelve respectively in @xmath , and it has 24
singularities. These are determined as the zeroes of the discriminant of
the variety [ 21 ] , and correspond in the IIB picture to the positions
on @xmath of 24 spacefilling 7-branes (filling up the eight
uncompactified dimensions) [ 31 ] .

When a specific combination of @xmath 7-branes (i.e. 7-branes on which
@xmath -strings ⁸ ⁸ 8 A @xmath -string is a bound state of @xmath
fundamental strings and @xmath D1-branes. can end) coincide at a
particular value of @xmath , or equivalently, at a particular point on
@xmath , then the gauge symmetry on the worldvolume of these 7-branes is
enhanced. Which particular gauge group we get depends on the number and
types of 7-branes involved [ 31 , 32 ] ; the different possibilities
include the ADE groups and were categorised in [ 27 ] .

Next we do what Banks et al [ 33 ] did and introduce a D3-brane parallel
to the 7-branes and located close to their position in @xmath . This
“probe technique” is a popular approach to studying the properties of
string theory backgrounds; by “probe” we mean that the D3-brane does not
itself affect the background geometry. This is admittedly an
approximation, and backreaction has been taken into account in e.g. [ 34
, 35 ] .

The probe provides an alternative picture of some of the physics on the
7-branes, as features of the worldvolume theory living on the D3-brane.
This is a four-dimensional @xmath =2 SYM theory with a broken gauge
symmetry that becomes enhanced at the singularity. Here it also becomes
superconformal, and acquires a global symmetry which is the same as the
gauge symmetry on the 7-branes ⁹ ⁹ 9 For @xmath global symmetry, this
theory does not admit a Lagrangian description. [ 33 , 36 ] . Moreover,
the hypermultiplet fields are strings stretched between the D3-brane and
the various 7-branes, whereas the vector multiplets correspond to
strings with both ends on the D3-brane.

We have thus constructed a somewhat elaborate string theory setup in
order to obtain a brane interpretation of the globally symmetric,
superconformal theory. But it was worth the effort; we now have a clear
picture of the generalised Coulomb branch in terms of F-theory — it is
just the K3 manifold on which the twelve-dimensional theory is
compactified (the ordinary Coulomb branch of the probe is the base space
@xmath ). In particular this has made it possible to find the exact
moduli space for strongly coupled SW-theories [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] .

Moreover, this setup is relevant here because now we have brane pictures
for both of the two gauge theories that Paper I relates to. The other
theory, the quiver gauge theory , which has a more straightforward brane
interpretation, is discussed in the next section. But first we remark
that since, as was shown in [ 8 , 9 ] and Paper I, there is a nontrivial
identity between the moduli spaces of these two different theories, we
expect there to be some kind of duality between the two string theory
backgrounds. However, this turns out to be less than manifest, and
attempts at finding such a duality have failed thus far (see e.g. [ 37 ]
).

Let us now explain what we mean by a quiver theory.

### 2.5 Quiver gauge theory

Quiver gauge theory is a well-established concept that frequently crops
up in string theory [ 14 , 38 ] . At first sight this type of theory may
seem anything but natural, as it involves a rather specific gauge
structure — a product of unitary groups and matter fields transforming
according to a strict pattern as bifundamentals under pairs of the
constituent gauge groups. However, in the quest for realistic physics
based on string theory one must break both supersymmetry and gauge
symmetry in some way, and one of the most straightforward procedures
yields precisely what we call quiver theory.

The idea is to start with Type IIB string theory in ten flat dimensions
(coordinates @xmath ) and introduce a stack of @xmath coinciding
D3-branes. We arrange these branes such that their four-dimensional
worldvolumes are aligned with the 0-1-2-3-directions @xmath . The
worldvolume supports a pure @xmath = @xmath SYM theory, i.e. the only
matter present is a vector multiplet containing three complex (= six
real) scalar fields transforming in the adjoint representation of the
gauge group. In the string theory picture these scalars are the
coordinates of the position of the branes along the six dimensions
transverse to the branes. As long as they all coincide, the gauge
symmetry is @xmath ; this is due to the way in which the ends of open
strings are indexed (by Chan-Paton indices ) according to which branes
in the stack they are attached to (see [ 39 ] , Section 6.5).

However, if the branes separate from each other, the gauge group is
broken down to some subgroup, since there will be fewer branes for
massless strings to end on. This is precisely the Higgs mechanism from
the point of view of the gauge theory; moving the branes corresponds to
giving expectation values to the scalar fields, which breaks the gauge
symmetry.

To break supersymmetry we make an orbifold out of the 6-7-8-9-dimensions
by imposing an identification on the coordinates under a group @xmath .
That is, two points are considered identical if they differ only by a
@xmath -transformation. Note that the origin @xmath is fixed under
@xmath -transformations — this is the orbifold singularity, which will
be blown up later.

Here we choose @xmath to be a discrete subgroup of @xmath ; the
motivation for this is that the resulting orbifold @xmath follows the
same ADE classification as a K3 surface, and may be viewed as a local
description of a K3 singularity, at least near the origin. As will
become clear presently, this orbifold constitutes the Higgs branch of
the worldvolume theory, and as we mentioned in Section 2.3 it is
required by @xmath =2 supersymmetry to be just such an orbifold.

To summarise, we have the following configuration,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where crosses indicate the dimensions along which the brane or orbifold
extends, and a dot means the brane is pointlike in that direction.

We now explore the consequences of the @xmath -identification.

#### 2.5.1 Effects of orbifolding

When we perform the orbifolding, the @xmath gauge group breaks down to a
product of unitary groups, which we call @xmath . One of the @xmath =
@xmath complex scalars remains in the adjoint representation of the
broken gauge group. The other two scalars on the other hand transform as
bifundamentals according to a special pattern. This rearrangement of the
matter fields breaks the supersymmetry down to @xmath =2; the adjoint
scalar becomes the scalar in the @xmath =2 vector multiplet, while the
two bifundamentals constitute the scalars of two hypermultiplets. Thus
the worldvolume theory on the branes is now an @xmath =2 SYM theory with
two hypermultiplets.

It is easy to see explicitly how the orbifolding acts on the gauge group
and the scalars. A detailed account of the orbifolding procedure is
given in [ 14 ] , and we merely sketch it here. The fields that we are
interested in, namely the vector fields @xmath ( @xmath labels the gauge
group generators), the complex 4-5-coordinate @xmath , and the complex
6-7-8-9-coordinates @xmath and @xmath , all arise as massless
excitations of open strings. We can therefore represent them by matrices
encoding their Chan-Paton indices. With @xmath branes present, these
matrices have dimension @xmath with, in a suitable basis, the ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) entry specifying whether or not the string stretches between
the @xmath :th and @xmath :th branes.

Here we take the number of branes to equal the order of the orbifold
group, @xmath . Although the reason for this choice will become clear
later, we attempt to justify it already at this point. Our aim is to
represent the action of @xmath on the open string sector, and since
there are @xmath distinct elements of the orbifold group, we need @xmath
different string states to represent them. Therefore the strings need to
be able to end on @xmath different branes; these string states provide a
faithful representation of @xmath .

We use the following notation for the Chan-Paton matrices,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the unorbifolded theory, all these fields belong to the vector
multiplet and therefore transform in the adjoint representation of the
unbroken gauge group @xmath . However, the requirement that they be
invariant under the orbifold group @xmath imposes restrictions on the
Chan-Paton matrices such that this is no longer true.

If we denote by @xmath the regular matrix representation ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The
regular representation of a group @xmath is the representation
corresponding to the left action of @xmath on itself. In matrix form it
is a @xmath @xmath @xmath block-diagonal matrix with each @xmath
-dimensional irreducible representation occurring @xmath times on the
diagonal. of @xmath , then a field is @xmath -invariant if it commutes
with @xmath . We therefore impose

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , however, we need to take into account the fact that they
live along the orbifold directions. This means that the invariance
condition involves an extra @xmath -action on the doublet ( @xmath ,
@xmath ), via the 2 @xmath 2 matrix representation acting on the
quaternion ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 For explicit matrix representations of the ADE
groups, see e.g. [ 14 , 37 ] . ( 2.7 ). We call this matrix @xmath , and
find the following invariance condition for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now a matter of straightforward matrix algebra to derive the form
of the Chan-Paton matrices that satisfy Eqs. ( 2.13 )–( 2.15 ), and the
result is the aforementioned factorisation of the gauge group and the
bifundamental structure. Some explicit such calculations are shown in
e.g. [ 37 ] .

Note that the vacuum moduli space now consists of two branches, as
expected of a four-dimensional @xmath =2 theory. The 4-5-space, induced
by the vector multiplet @xmath , constitutes the Coulomb branch, and the
orbifolded 6-7-8-9-space, induced by the hypermultiplets @xmath , is the
Higgs branch.

So what about the Fayet-Iliopoulos terms? To find the corresponding
object in the string theory picture it is not sufficient to look only at
the open string sector. We need to include massless closed strings, in
particular the twisted ones. That is, string states that are invariant
under the orbifold group only as long as they stay at the singularity.
These states enter the worldvolume theory of the D3-branes in exactly
the same way as FI-terms [ 14 ] .

#### 2.5.2 Quiver diagrams

The resulting gauge structure has the interesting feature that it falls
into an ADE classification. That is, one may use the ADE (extended)
Dynkin diagrams to encode the transformation properties of the
bifundamentals. As explained above, these properties are directly
related to the group @xmath . For instance, @xmath breaks the gauge
group down to a direct product of @xmath @xmath ’s and arranges the
hypermultiplets to transform as ( @xmath , @xmath ) under pairs of
@xmath ’s according to an @xmath pattern.

That is, we may represent the gauge structure by means of an @xmath
extended Dynkin diagram, as shown in Fig. 2.4 . The nodes of the diagram
each corresponds to a @xmath factor (i.e. a FI-term) and the edges
describe the bifundamentals with the arrow pointing towards the
antifundamental representation. Similarly, for @xmath equal to the
dihedral group @xmath , we obtain a @xmath structure, and @xmath , the
tetrahedral group, yields an @xmath structure. The octahedral group,
@xmath , gives @xmath , and the icosahedral @xmath an @xmath structure.
Thus there is a one-to-one correspondence between the discrete groups
@xmath and the ADE Lie algebras.

That the quiver diagrams are extended Dynkin diagrams means that there
is an extra @xmath node compared to the ordinary Dynkin diagram. This
extra @xmath factor comes from the fact that there is a trivial solution
of ( 2.13 ), namely @xmath , the identity matrix; the trivial solution
corresponds to a @xmath that will always remain unbroken no matter what
we do to the branes. In terms of the worldvolume gauge theory this means
we can Higgs away all the vector multiplets except the one corresponding
to the trivial @xmath . This @xmath group is the gauge group in the
worldvolume theory of a single D-brane, so we see that the
hypermultiplets now parameterise the position in the orbifold of a
single D3-brane. From the point of view of the covering space @xmath ,
this brane is actually a stack of @xmath fractional branes, moving
simultaneously in such a way that they are images of each other under
@xmath .

### 2.6 The @xmath=2 Higgs branch

The object of Paper I was to show that the Higgs branch of the @xmath
quiver theory is identical to the generalised Coulomb branch of @xmath
Seiberg-Witten theory. There is no problem to do this in the singular
limit; then the quiver Higgs branch is just the orbifold @xmath , which
is described essentially by Eq.  ( 2.8 ) with @xmath and @xmath .

The subtle difference is that the variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are @xmath -invariants here, not @xmath -invariants, although they are
isomorphic to the latter [ 40 ] . To make the distinction explicit, we
call the @xmath -invariants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and find the
variety [ 8 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the @xmath quiver Higgs branch.

For nonsingular moduli spaces matters are more involved. We already know
the algebraic variety for the resolved SW-theory — it is Eq.  ( 2.8 ),
with [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the coefficients @xmath are deformation parameters; when they are
nonzero, the singularity is deformed so that the space becomes smooth.

However, we did not know the explicit form of the resolved quiver Higgs
branch (the ALE space), so we computed it in Paper I, in terms of
FI-parameters. The resulting variety was then brought, by means of
variable substitutions, to the form ( 2.8 ) with @xmath and @xmath given
by ( 2.16 ) and ( 2.17 ), except the coefficients in @xmath and @xmath ,
which we called @xmath , were now explicit polynomials in FI-terms.
These polynomials may a priori be different from the deformation
parameters of the SW-theory, and the conclusion in Paper I was that they
are in fact identical.

Before concluding this chapter, we briefly remark on the details of the
Higgs branch computation and comparison to the SW-variety.

#### 2.6.1 Comparing the moduli spaces

To compute the Higgs branch we used so-called “bug calculus,” introduced
in [ 8 ] and reviewed in [ 41 ] . It is essentially a technique to avoid
writing zillions of indices in computations that involve a lot of
fields. Polynomials in the ADE bifundamentals are represented by lines
drawn in quiver diagrams, and traces (invariants) correspond to closed
loops. These loops may then be manipulated subject to a set of
constraints that reflect the D-flatness conditions (i.e. the moment map
constraints), and we thus find the algebraic variety for the quiver
Higgs branch.

The comparison between the @xmath quiver Higgs branch and the @xmath
SW-variety boils down to showing that our coefficients @xmath are equal
to the deformation parameters @xmath of Noguchi et al [ 27 ] . The link
between the two notations goes via the simple roots. To see how, we
introduce the characteristic polynomial ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some representation of the group @xmath , @xmath is a
complex parameter, and @xmath are the weights of the representation
@xmath . The matrix @xmath is the matrix with the weights on the
diagonal and zeros otherwise, and is the identity matrix. The vanishing
of @xmath encodes the same information about the singularity in an
elliptic fibration as the hypersurface ( 2.8 ) [ 18 ] .

In particular, it is convenient to use the characteristic polynomial for
computing the Casimir invariants of @xmath , and this is what Noguchi et
al [ 27 ] did to express the @xmath Casimir invariants (= elements of
@xmath that commute with all generators) in terms of the deformation
parameters @xmath . Their equations are easily inverted so as to express
the @xmath ’s in terms of Casimirs, which in turn are polynomials in the
weights @xmath . And since the weights may be written in terms of the
simple roots as shown in Section 2.2 , we obtain the Casimirs as
polynomials in the simple roots. We thus have the @xmath ’s expressed in
terms of FI-parameters, hence they may be explicitly compared with our
coefficients @xmath (which were defined as polynomials in FI-terms
already from the beginning).

## Chapter 3 Boundary conditions

### 3.1 Introduction

This chapter is concerned with the dynamics of the ends of open
superstrings. As an open string propagates through spacetime it sweeps
out a two-dimensional worldsheet . The ends of the string trace out
one-dimensional paths, which constitute boundaries of the worldsheet.
The motion of the string, and hence the shape of its worldsheet, is
dictated by equations of motion derived from a two-dimensional field
theory called the nonlinear sigma model . It is an action integral whose
domain is the worldsheet, parameterised by two coordinates: @xmath along
the string, and a time coordinate @xmath along the direction of motion.
The target space of this integral is spacetime; that is, the dynamical
fields in the action are the vectors @xmath , giving the position in
spacetime of the worldsheet point @xmath . Thus the dynamics of the
string is described by the equations of motion for @xmath .

In particular, the end of the string moves according to the equations of
motion on the domain boundary (boundary conditions), which restrict it
to move on some hypersurface in spacetime. Since open strings are by
definition attached to D-branes, this hypersurface is a D-brane. Thus,
in defining the hypersurface where the end is allowed to move, the
boundary equations of motion are telling us what the corresponding
D-brane looks like, see Fig. 3.1 .

How restrictive these equations of motion are depends on the amount of
symmetry preserved on the boundary. We focus here on the minimally (
@xmath =1) supersymmetric conformal nonlinear sigma model, ¹ ¹ 1 In
Papers II and IV we also made a sketchy analysis of the @xmath =2 model.
In this case a rich structure arises due to an ambiguity in choice of
sign in the boundary conditions. The @xmath =2 model was studied in more
detail in [ 42 , 43 ] . assuming that the worldsheet bulk superconformal
symmetry is preserved also on the boundary (the D-brane). We showed in
Papers II–IV that the boundary conditions allowed by this assumption are
more general than those commonly used elsewhere — the latter conditions
are just special cases. Nevertheless, we will see that our conditions do
impose some restrictions on the properties of D-branes.

In deriving the boundary equations of motion, the naive approach would
be to do so directly from the action, by use of the principle of least
action (i.e. a perturbation of the action should vanish). This is
hazardous, as the result does not necessarily preserve the desired
symmetries. One could in principle amend this by modifying the action by
extra boundary terms to make it superconformal on the boundary. However,
there is no systematic way to find those boundary terms, except guessing
them. In Papers II and III we therefore went for the safer method of
analysing the currents that correspond to the relevant symmetries,
requiring that they be conserved on the boundary. This defines boundary
conditions for the currents, from which we could derive conditions on
the brane.

Having thus obtained the minimal requirements for boundary
superconformal invariance in a general background, it is natural to
consider a special case of background. In Paper IV we chose the ever
popular WZW model , which is a nonlinear sigma model defined on a group
manifold, with chiral isometry currents [ 44 , 45 ] . Here our boundary
conditions imply a surprisingly general gluing map between the isometry
currents, the geometrical implications of which remain unclear at the
time of writing.

#### 3.1.1 Outline

To introduce some fundamental concepts pertaining to symmetries and
conserved currents, we begin in Section 3.2 by discussing the bosonic
nonlinear sigma model. Then we define the supersymmetric sigma model in
Section 3.3 , explaining about superspace and superfields, and how to
derive the superconformal currents. In Section 3.4 we make an ansatz for
the worldsheet fields which, after introducing some necessary notation
in Section 3.5 , we plug into the conservation laws for the currents and
obtain in Section 3.6 the complete set of conditions for a
superconformal D-brane, which we interpret in geometrical terms.
Prompted by similarities to the structures of almost product manifolds ,
we look at globally defined boundary conditions in Section 3.7 , drawing
some conclusions about the global embedding of D-branes in spacetime.
Finally in Section 3.8 we apply our analysis to the WZW model, leading
to some interesting statements about gluing maps of group currents.

### 3.2 The bosonic model

Consider an open string of tension @xmath propagating on a spacetime
manifold that supports a general background two-tensor @xmath . Here
@xmath is the spacetime metric and @xmath an antisymmetric B-field, both
of which may depend on the spacetime coordinates @xmath . Then the
nonlinear sigma model for the string is (see [ 46 ] , Section 3.4)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the metric on the worldsheet, @xmath , and @xmath is the
worldsheet antisymmetric tensor with @xmath = @xmath =1 and @xmath =0.

One may derive equations of motion for the string by varying ( 3.1 )
with respect to @xmath . Since the string is open, the domain of the
integral has boundaries, which contribute boundary terms to the
equations of motion. The dynamics of the ends of the string is then
determined by the vanishing of these boundary terms, implying some
nontrivial boundary conditions for the open string.

The boundary conditions are of two types; either the string is moving
freely along the @xmath -direction — Neumann conditions — or it is stuck
in that direction — Dirichlet conditions. The hypersurface to which the
string’s endpoint is confined, i.e. the D-brane, thus extends along
Neumann directions and is pointlike in Dirichlet directions (see [ 39 ]
, Chapter 8).

However, the boundary equations of motion obtained in this way do not
necessarily preserve all the symmetries that are preserved in the bulk.
If our prime concern is that they do (which it is), then we are better
off analysing conserved currents .

#### 3.2.1 Conserved currents

The model ( 3.1 ) is invariant under three different symmetries:
spacetime Poincaré transformations, worldsheet conformal transformations
(rescaling of the two-dimensional metric @xmath ), and worldsheet
reparameterisation. The last symmetry allows us to switch to lightcone
coordinates on the worldsheet, @xmath , and we use this basis
henceforth.

Each symmetry corresponds to a conserved current, obtained by varying
the action with respect to the appropriate field. The requirement that
the action be invariant under this perturbation (in the bulk) translates
into a conservation law ² ² 2 The conservation law holds only up to
equations of motion; we say that it holds on-shell . saying that the
current is divergence-free, i.e.  there are no sources. For example in
the case of conformal invariance, the corresponding current is the
stress energy-momentum tensor and is derived by varying ( 3.1 ) with
respect to @xmath . Its components in lightcone coordinates are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the derivatives with respect to @xmath , and we have
rescaled the tension to one. The @xmath component depends only on @xmath
, and is called the “left-moving” current, whereas @xmath depends only
on @xmath and is referred to as “right-moving.” Here the bulk
conservation law takes the form @xmath .

To ensure that also the boundary is conformally invariant, we need to
impose current conservation on the boundary separately. In general we
find the boundary condition for a given current @xmath by using its
associated charge @xmath . This charge is conserved in the sense that it
is time-independent, @xmath (see [ 11 ] , Section 3.2). Thus, since
@xmath obeys the conservation law @xmath , we may write charge
conservation as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence we obtain the boundary condition @xmath , for @xmath . Applied to
the stress tensor, the result is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the left- and right-moving components of the stress tensor must be
equal. Via the relation ( 3.2 ) between the stress tensor and the
worldsheet fields, we thus find a boundary condition relating the
left-moving fields @xmath to the right-moving fields @xmath .

In conclusion, we have derived the condition for conformal invariance on
the boundary in the bosonic model. But we are interested in the
supersymmetric theory, which looks a little bit different.

### 3.3 The superspace action

The bosonic model ( 3.1 ) has only the three symmetries listed in
Section 3.2 . If we want more symmetry the action needs to be modified.
In particular, to make it supersymmetric we have to add superpartner
fields that together with the bosonic worldsheet scalars @xmath make up
multiplets (cf. Section 2.3 ). We thus add two worldsheet spinors @xmath
and an auxiliary (i.e. nondynamical) field @xmath .

The fields constituting a multiplet can be conveniently collected in a
single superfield . The idea is to promote the ordinary worldsheet to a
superspace by supplementing the bosonic worldsheet coordinates @xmath
with anticommuting coordinates @xmath . Superfields are terminating
polynomials in @xmath , with the multiplet fields as coefficients. For
example, a multiplet ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) would correspond to
the superfield [ 15 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, the worldsheet derivatives @xmath in (the lightcone version
of) ( 3.1 ) are extended by additional “superderivatives” @xmath , and
the action becomes an integral over superspace rather than over ordinary
space. Superspace comes equipped with integration rules that render this
integral equivalent to the ordinary one [ 15 ] .

The whole point of using superfield notation is that the supersymmetric
theory can be analysed in a much more compact way than if we were to use
the explicit “component form.” Instead of writing out the kinetic terms
in the action for all the multiplet fields individually, we can simply
replace the bosonic fields in ( 3.1 ) with superfields. In lightcone
coordinates we thus obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the superfield whose lowest component is the background
tensor @xmath . Analysis of the superspace action can then be performed
in a way completely analogous to the bosonic case, using superspace
quantities instead of bosonic ones.

Without boundaries, the action ( 3.5 ) is @xmath =(1,1) (globally)
supersymmetric, i.e. it is invariant under two independent supersymmetry
transformations that transform the bosonic and fermionic fields into
each other. One is parameterised by a left-moving supersymmetry
parameter @xmath , and the other by a right-moving one, @xmath . These
two parameters are a priori independent of each other, and each of them
is associated with a conserved supersymmetry current; we denote these
currents by @xmath .

In the presence of a boundary the supersymmetry parameters and currents
are subject to boundary conditions that relate left- and right-movers,
as we saw in Section 3.2 . The supersymmetry parameters become
identified up to a sign, @xmath ( @xmath ), reducing the @xmath =(1,1)
symmetry to @xmath =1. For the currents the boundary condition ( 3.3 )
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the condition for the boundary to preserve worldsheet
supersymmetry.

The condition ( 3.6 ) together with the stress tensor condition ( 3.4 )
define the superconformal boundary conditions for the classical open
superstring. It is these two conditions that served as our starting
point in Papers II–IV. To derive the corresponding boundary conditions
for the worldsheet fields we need to write the currents @xmath and
@xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . In the bosonic theory the
expression for the stress tensor was ( 3.2 ); here the relation is more
complicated, involving also @xmath . We now briefly explain how to
compute the superconformal currents from a locally supersymmetric sigma
model.

#### 3.3.1 Finding the currents

The conformal and supersymmetry currents can be viewed as components of
a superfield which we call the “supercurrent,” and which we denote by
@xmath (the indices @xmath run over the superspace indices @xmath ).
This is a kind of stress tensor for a locally supersymmetric version of
the nonlinear sigma model ( 3.5 ).

What one does is to “gauge” the model by replacing the flat
superderivatives @xmath with covariant ones, @xmath , as well as
introducing a supervielbein ³ ³ 3 Vielbeins are orthonormal tangent
vectors that may be used to go to a locally flat tangent space at a
point (see [ 47 ] , Chapter 12). @xmath on superspace (see [ 46 ] ,
Section 4.3.4). The action then becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the determinant of the supervielbein.

Next we vary @xmath with respect to the vielbein components and obtain
the supercurrent, of which only two components do not vanish on-shell,
namely @xmath and @xmath [ 48 ] . These are expressions in covariant
superderivatives of superfields, and we revert to global supersymmetry
by replacing the covariant derivatives with flat ones again. Finally, we
can extract the components of the supercurrent as follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result is a set of explicit expressions for the currents in terms of
worldsheet fields, which we omit here; they are given in Paper III.

It is now in principle straightforward to convert the boundary
conditions ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.6 ) for the currents into boundary conditions
for the fields @xmath and @xmath . We know that the boundary enforces
relations between left- and right-movers, so we can make an ansatz for
the way in which the left- and right-moving worldsheet fields are
related to each other, and then derive restrictions on this ansatz from
the current conditions. Thus our plan of attack is to make the most
general ansatz possible for the worldsheet fields, plug it into the
current conditions, and reduce these conditions to an independent set of
boundary conditions that we can interpret.

### 3.4 The ansatz

It turns out that the most general, local ansatz we can make in our
classical conformal theory is very simple for the fermions, due to the
absence of dimensionful parameters. We therefore start with this ansatz
and then derive the corresponding bosonic relation by a supersymmetry
transformation. A little dimensional analysis reveals that the fermionic
ansatz takes the form (the sign @xmath is included merely for
convenience)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a general (1,1)-tensor defined on the boundary, which
may depend on the worldsheet scalar @xmath at that point, but not on
@xmath . The bosonic superpartner of ( 3.7 ) is more complicated,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath ( @xmath is the Kronecker delta), the
antisymmetric three-tensor @xmath is the field strength (or torsion ) of
the background B-field, and @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection. Note
that ( 3.8 ) is more general than the usual boundary conditions adopted
in the literature (see e.g. [ 49 ] ), in that there is an extra
two-fermion term allowed by superconformal invariance. ⁴ ⁴ 4 But see
also [ 50 ] , where an extra two-fermion term is included. We showed in
Papers II and III that this extra term vanishes only for very special
cases.

The ansatz ( 3.7 ) encodes in a covariant form the standard Neumann and
Dirichlet boundary conditions that define a D-brane. In the presence of
a B-field the Neumann condition has an a priori very general form, while
the Dirichlet condition is much simpler. If we choose a basis where the
worldvolume coordinates of the D-brane are aligned with the spacetime
coordinates — called adapted coordinates — then the Dirichlet condition
takes the familiar form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

stating that the position of the endpoint along the @xmath :th Dirichlet
direction does not change with worldsheet time @xmath , i.e.  it is
frozen in that direction. The corresponding situation holds for the
spinors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

At first glance @xmath seems a completely general object, but we can
actually say something about it already at this stage, by going to
adapted coordinates at a point. In this basis it should imply ( 3.10 ),
so the Dirichlet-Dirichlet part is @xmath . On the other hand, the
Neumann condition is still very general ( @xmath label Neumann
directions),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some Neumann-Neumann tensor @xmath . It is clear that this tensor
depends on the B-field, because for @xmath we expect ( 3.11 ) to reduce
to @xmath . In fact, one may think of @xmath as defining the B-field; ⁵
⁵ 5 Note that @xmath is actually the gauge invariant combination of a
truly background B-field and the field strength of the @xmath gauge
field on the D-brane. we will see later precisely how.

To summarise, if we write @xmath as a 2 @xmath 2 block matrix, with the
upper left block being the Neumann-Neumann part, the lower right the
Dirichlet-Dirichlet part, and the off-diagonal blocks the mixed parts,
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

But we want to work in a basis-independent notation, so we would like to
write for example the Dirichlet condition ( 3.9 ) in a covariant form. ⁶
⁶ 6 We focus on the Dirichlet condition because of its simple form. To
do this, we need to introduce some structures on our spacetime manifold.
These structures are natural from a physical point of view, but there is
a rich mathematical machinery associated with them, which will be
tremendously useful in writing down and interpreting the final boundary
conditions.

### 3.5 Structures on D-branes

We begin by defining a projector @xmath on the worldsheet boundary,
which projects vectors on the D-brane onto the space spanned by the
Dirichlet directions. That is, given a vector @xmath at some point on
the brane, @xmath is by definition normal to the brane at that point. If
@xmath is invariant under @xmath , @xmath , then it is a pure Dirichlet
vector. In this sense, @xmath assigns a vector space to each point
@xmath on the brane, which we denote by @xmath . Clearly the dimension
of this space equals the rank of @xmath . We call @xmath a Dirichlet
projector , and we can use it to write the Dirichlet condition ( 3.9 )
on the desired covariant form,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we may define a Neumann projector @xmath complementary to
@xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It projects vectors onto the tangent space of the brane (i.e. the
Neumann directions) at any given point @xmath on the brane, and thus
assigns to @xmath a vector space @xmath of dimension @xmath .

The two spaces @xmath and @xmath are subspaces of the tangent plane
@xmath of the spacetime manifold @xmath at the point @xmath , and they
are orthogonal to each other. That is, any vector in @xmath is
orthogonal to all vectors in @xmath with respect to the metric @xmath on
@xmath . In other words, @xmath and @xmath split @xmath into a direct
sum (see Fig. 3.2 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is worth emphasising that the only assumption we make from the outset
is that the target space is a smooth manifold equipped with a (pseudo-)
Riemannian metric and an antisymmetric two-tensor (the B-field). A
priori we do not know anything about the properties of the D-brane; it
need not be a regular submanifold of spacetime, and could be singular or
ill-defined for all we know. Our object is to start from this unassuming
standpoint and derive the properties required of the brane by
superconformal invariance. It is thus by no means certain at this point
that @xmath defines a tangent space corresponding to a submanifold of
spacetime, although the vector space @xmath is a subspace of @xmath .
However, we will see in Section 3.7 that, under certain circumstances,
this follows as a consequence of the superconformal boundary conditions.

We need one more object before writing down the boundary conditions.
Given two orthogonal projectors @xmath and @xmath we may define another
(1,1)-tensor,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which squares to the identity, @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are
orthogonal and each of them squares to itself. Alternatively, @xmath and
@xmath can be written in terms of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The three structures @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , although very simple
and intuitive in essence, were crucial in deriving and understanding the
superconformal boundary conditions in Papers II and III. Note that
initially they are defined only at a point, the endpoint of the string.
However, we will see that superconformal invariance allows us to extend
them to a neighbourhood, thus providing some information about the local
smoothness of the brane. In fact, we will even define them globally
(i.e. at every point in @xmath ), just to see what happens. One can then
draw some conclusions about the way in which the D-brane is embedded,
globally, in spacetime, rather than merely looking at a small coordinate
patch of the brane. But before exploring such possibilities, let us
finally write down the boundary conditions explicitly.

### 3.6 The boundary conditions

Using the ansatz ( 3.7 ) and ( 3.8 ) in the current conditions ( 3.4 )
and ( 3.6 ), we found in Paper III the following three boundary
conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also showed that they make up a complete set, i.e. there are no
further independent conditions to be found.

It may seem that these conditions are not in fact conditions on the
worldsheet fields, which we claimed we were after. However, they are
explicit conditions on the structures on the brane, which is equivalent
to restrictions of the motion of the string endpoints.

The first condition says that the boundary map @xmath preserves the
spacetime metric. This implies that the metric diagonalises so that it
consists of a Neumann-Neumann part and a Dirichlet-Dirichlet part, but
has no “mixed” components. One may see how this happens by going to
adapted coordinates; there we have seen that @xmath has the diagonal
form ( 3.12 ), so it follows immediately from ( 3.14 ) that the metric
must be block-diagonal, @xmath .

There are two things to note here. First, the diagonal form of the
metric does not necessarily imply that the two constituent blocks are
completely decoupled. There may still be interdependence such that e.g.
@xmath depends on Dirichlet coordinates. Second, it is important to
realise that the condition ( 3.14 ) is not imposing restrictions on the
spacetime metric, but on the D-brane — its embedding in target space
must be such that the metric diagonalises.

Moving on to the second boundary condition, Eq. ( 3.15 ), we see that it
is a condition on the Neumann-Neumann part of @xmath . It is essentially
the definition of the B-field mentioned in Section 3.4 ; in adapted
coordinates it schematically looks like @xmath (along the
Neumann-Neumann directions). From this form we can derive the behaviour
of the string for large B-field; as we take @xmath , the Neumann-Neumann
block of @xmath goes to @xmath , i.e. we find that the Neumann
conditions turn into Dirichlet conditions. That is, the endpoint of the
string is completely frozen in all directions in this limit. It is also
interesting to note that, in the limit @xmath , we find @xmath .

Last but not least, we want to interpret the condition ( 3.16 ). This is
actually a precise mathematical statement saying that the projector
@xmath is integrable [ 51 ] . There are several ways of understanding
the content of this statement [ 52 ] , but perhaps the most intuitive
one is to consider two displacements along the Neumann directions. If
the commutator @xmath between them vanishes, then regardless of which
order we do them in, we always end up in the same point. If, on the
other hand, they do not commute, the final position will depend on the
order of displacement. The latter case corresponds to some singular
D-brane about which we cannot say much. The former situation, however,
is the interesting one, because it occurs if and only if ( 3.16 ) holds,
as is easily seen by inserting @xmath in the commutator. It implies
local smoothness at the point @xmath in the sense that we can extend the
basis of @xmath to a neighbourhood of @xmath [ 53 ] . In particular the
adapted coordinate basis, where @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be extended to a neighbourhood of @xmath so that @xmath is given by
( 3.17 ) on the whole neighbourhood. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that this extension is
only possible along the Neumann directions. If @xmath were integrable
too, then we would be able to extend the basis in all directions. And
since we can define @xmath wherever @xmath is defined, and hence @xmath
, it follows that we may extend all three of our (1,1)-tensors to a
neighbourhood of @xmath .

Another consequence of @xmath -integrability is that the Neumann-Neumann
part of the metric is independent of the Dirichlet directions [ 52 ]
(though as long as @xmath is not integrable, the Dirichlet-Dirichlet
part of @xmath may still depend on the Neumann coordinates).

This is as far as we get in our interpretation of the conditions ( 3.14
)–( 3.16 ) without making additional assumptions. But the properties of
our structures @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are exactly the same as those
of the structures associated with almost product manifolds [ 52 ] ,
except that they are not globally defined. We therefore found it
irresistible to add this extra property in Papers II and III, and
investigate the consequences.

### 3.7 Globally defined conditions

By “globally defined” we mean that our structures @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , as well as @xmath , all are defined not only at a point @xmath
(and, by integrability, on a neighbourhood of @xmath ), but at every
point @xmath in spacetime.

In this case, @xmath and @xmath are distributions on @xmath [ 51 ] .
That is, they assign a space of vectors ( @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively) to each point @xmath , thus splitting the whole tangent
space @xmath (not just the tangent plane at a point @xmath , cf. Eq. (
3.13 )) into a direct sum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The tensor @xmath is now an almost product structure , defining the
target space as an almost product manifold [ 52 ] . The word ‘‘almost’’
refers to the fact that the manifold is not necessarily a direct
product, despite its tangent space being a direct sum. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The failure
of the split ( 3.18 ) to split @xmath into a direct product is measured
by the Nijenhuis tensor @xmath [ 54 ] . An example of such a manifold is
a locally product manifold, i.e. a manifold that locally looks like a
direct product but globally is not (think of the Möbius strip).

Let us have a fresh look at the boundary conditions ( 3.14 )–( 3.16 )
through our “global glasses.” We saw in Section 3.6 that the first
condition implies that the metric diagonalises. In adapted coordinates
it is then easily seen that the metric preserves also the almost product
structure, since the latter takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in this basis. Thus the spacetime manifold is an almost product manifold
with a (pseudo-) Riemannian metric that is preserved by the almost
product structure; such a manifold is called a (pseudo-) Riemannian
almost product manifold [ 52 ] .

The second boundary condition, Eq. ( 3.15 ), gives no new information,
so we turn directly to the condition ( 3.16 ), which says that @xmath is
an integrable distribution. Such an object is by definition a foliation
[ 53 , 55 ] . This means that, at every point @xmath in spacetime,
@xmath locally defines, on a neighbourhood of @xmath , a set of
hyperplanes, or leaves , that in adapted coordinates are described by
the system of equations @xmath = constant @xmath [ 55 ] . These
hyperplanes are contained in the space @xmath , but a priori need not be
of the same dimension, so they are not necessarily D-branes (recall that
@xmath defines the dimensionality of the D-brane). However, there is a
theorem by Frobenius saying that when @xmath is a foliation, then
through every point @xmath there is a unique submanifold of @xmath whose
tangent space is @xmath (called a maximal integral manifold of @xmath )
[ 56 ] ; this is the D-brane we were looking for.

In conclusion, globally defined superconformal boundary conditions imply
that spacetime is foliated by D-branes which are submanifolds embedded
in such a way that spacetime may be viewed as a (pseudo-) Riemannian
almost product manifold. Let us give some concrete examples of such
D-brane embeddings.

#### 3.7.1 Examples

As we mentioned above, the obvious special case of an almost product
manifold is a direct product, e.g. a torus (a direct product of
one-cycles). Thus, if spacetime were a torus, the superconformally
allowed D-branes would be those that wrap one or more of the constituent
one-cycles.

More interestingly, many exact solutions of Einstein’s equations are
almost product manifolds, e.g. the Schwarzschild and Robertson-Walker
spaces. To be explicit, we take a closer look at the Schwarzschild
space; it makes an instructive example of the way different D-brane
embeddings determine the type of the spacetime manifold.

The Schwarzschild metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is time, @xmath is the radial coordinate, @xmath with
@xmath a constant, @xmath , and @xmath is the metric on a two-sphere.
Assuming that @xmath is the time coordinate also on the worldvolume of
the D-brane, there is only one embedding which is allowed by the
superconformal boundary conditions ( 3.14 )–( 3.16 ). We can write the
manifold at hand as a warped product manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath being the metric on @xmath and @xmath the metric on @xmath .
It is called “warped” because the factor in front of @xmath (in our case
@xmath ) depends on the coordinates of @xmath . Then the brane can
extend along @xmath and @xmath , i.e. we have a D1-brane that coincides
with the manifold @xmath . Here @xmath is the metric on the brane; it is
independent of the @xmath -coordinates, which is consistent with
integrability of @xmath . On the other hand, there is a problem with
integrability at the singularity @xmath ; nevertheless, the general
principle should be clear.

Alternatively, we may write the metric ( 3.19 ) as a different almost
product manifold,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . Here we could have a D2-brane wrapping @xmath .
However, it would not be superconformal, since @xmath is not integrable
in this case; the Neumann-Neumann metric @xmath depends on the Dirichlet
direction @xmath . Finally, there is also the possibility of a D0-brane,
extending only along @xmath , in which case spacetime again is a warped
product manifold, with warp factor @xmath . Also this brane breaks
superconformal invariance, since the metric on the brane depends on the
Dirichlet directions.

The various embeddings are illustrated in Fig. 3.3 .

### 3.8 The WZW model

In the preceding sections we have learnt the minimal requirements for a
D-brane to preserve superconformal symmetry in a general spacetime. To
put our boundary conditions to the test, we want to study a special
case, i.e. a string propagating on a given manifold. The most obvious
choice is the extensively studied WZW model [ 44 ] . This is a nonlinear
sigma model defined on a group manifold of some Lie group @xmath ; that
is, the target space coordinates transform into each other under a group
@xmath . The importance of this model is due to the fact that it is
exactly solvable, and provides a tractable setting for studying D-branes
in curved backgrounds. In particular, when @xmath is a semisimple Lie
group, the background fields simplify in such a way as to make our
boundary conditions more transparent.

#### 3.8.1 Symmetries

The target space (and the action) is invariant under @xmath
transformations, so there are two chiral currents (i.e.  each current
depends only on one of the worldsheet coordinates @xmath ) associated
with this symmetry, one for each group @xmath . They can be derived from
the superspace action ( 3.5 ) by varying it with respect to the “left”
and “right” group, respectively. The result is left- and right-moving
currents,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the superfield Killing vectors associated
with each symmetry. We denote the lowest (fermionic) components of
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the lowest components of the superfield
Killing vectors. ⁹ ⁹ 9 The vector @xmath should not be confused with the
almost product structure @xmath in Section 3.7 .

The vectors @xmath and @xmath can be expanded in the Lie algebra basis
@xmath of their corresponding groups, as @xmath and @xmath . Then the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath satisfy the corresponding Lie algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(the sign is just a convention), and they commute with each other,
@xmath . Here the Lie bracket for vectors @xmath is defined as @xmath .

#### 3.8.2 The gluing map

From ( 3.20 ) follows immediately that the fermionic ansatz ( 3.7 )
translates into a boundary condition for the group currents,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transformation in ( 3.21 ) is essentially a change of basis from
spacetime vectors to the Lie algebra basis [ 45 ] .

The object @xmath is a gluing map between the chiral currents at the
worldsheet boundary. Since it maps @xmath to @xmath , which are elements
of the Lie algebra, it is clearly a map from the Lie algebra into
itself. What more we can say about this map? It is usually assumed in
the literature to be a constant Lie algebra automorphism [ 45 , 57 , 58
] . This means that it preserves the Lie algebra structure in the sense
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, this restriction is always made for practical reasons, as a
nonconstant gluing map makes the quantum theory unwieldy. And indeed we
found in Paper IV that @xmath in the @xmath =1 model can in principle be
a much more general object.

To see how we reach this conclusion, let us write down the boundary
conditions for the WZW model. For this purpose, we take advantage of the
fact that on group manifolds the metric and torsion can be expressed
entirely in terms of Killing vectors, Lie algebra structure constants
and the Cartan-Killing metric ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The Cartan-Killing metric is
defined as @xmath . @xmath [ 59 ] . As a consequence, the boundary
conditions ( 3.14 ) and ( 3.16 ) can be written as equations involving
only these quantities plus @xmath , and we end up with the following
conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the Lie derivative is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the usual Lie derivative with respect to the vector @xmath .

The first condition, Eq. ( 3.23 ), says that the gluing map preserves
the Cartan-Killing metric. But it is the second condition, Eq. ( 3.24 ),
that interests us. To see what it means, let us first use ( 3.23 ) to
manipulate the Lie bracket ( 3.22 ) a little. We can rewrite the
left-hand side of ( 3.22 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence, using ( 3.23 ), follows that @xmath is a Lie algebra
automorphism if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we see that @xmath is a Lie algebra automorphism if and only if the
right-hand side of ( 3.24 ) vanishes.

Hence we draw two conclusions from ( 3.24 ). First, @xmath does not have
to be a Lie algebra automorphism. Second, it can be a Lie algebra
automorphism without being constant, since the right-hand side can
vanish even if @xmath is nonconstant. The interpretation of this
condition in terms of D-branes was not addressed in Paper IV, but it is
known that for the special case where @xmath is constant, conformally
invariant D-branes are obtained as conjugacy classes of the group @xmath
[ 57 ] .