This thesis starts with a review of supersymmetric solutions of
11-dimensional supergravity; in particular flat M-branes and BPS
configurations which can be constructed from them. The harmonic function
rule is discussed and it is shown why this cannot be expected to apply
to intersecting brane configurations where the intersection is
localised. A new class of spacetimes is needed to cover these situations
and the Fayyazuddin-Smith metric ansatz is introduced as the answer to
this problem. The ansatz is then used to find supergravity solutions for
M-branes wrapped on holomorphic curves. This method is discussed in
detail and its various components explained; for instance, the way
holomorphicity dictates the projection conditions on the Killing spinor
and the construction of a spinor in terms of Fock space states. The
method is illustrated via various examples. We then move on and discuss
a mathematical concept known as calibrations. Calibrations are forms
which can be used to pick out the minimal surfaces in a given
background. Since BPS configurations of M-branes are minimal, it turns
out that they must wrap cycles ’calibrated’ by such p-forms. For the
case when the background contains no flux, calibrations have been
classified. However, for more general cases where there is a non-trivial
field strength, such a classification does not yet exist. This would be
desirable for various reasons, one of which is the following. Given a
particular calibrated form, there is a simple and very elegant method of
writing down the supergravity solution for a brane wrapped on the
corresponding calibrated cycle. So far, this method was applied only to
Kahler calibrations as these were the only ones known to exist in
backgrounds with non-trivial flux. We extend this method to a wider
class which contains Kahler calibrations. A constraint is used to
classify possible calibrations; this constraint incorporates the
geometry of the space transverse to the submanifold which contains the
supersymmetric cycle. A rule is given which can generate the required
constraint for any given M-brane wrapped on a holomorphic cycle. Ways in
which this constraint can be satisfied are also discussed.
