###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Background
    -    1.2 Outline of Thesis
    -    1.3 Excited Fermions
    -    1.4 Heavy Fermions
    -    1.5 Present Contraints
        -    1.5.1 Mixing
    -    1.6 The Detector
        -    1.6.1 The LEP Accelerator
        -    1.6.2 The OPAL Detector
-    2 Phenomenology
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 General
        -    2.2.1 Comments About Cross Section Generation
    -    2.3 Double Production of Exotic Leptons
    -    2.4 Single Production of Exotic Leptons
        -    2.4.1 Branching Ratio @xmath
        -    2.4.2 Heavy Leptons
        -    2.4.3 Excited Leptons
-    3 Simulation and Selection
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Signal Generation
        -    3.2.1 General
        -    3.2.2 Heavy Leptons
        -    3.2.3 Excited Leptons
    -    3.3 Backgrounds
    -    3.4 Variables and Cuts
        -    3.4.1 Description of Variables
        -    3.4.2 Preliminary Cuts
    -    3.5 Complete Analysis of Heavy Neutrinos
        -    3.5.1 Cuts
    -    3.6 Discussion of Heavy Charged Leptons
-    4 Data Analysis and Results
    -    4.1 Heavy Neutral Lepton
        -    4.1.1 Lower Limits on the Mixing
        -    4.1.2 Upper Mixing Limits
        -    4.1.3 Systematic Errors
-    5 Conclusions and Outlook
    -    5.1 Conclusions
    -    5.2 Outlook
-    A Glossary
-    B List of Symbols
    -    B.1 Exotic Particles
    -    B.2 Standard Model Particles
    -    B.3 Variables
    -    B.4 List of Constants
    -    B.5 Abbreviations

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Background

Ever since the discovery of the three families/generations of light
leptons and quarks striking similarites have intrigued physicists:

-   Similarity between families.

-   Similar group structure of leptons and quarks

-   Mass hierarchy

-   Equal charge

The Standard Model of particle physics [ 1 ] postulates three families
of leptons and quarks. However, there is no underlying theory predicting
these families to be three or predicting the number to be the same for
leptons and for quarks. ¹ ¹ 1 In fact, in order for the Standard Model
to be anomaly-free, the sum of the charge of all fermions must be zero,
though this does not necessarily imply an equal number of leptons and
quarks. So far, it is only an experimental fact. Thus, a priori, there
is no reason why this number should be restricted to three only. In
fact, the situation is rather the opposite: there is theoretical
justification for more than three generations of leptons/quarks (cf.
section 1.4 ).

Within the lepton family there is nothing to distinguish an electron
from a muon or a tau, except its mass (and its lepton number).
Furthermore, the symmetry of the group structure of leptons and quarks
(cf. table 1.1 ) is a remarkable coincidence.

In the past, symmetries of this kind have been recognized as a sign of
substructure. Also the remarkable mass distribution in figure 1.1 is an
argument for either a substructure of fermions or for a classification
as a representation of a larger group. If a substructure exists, then
excited states ought to exist. If there is a larger group it might very
well contain heavy leptons. A priori, there is no relation between heavy
and excited leptons.

The hierarchy of the masses suggests the possibility of a fourth, even
heavier, generation of leptons. Its mass would be of the order of 100
GeV, which could be within the reach of the LEP accelerator where the
sensitivity reaches up to @xmath GeV in single production and up to
@xmath GeV in double production. The corresponding neutrino mass would,
in principle, also have to be large ( @xmath ) in order to be in accord
with the measured invisible width of the @xmath (see section 1.5 ).

Besides the arguments in favor of heavy and excited fermions there are
also several problems with the Standard Model.

1.  The Standard Model has more than 20 free parameters which have to be
    determined experimentally (three lepton masses, six quark masses,
    @xmath and Higgs boson masses, three coupling constants, four quark
    mixing angles, in addition to the masses and mixing angles of the
    neutrinos).

2.  The form of the Higgs potential is somewhat arbitrary. The Higgs
    particle has not yet been found and the stability of its mass
    against radiative corrections is fine-tuned.

3.  The nature and origin of the CP violation is introduced ad hoc as a
    complex phase in the CKM matrix.

### 1.2 Outline of Thesis

This thesis is divided into five chapters. The introduction offers some
reasons for the interest in the subject of exotic leptons, as well as it
presents a theoretical introduction to the subject, and a summary of the
results of previous research. A brief description of the OPAL detector
is also given. After that the phenomenology of excited and heavy leptons
is presented in chapter 2. The word phenomenology refers to the
characteristics of the exotic leptons, which can be used to distinguish
them from the background noise of ordinary particles. The following
chapter describes the simulations, both of the signal and of the
background. In this chapter, the process of event selection is also
discussed. This process is concentrated on the single production of
heavy leptons, which is the main issue of this thesis. Chapter four
describes the data analysis itself with the results in the form of
confidence limits on the masses and mixing parameter involved in the
theory. The conclusion in chapter 5 offers a summary of the results, an
outlook of what remains to be done, and possibilities of improvement.

Below are presented some theoretical features of excited and heavy
leptons. However, this thesis will not dwell long on the theoretical
properties of different models, but rather will investigate their
phenomenology and the parameters of importance to detection. This will
be the subject of Chapter 2 . So far, these theories are not (yet)
supported by any experimental evidence.

### 1.3 Excited Fermions

If a particle has an excited state, this means that it also has a
substructure. The excitation is nothing else than a rearrangement of the
internal structure, just like an atom or a molecule rearranges its
constituents when (de)exciting. Excitation means stored potential
energy, just like that in a waterfall.

In the literature [ 2 ] , the constituents of excited fermions are
called preons . Different models have been proposed; the number of
preons is usually, rather arbitrarily, set to two or three, where the
three preon case can have two of them bound together in a bosonic state
(see e. g. [ 3 ] ).

Here are a few arguments in favour of the existence of excited leptons:

-   There are unstable and mixed leptons and quarks, and neutrinos are
    oscillating [ 4 ] . From a philosophical viewpoint, these are not
    desirable properties for a fundamental particle. In the past, these
    effects have also been shown to be signs of substructure (e. g.
    atomic and hadronic decays, Kaon oscillation etc.).

-   In some preon models [ 3 ] the masses of the @xmath and @xmath can
    be explained without the introduction of a Higgs boson. The @xmath
    and @xmath are considered to be preon-antipreon states in analogy
    with the strong force that can be said to be mediated by
    quark-antiquark pairs (mesons). This would certainly be of interest
    if the Higgs particle is not found in the next generation of
    accelerators.

The catch with the preon models is that they must be able to reproduce
all experimental data with the new configuration and properties of the
preons. This is already the case for e. g. the Supersymmetry and the
Grand Unified Theory models, since they are extensions of the Standard
Model. However, new particles have to be shown to reproduce current
data. Even though there remain several theoretical problems within
current preon models they still have many attractive features as
mentioned in the previous paragraph.

In this thesis, the detailed description of a specific model is not
important, as we study the phenomenological properties of excited
leptons from a general point of view.

### 1.4 Heavy Fermions

Several theories predict the existence of new, heavy fermions. These
extensions of the Standard Model generally have a mass scale at which a
certain symmetry is restored. If we can obtain accelerator energies
reaching this mass scale, we can directly probe the validity of the
theory. However, these energies are generally far too high ( @xmath TeV)
to be reached for our present accelerators ( @xmath TeV).

The most ambitious of the theories is the Superstring Theory ( @xmath
TeV), aiming at unifying all the known forces: electromagnetic. weak,
strong and gravitational. It is currently the only viable theory to do
so. The Grand Unified Theories (unifications at @xmath TeV) attempt all
the above, except that they do not include gravity. Supersymmetry
Theory, which basically is a way of explaining the mass hierarchy
discussed above, is an integral part of both the Superstring Theory and
most of the Grand Unified Theories.

A characteristic property of these extended models is that they predict
a zoo of new particles, which have to be detected in order to be
validated. The experimental advantage is that they offer some concrete
predictions to search for.

The Grand Unified groups have fermion representations which contain the
Standard Model quarks and leptons but often also additional fermions.
The wide range of masses of the fermions suggests that some new leptons
could have masses of about 100 GeV, which is within reach of LEP.

There are three popular unifying groups @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
the latter two contain new fermions. The group @xmath [ 5 ] contains a
right-handed Majorana neutrino and it is one of the simplest groups in
which the Standard Model could be conveniently embedded ( @xmath is the
simplest). The exceptional group E6 [ 6 ] contains several singlet
neutrinos as well as new charged leptons and quarks and it is an
acceptable four-dimensional field theoretical limit of Super String
Theory,

There are four phenomenologically different types of heavy leptons
(compare with table 1.1 ):

-    Sequential
    A fourth generation of fermions with the same basic properties as
    the other three.
    @xmath @xmath

-    Mirror
    Doublets have right chirality and singlets have left (opposite of
    the Standard Model).
    @xmath @xmath
    Mirror fermions occur in many extensions of the Standard Model
    trying to restore the left-right symmetry [ 7 ] at the scale of the
    electroweak symmetry breaking.

-    Vectorial
    Both the right and left chirality are doublets.
    @xmath @xmath
    Vector fermions occur e. g. in the group @xmath .

-    Singlet
    Both the right and left chirality are singlets.
    @xmath ; @xmath @xmath ; @xmath
    Singlet fermions are found both in @xmath and in @xmath .

In this thesis the focus will be on sequential heavy leptons, also
called fourth generation leptons. These new leptons are of the same
character as the ones already known.

An experimental reason for searching for this type of leptons is the
recent evidence for the mass of neutrinos [ 8 ] . The see-saw mechanism
[ 9 ] can be used to generate massive neutrinos. The mechanism predicts
new neutrinos with masses, which could be reachable at LEP.

### 1.5 Present Contraints

In this section, the present experimental limits in the search for
exotic (i. e.  heavy and excited) fermions and in particular, for exotic
leptons, are outlined. In the past, several searches have been performed
in order to find traces of excited and heavy leptons.

Lower limits on the masses of heavy leptons were obtained in @xmath
collisions at centre-of-mass energies, @xmath , around @xmath [ 10 ] ,
and recent searches at @xmath 130-140 GeV [ 11 , 12 ] , @xmath 161 GeV [
13 , 14 ] , @xmath 172 GeV [ 14 , 15 ] , @xmath 130-183 GeV [ 16 , 17 ,
18 ] , and @xmath 200-209 GeV [ 19 ] have improved these limits. Excited
leptons have been sought at @xmath [ 20 ] , @xmath 130-140 GeV [ 21 , 22
] , @xmath 161 GeV [ 23 , 24 ] , @xmath 172 GeV [ 15 ] , @xmath 183 GeV
[ 18 , 17 ] , @xmath 189 GeV [ 25 ] , and at the HERA ep collider [ 26 ]
. If direct production is kinematically forbidden, the cross-sections of
processes such as @xmath and @xmath [ 27 , 28 ] are sensitive to new
particles at higher masses through loop corrections.

For double production of heavy leptons, masses up to 103 GeV have been
explored [ 19 ] . For single production of heavy leptons, this thesis
covers masses up to 170 GeV. In both cases it is the charged current
channel that has been studied because it has higher branching ratio than
the neutral current channel.

For single production of excited leptons in all important decay modes,
the most recent results are found in [ 29 ] where all LEP data are
combined.

Most searches for new particles, predicted by models beyond the Standard
Model, assume that the new particles decay promptly at the primary
interaction vertex due to very short lifetimes. These searches would not
be sensitive to long-lived heavy particles, which do not decay in the
detectors. For example, heavy neutral singlet leptons with masses below
2 GeV will live long enough to escape the LEP and the SLAC Linear
Collider detectors before decaying [ 30 ] and through their mixing they
would contribute insignificantly to the width of the @xmath resonance
and therefore would be they are disguised within the @xmath
light-neutrino number measurements [ 31 ] . These measurements also give
a mass limit @xmath GeV. The disguise is not watertight from a
theoretical point of view but this is of no experimental importance.

The possibility of light, long-lived new leptons has recently been
addressed in [ 32 ] while [ 30 ] gives some older limits in the light of
kaon decays, the absence of forward neutral decaying particles in
neutrino beams from conventional sources or beam dumps and high
statistics neutrino experiments. Furthermore, singlet neutrinos do not
have full couplings to the @xmath boson and would not contribute to the
decay width of the @xmath , thus escaping detection.

Several models predict such long-lived particles. One example is the
Minimal SuperSymmetric Model [ 33 ] . Some models beyond the Standard
Model would also predict the existence of particles with fractional
electric charge. As an example, leptoquarks [ 34 ] could be long-lived.
There are also some long-lived hadronic states with fractional charge
predicted by some modified Quantum Chromo Dynamics models [ 35 ] .

#### 1.5.1 Mixing

The mixing between a heavy fermion and an ordinary fermion (by Flavour
Changing Neutral Currents) is parametrized by a constant @xmath . In
order to be general, this would have to be a mixing matrix containing
the mixing between all the new fermions and the old ones @xmath where
@xmath represents all the new fermions and @xmath all the old ones.
However, the intergenerational mixing is generally supposed to be very
weak (see section 2.2 ). We will assume only one effective mixing
parameter @xmath for every new lepton.

The mixing between fermions will alter their couplings to the
electroweak gauge bosons ( @xmath ). If this mixing is large, the high
precision measurements ² ² 2 Measurements of total, partial and
invisible decay widths as well as forward-backward and polarization
asymmetries. of the @xmath boson would be significantly altered, which
is not the case. Thus, even the generational mixing must be rather
small. The upper experimental limit on the mixing parameter is of the
order of @xmath [ 36 , 37 ] . However, in some cases, the mixing could
be higher [ 38 ] . If the left and the right-handed mixing angles are
equal for leptons, their mixing can be even further constrained, to the
order of @xmath [ 38 ] . This is due to the contributions from lepton
loops to the anomalous magnetic moment ( @xmath ) @xmath , which would
be too large unless the lepton mass is very large.

The decay length of the heavy neutrino is inversely proportional to the
square of the mixing. If the mixing parameter is smaller than @xmath [
15 ] , the heavy neutrino is too long-lived to be discovered in the
detector.

### 1.6 The Detector

#### 1.6.1 The LEP Accelerator

The accelerator and storage ring had a circumference of about 27 km.
Four experiments, called ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL were placed
equidistant along the ring [ 39 ] . The peak luminosity of the machine
reached about @xmath cm @xmath s @xmath .

#### 1.6.2 The OPAL Detector

This is a summary of the OPAL detector (see figure 1.3 ), the details
can be found in [ 40 ] .

A trigger determines when a collision has occurred and causes the event
to be recorded. It is set off when (i) an ”essential” detector (such as
the electromagnetic or hadronic calorimeters) detects a signal above a
predetermined threshold or (ii) when a signal is observed in the same
@xmath region (out of 6 @xmath and 24 @xmath divisions) in a number of
subdetectors.

The OPAL right-handed coordinate system is defined such that the @xmath
axis is in the direction of the electron beam, the @xmath axis is
horizontal and points towards the centre of the LEP ring, and @xmath and
@xmath are the polar and azimuthal angles, respectively.

The OPAL detector consists of seven different parts:

-   Central Detector

-   Electromagnetic Calorimeter

-   Hadron Calorimeter

-   Muon Detector

-   Forward Detector

-   Silicon Tungsten Detector

##### Central Detector

The central detector consists of a system of tracking chambers,
providing charged particle reconstruction over 96% of the full solid
angle inside a 0.435 T uniform magnetic field. It consists of a
two-layer silicon microstrip vertex detector, a high-precision drift
chamber, a large-volume jet chamber and a set of @xmath -chambers
measuring the track coordinates along the beam direction.

Closest to the interaction point is the microvertex detector to
pin-point the earliest vertices. It is placed about 7 cm from the center
of the beam pipe.

Then comes the vertex detector which is a jet-drift chamber providing
track reconstruction with high precision. It has a radius of about 20
cm.

The jet chamber and the Z-chamber also do track reconstruction with the
only difference that the Z-chamber only measures the z-coordinate of the
tracks.

##### Electromagnetic Calorimeter

The electromagnetic calorimeter covers almost 99 % of the solid angle
and can be used to identify electrons and photons.

The first part of this calorimeter is the time of flight chamber which
permits low energy (0.6-2.5 GeV) charged particle identification.

Then comes presampling devices assuring the measurement of premature
electromagnetic showers. After that the barrel lead glass calorimeter
produces Cerenkov light used to identify the higher energy particles.

Finally there is an endcap presampler and calorimeter.

##### Hadron Calorimeter

The hadron calorimeter detects and measures the energy of jets, showers
of particles concentrated in a specific direction. The jets are often
the remnants of a quark.

##### Muon Detector

There are four muon detectors placed at the outer perimeter of the
detector. A muon leaves an electromagnetic trace from the inner of the
detector all the way out to the muon chamber. The muon is the only
particle to do this since the other particles disintegrate before the
muon chamber.

##### Silicon Tungsten Detector

The Silicon Tungsten Detector is an electromagnetic calorimeter used to
measure the luminosity.

##### Forward Detector

Electromagnetic calorimeters close to the beam axis complete the
geometrical acceptance down to 24 mrad on both sides of the interaction
point.

## Chapter 2 Phenomenology

### 2.1 Introduction

Basically there are two mutually supporting approaches relating physical
principles, theory, and experiment. In the first approach, we start with
some physical principles and from those we can deduce a theory. In our
case we are concerned about the origin of the heavy leptons and the
constitution of excited leptons. This part of the theory is briefly
treated in chapter 1 . In the second approach we investigate how our
theoretical predictions would manifest themselves in experiments and we
study the experimental parameters of the predictions. The latter
approach will be presented in this chapter. Most of the properties are
common to exotic (heavy or excited) leptons and quarks, even though the
present thesis is concentrated on exotic leptons.

When the results are general, this will be made explicit by the use of
the word fermion instead of lepton.

### 2.2 General

In LEP there are basically two ways of producing an exotic lepton. The
first way is by single production, in which two electrons interact via a
vector boson, which in turn decays into an exotic lepton and an ordinary
lepton (see figure 2.1 ). The second one is double production, in which
the vector boson decays into a pair of exotic leptons (see figure 2.2 ).

If the mass difference between the exotic fermion and the ordinary
fermion to which it decays, is less than the mass of the intermediary
vector boson, the latter is virtual, leading to a three body final
state. Otherwise, the boson is real, giving a two-body phase space for
the decay.

The general formulae for heavy fermions are described in [ 41 ] . These
formulae account for single production of these heavy fermions as well
as for double production of them including all possible decay channels
for the different types of fermions (as described in 1.4 ). The exotic
fermions have electromagnetic and weak couplings, except for the singlet
neutrinos which only couple through the mixing. The Lagrangian of the
interactions of the new fermions is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where implicit summation over @xmath is assumed, @xmath is the four
vector of the vector boson field @xmath , @xmath is the fermion current
coupling to @xmath and complex conjugation of the charged current is
understood. @xmath allows for Standard Model as well as new vector
bosons.

@xmath are the coupling constants:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the Standard Model vector bosons. In this thesis, it will be
supposed that any new gauge boson will be heavy enough not to affect the
result. Furthermore, it is also supposed that the mixing between the new
vector bosons and the @xmath is too weak to interfere with the current
research.

A coupling @xmath allows the mixing between the exotic fermions and the
ordinary fermions. In this thesis, the mixing is supposed not to be
intergenerational. In other words, a heavy fermion of electron-type
would not mix with the regular muon, tauon, their neutrinos or the
quarks. This is motivated by the fact that large intergenerational
mixing would introduce flavour changing neutral currents at tree level.
However, these currents are severely limited by experimental data [ 6 ]
, thus putting a tight constraint on intergenerational mixing.

#### 2.2.1 Comments About Cross Section Generation

In order to generate the cross sections in the sections below, a number
of (rather general) conditions have been taken into account.
Spin-correlations have been included as well as initial state radiation.
Final state radiation has not been used, due to limitations in the
EXOTIC [ 42 ] software. The effect has, however, been shown to be
negligible [ 43 ] . The fermions that interest us are leptonic, and they
are all supposed to belong to the first generation because their cross
sections are much higher than in the second and third generationi, [ 41
] .

For heavy leptons, the mixing angle has been taken as @xmath , and for
excited leptons the gauge coupling parameters @xmath (see section 2.4.3
).

### 2.3 Double Production of Exotic Leptons

Pair production of heavy leptons is mainly achieved through the @xmath
-channel (see figure 2.2 ) via a virtual photon or @xmath . There is
also a contribution from the @xmath -channel but it is quadratically
suppressed [ 41 ] by the mixing angle and is very small. Masses up to
@xmath can be probed in double production.

The principal production channels are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath leptonic decay has a comparatively low branching ratio, and the
neutrino identification can be problematic.

The unpolarized differential cross section for pair production of heavy
leptons is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the four vector of the ordinary
lepton, @xmath (velocity of the final state fermion), @xmath is the mass
of the fermion, and @xmath is the number of colours, i. e. three for
quarks and one for leptons. The generalized charges @xmath are rather
comlicated and can be found in equation (3.4) in [ 41 ] .

The cross section is plotted in figure 2.3 .

In this thesis there is only a general discussion on double production
of exotic leptons, as the data has already been analysed in detail in [
19 ] .

### 2.4 Single Production of Exotic Leptons

For exotic quarks and second and third generation leptons, single
production proceeds only through the @xmath -channel [ 44 ] . This means
that a photon or a @xmath splits into an exotic fermion and an ordinary
one. However, for the electron type, additional @xmath -channel
production is allowed (see figure 2.4 ). This means @xmath exchange for
neutral leptons and @xmath exchange for charged leptons. The @xmath
-channel is obviously not available for muon- and tau-type heavy leptons
because LEP is an @xmath collider. The @xmath -channel increases the
cross section by several orders of magnitude making a search for
electron-type heavy leptons favourable.

For single production of heavy fermions to be possible, there has to be
a mixing between the ordinary and the exotic fermions. Otherwise,
flavour conservation would make the production impossible.

The heavy fermions decay into their light counterparts and a vector
boson, again through mixing. Thus, the final state is rather
complicated, containing four different particles. However, the final
state particles are not distributed randomly. This is a fact that can be
used to distinguish them from the background noise. Their distribution
pattern and properties of the decay particles can also help us to
identify the type of the heavy lepton (see section 1.4 ), which is
crucial to the understanding of the origin of heavy leptons. In
particular, the angular distributions are useful for this purpose [ 44 ]
as the different types of heavy leptons have the same type of
interaction, differing only in their angular distributions.

The calculated cross sections for different signals are given in figures
2.5 and 2.6 , presenting the cross section as a function of mass and
energy, respectively. The cross section for masses close to the @xmath
mass, is not well treated by the inital state radiation method (PHOTOS [
45 ] used by EXOTIC [ 42 ] ) for single production of exotic leptons.

A rough estimate for the number of expected events for a total
integrated luminosity of  660 pb @xmath would be:
@xmath 660 @xmath 2 @xmath 15 @xmath 100
supposing the mass of the exotic fermion to be 140 GeV and the center of
mass energy to be 200 GeV. However, at such a low mass, the cross
section will be roughly the same for the different center of mass
energies (see table 2.1 ).

This cross section as a function of energy is plotted in figure 2.6 .

#### 2.4.1 Branching Ratio @xmath

The branching ratio for heavy fermion decay through the charged current
(decay through @xmath ) versus the neutral current (decay through @xmath
) is independent of the center of mass energy, as well as of type and
charge of the exotic lepton. This result has been obtained with EXOTIC [
42 ] which is based on the formulae in [ 44 ] .

The expressions for the partial decay widths for on-shell vector bosons
are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . This means that for low fermion masses @xmath
, the charged current channel will be strongly dominating, and even when
@xmath the charged current channel will have twice as high a cross
section.

#### 2.4.2 Heavy Leptons

The polarized cross section of a heavy lepton is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is the number of colours,
i. e. three for quarks and one for leptons. The values of the cross
section are presented in table 2.1 .

##### Decay

The possible decay channels for a heavy lepton are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The decay of a heavy fermion into another (lighter) heavy fermion is
possible, though not favourable, because of their smaller mass
difference compared to that between a heavy and an ordinary lepton.
However, if the mixing angle @xmath is very small, decay into another
heavy lepton could still be a possibility. From the fact that the
charged leptons in general are much heavier than their neutral
counterparts, it is plausible that the same would be the case for heavy
leptons. In this case, the channel @xmath would be kinematically closed.

#### 2.4.3 Excited Leptons

Excited leptons are supposed to have the same electroweak @xmath
couplings ( @xmath and @xmath ) as ordinary leptons. However, unlike
ordinary leptons, they are supposed to be grouped into both left-handed
and right-handed iso-doublets with vector couplings to the gauge bosons
( @xmath ). The @xmath coupling is of magnetic type. If the excited
leptons were not iso-doublets, the light leptons would radiatively
acquire a large anomalous magnetic moment, due to the @xmath ( @xmath )
interaction [ 46 ] .

The effective Lagrangian of excited leptons is [ 46 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which describes the generalized magnetic de-excitation of the excited
states through the decay of the excited lepton. The matrix @xmath is the
covariant bilinear tensor, @xmath are the Pauli matrices, @xmath and
@xmath represent the fully gauge-invariant field tensors, and @xmath is
the weak hypercharge. The parameter @xmath has units of energy and can
be regarded as the compositeness scale, while @xmath and @xmath are the
weights associated with the different gauge groups. The relative values
of @xmath and @xmath also affect the size of the single-production
cross-sections and their detection efficiencies. Either the photonic
decay, the CC decay, or the NC decay will have the largest branching
fraction, depending on their respective couplings [ 46 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the excited fermion charge, @xmath is the weak isospin,
and @xmath are the sine (cosine) of the Weinberg angle @xmath .

The integrated cross section for excited leptons is plotted as a
function of mass and energy in figures 2.5 and 2.6 respectively.

The possible decay modes for an excited lepton are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 3 Simulation and Selection

### 3.1 Introduction

This chapter describes the Monte Carlo generated signals of exotic
leptons and their background. It also includes cut-optimization, which
is applied on the Monte Carlo samples in order not to be biased by the
data. The Monte Carlo samples have been generated for several different
energies and normalized with respect to the corresponding integrated
luminosity at LEP (see table 3.1 ). Furthermore, they have been grouped
into three regions, 183-189 GeV, 192-200 GeV and 202-209 GeV. There are
two reasons for this grouping. The first reason is that the cross
sections of the sought signals is so small that statistically, they
would not show at one single energy. The second is that the grouping
simpifies the calculations. The total integrated luminosity is 663 pb
@xmath after detector cuts. Detector cuts means basically that all
detectors are required to have registered a clean signal.

After having been generated, all Monte Carlo events (both signals and
backgrounds as described later) are processed through the GOPAL [ 47 ]
system, which is a detector simulator based on GEANT 3. GEANT provides
tools to allow the user to define the geometrical parameters of his
detector, using standard shapes. GEANT also deals with tracking of
particles through this detector, including the necessary physics
processes (scattering, decays, interactions). All Monte Carlo results
(and later on also the data) are then processed through the same system
of pre-selection. ¹ ¹ 1 The pre-selection scheme is named the Tokyo
Multihadronic Event Selection (TKMH) [ 53 ] and basically means that
only good multihadronic events are kept. and then through selection of
events with desired characteristics. The detector itself is described
briefly in section 1.6 .

### 3.2 Signal Generation

The simulation of the signal have been done with EXOTIC [ 42 ] , a Monte
Carlo generator for single and pair production of heavy and excited
fermions in e @xmath e @xmath colliders. All spin correlations in the
production and in the decay processes are included, as well as the
transition betweeen a virtual and a real intermediate vector boson at
@xmath . The hadronization of quarks is done with the JETSET [ 48 ]
package. The formulae for the generation of exotic fermions are based on
[ 41 , 50 ] .

EXOTIC was chosen because it is the most versatile generator. For heavy
leptons, TIPTOP [ 51 ] is another possible generator, but it is more
limited. It only generates pair-produced sequential leptons within the
framework of the Standard Model. PYTHIA [ 49 ] could also have been
used, but it is restrained to generate fourth generation sequential
fermions and it does not include spin-correlations.

For the generation of excited fermions, existing Monte Carlo generators
do not take into account the polarization of the @xmath in their decay
process which is important for the angular distribution of @xmath .
Besides, decays via @xmath and @xmath have not been considered. For
further discussion on the limits of alternative generators, see the
EXOTIC write-up [ 42 ] .

Within the OPAL collaboration, several topics have already been covered,
like heavy lepton double production [ 19 ] and excited leptons with
photon decay [ 52 ] . For further discussions see chapter 1 .

The assumptions made for the signal generation are summarized and
motivated in the following sections.

#### 3.2.1 General

-   Leptons, not fermions
    The fact that the accelerator collides @xmath favours the production
    of leptons. Exotic quarks might also be produced, but we know that a
    fourth quark would have to be heavier than the top quark and
    therefore it would not be observable (see however [ 54 ] ).

-   Single production for @xmath GeV
    This thesis is primarily focused on single production, because the
    final state ( @xmath ) is clean and easy to identify. Furthermore,
    double production of heavy leptons is already covered by [ 19 ] up
    to heavy lepton mass 103 GeV.

-   Charged Current Channel
    The charged current channel is selected in preference to the neutral
    current channel, due to its higher branching ratio. Even for high
    masses, the branching ratio into a @xmath is roughly double that
    into a @xmath . For further details, see figure 2.7 .

-   @xmath
    The branching ratio of @xmath is about 70 %, while the branching
    ratio of @xmath is about 20 % (not counting the @xmath neutrino,
    which is not easily identified). Further, the final state signature
    @xmath is rather easy to identify and to reconstruct. Using the
    @xmath channel would imply a combinatory problem between the two
    leptons, as well as it would lead to severe difficulties in
    distinguishing the neutrinos.

-   Minimum cross section 15 fb
    If the number of signal events is required to be at least ten, then
    the smallest allowed cross section is @xmath fb for the total
    integrated luminosity of 663.5 pb @xmath . If the number of signal
    events is significantly lower than ten they will most likely
    disappear during the cuts.

-   No final state radiation in EXOTIC
    There is a bug in the OPAL version of the code of EXOTIC making it
    impossible to use final state radiation. The effect, however, has
    been found to be small, [ 43 ] .
    For masses around 90 GeV, even the initial state radiation
    encounters some difficulties, thus producing unphysical results.
    This is due to the transition between a three body problem with a
    virtual vector boson, and a two body problem with a real vector
    boson at the @xmath peak ( @xmath GeV). Further discussion can be
    found under the section ISRGEN in [ 42 ] .

-   The use of spin correlations.
    This means that the angular distributions should be correctly
    generated.

-   No new vector bosons light enough to affect the results.

#### 3.2.2 Heavy Leptons

-   Heavy electron generation, neither heavy @xmath , nor heavy @xmath .
    As we have mentioned in chapter 1 intergenerational mixing is
    assumed not to exist. Futhermore, only the first generation is
    studied, due to the non-existence of the @xmath -channel in the
    other generations. The @xmath -channel gives a much higher
    contribution to the cross section than the @xmath -channel. For
    example, in the second generation, the number of observed events can
    be predicted to peak at about three, which would be hidden by the
    LEP background (see chapter 2 ).

-   @xmath
    The current upper limit on the mixing of heavy leptons and ordinary
    leptons (see section 1.5.1 ).

-   Assuming @xmath so that the channel @xmath is kinematically closed.

-   Left-handedness
    There is no major difference between right-handed and left-handed
    leptons, except in the @xmath distribution for heavy neutrinos. The
    left-handed state has been chosen in order to limit the
    calculations.

#### 3.2.3 Excited Leptons

-   Only generation of @xmath , not @xmath or @xmath .
    The electrons are the easiest to detect and identify.

-   The gauge coupling parameters @xmath .
    As an extension to the current study, the case where @xmath could be
    studied.

-   The compositeness scale is, rather aritrarily, set to @xmath TeV.
    The cross section is inversely proportional to the square of the
    mass scale.

### 3.3 Backgrounds

The backgrounds that are likely to cloud the signature of the signal
(electron, neutrino and two jets) are (ordered approximately by
importance as can be seen in tables 3.8 and 3.9 ):

1.  llqq
    This is an irreducible background as it has exactly the same
    signature as the signal. The main production process is @xmath llqq.
    For technical reasons the eeqq background has been generated and
    treated separately.

2.  qq @xmath
    The cross section of this process is very high but on the other
    hand, the final state is quite different from the final state of the
    signal. in order to confuse the two of them, the lepton must come
    e. g. from one of the jets (b-jet or c-jet) and the missing energy
    could come in the form of radiation or a particle disappearing along
    the beampipe. The production process is @xmath qq.

3.  qqqq
    Two showers are recognized as jets, while the other two give rise to
    individual particles. Some of these include leptons and neutrinos,
    which is the signature of the signal. The principal sources of this
    background are @xmath qqqq.

4.  @xmath qq
    If one of the electrons from @xmath is undetected, then this final
    state correspond to that of the signal. @xmath qq has not been
    considered, due to the fact that the virtuality of the photons must
    be rather high.

5.  ee @xmath
    The two @xmath decay quickly to produce the jets and missing energy.
    @xmath has not been included because of its rather far-fetched
    signature.

The explanations above show how the backgrounds can be confounded with
the signals. Note, however, that they are only examples and that other
confusions also are possible.

The backgrounds have been generated by the OPAL collaboration with KK2f
[ 55 ] , Pythia [ 49 ] PHOJET [ 56 ] and grc4f [ 57 ] (cf. table 3.2 ).

Alternatively, a number of other generators could have been used, for
instance KORALW [ 58 ] for the llqq and qqqq backgrounds.

The @xmath qq (where @xmath is a real photon) background has not been
considered due to the fact that the virtuality of the photons must be
rather high to be a real background to our process. Even when one of the
photons can be considered to be virtual, the background is hardly
noticeable (see table 3.4 ).

The @xmath background has not be treated either because of its
relatively low cross section ( @xmath pb) in combination with the
remoteness of the final state particles compared to the signal.

For specific energies, where the luminosity is high and the number of
generated events are low, the number of generated background events
might be insufficient. Notably, this is the case for the @xmath
background, where the 189 GeV energy is particularly flagrant. The
number of generated events correspond to a luminosity of about 500 pb
@xmath while the data contains roughly 200 pb @xmath . Unfortunately, at
this moment, there are no more of these background events available.
However, this background is very sensitive to the preliminary cuts (see
section 3.4.2 ) and is quickly eliminated. This means that the lack of
simulations is not really a problem.

The only other background where simulations might be insufficient is the
qq( @xmath ) final state. In the worst case (at @xmath GeV), the number
of generated events correspond to about 2 fb @xmath , which is ten times
the data luminosity. This should be rather sufficient.

### 3.4 Variables and Cuts

#### 3.4.1 Description of Variables

The electron mentioned below refers to the most energetic electron
detected, while the neutrino is deduced as the missing energy and
momentum. The missing energy and momentum can either be a neutrino,
which passes right through the detector, or particles that pass so close
to the beam pipe that they escape detection. Often it is both, making
the determination of the exact neutrino energy and momentum difficult.
The @xmath is reconstructed from the two jets. The jets are identified
with the Durham jet-finding algorithm [ 59 ] forcing reconstruction of
only two jets. The quality of this jet-finding is characterized by
@xmath but this variable has not proved to be of any use in the cuts.

-   @xmath
    @xmath is the angle between the missing ² ² 2 Conservation of
    momentum gives that @xmath and thus @xmath . momentum and the @xmath
    -axis. []

-   @xmath
    is the reconstructed invariant mass of the neutrino and the lepton
    with the highest energies. This variable will have a peak around
    @xmath GeV for all backgrounds containing @xmath . This means that
    it is very useful to eliminate the llqq background.

-   @xmath
    is the energy of the neutrino, which is reconstructed supposing that
    there are only two jets and one charged lepton except for the
    neutrino. This variable is very useful to eliminate the qq( @xmath )
    background.

-   @xmath
    is the energy of the most energetic lepton, which should be the
    lepton shown in figure 2.1 . Unfortunately this is not always the
    case (cf. 3.6 ). This variable is very useful to eliminate the qq(
    @xmath ) background.

-   @xmath
    is the mass of the reconstructed neutral lepton ( @xmath ), i. e.
    the invariant mass of the two jets and the most energetic lepton.

-   @xmath
    is the mass of the reconstructed charged lepton ( @xmath ), i. e.
    the invariant mass of the two jets and the most energetic neutrino
    (missing @xmath ).

-   @xmath
    is the angle between electron and the @xmath direction in the center
    of mass system of the reconstructed @xmath . []

-   @xmath
    is the angle between the reconstruced @xmath and the invariant
    @xmath in the laboratory coordinate system. This variable could be
    used to discriminate the signal from the irreducible @xmath
    background. []

-   @xmath
    is the angle between the reconstructed @xmath and the @xmath in the
    coordinate system of the reconstructed @xmath . This variable has
    not proved to be very useful to distinguish the signal from the
    background, but it might, for example, be used to distinguish the
    type of heavy lepton. []

-   Lepton type
    is useful to distinguish heavy leptons, which should basically only
    give electron-type recoil leptons.

Note that the angle variables make sense in the heavy neutral lepton
case. This is also the only case that has been studied thoroughly.

#### 3.4.2 Preliminary Cuts

First of all, a standard set of OPAL cuts is applied on the Monte Carlo
samples, the Tokyo Multihadronic Event Selection [ 53 ] . These cuts are
applied in order to have nice jets, which is advantageous in the present
analysis.

As seen in section 3.3 , the backgrounds that have only photons and/or
quarks in their final state have a rather high cross section. However,
due to the lack of leptons, these backgrounds can be severely reduced by
requiring a high energy of the lepton and of the neutrino. All the
signals of exotic neutrinos have rather high @xmath and @xmath because
of their kinematics. However, the heavier the exotic lepton is, the more
energy is available for the recoil lepton and the less for the neutrino.
It would eventually be possible to combine these two variables and cut
only on the combination as the two energies are kinematically
interrelated. For the moment, cutting each one individually still
produces good results.

For all exotic neutrinos and their backgrounds, the following preiminary
cuts have been applied:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These cuts reduce the signals with a factor of about 1.3-1.5 (depending
on the mass of the exotic lepton) while the quark backgrounds mentioned
above are reduced more than sevenfold. The other backgrounds are
moderately reduced as can be seen in table 3.4 .

### 3.5 Complete Analysis of Heavy Neutrinos

Heavy neutrinos have been extensively studied for @xmath 100, 110, 120,
130, 140, 150, 160, 170 GeV. Higher masses have not been studied due to
the difficulties present already at 170 GeV (see table 4.2 ). It is
noteworthy that the masses are high enough to avoid the problems with
initial state radiation, as has been discussed in section 3.2 . Each
mass and energy region has been individually treated and optimized.

The analysis has been divided into three energy regions in order to
optimize the different cuts more effectively. The first region is
180-190 GeV, containing 244.5 pb @xmath , the second region is 191-200
GeV, containing 174.04 pb @xmath , and the last region is 201-209 GeV.
containing 244.92 pb @xmath .

#### 3.5.1 Cuts

There are many different methods to optimize the cuts. It matters in
what order the cuts are applied. It also matters whether all optimizing
cuts are applied at the same time, or if they are applied one by one,
with an inspection of the results before moving on to the next cut.
Different methods give different results although the conclusions have
proved to be basically the same, independently of the method used. Apart
from the method described below, one could start optimizing from the
cuts of a higher or lower mass or energy region. However, this would
induce a correlation between different masses and energy regions, which
is not necessarily real.

Due to the kinematics of the different masses it is not possible to make
good mass independent cuts. However, it is possible to make cuts that
are functions of the mass (see tables 3.5 – 3.7 ). For an explanation of
the different variables, cf. section 3.4.1 .

The optimization of cuts has been made in three steps, starting from
some very loose general cuts: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The first step is a visual estimation of appropriate cuts for the
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath .

At this point, every cut is slightly altered ( @xmath GeV or @xmath 0.1
radians), and those changes are kept, which improve @xmath , without too
much decreasing the signal. The alteration is then repeated, until no
more significant improvements are achieved. This step is done
automatically, and because of this a rather high improvement (in the
order of several percent) is required to continue. Note that in some
cases this optimization implies a broadening of the general cuts.

The last step is a manual fine-tuning of the cuts with the aim of having
a high @xmath , but still a with signal larger than one. In the
evaluation, @xmath is also considered in order to promote high signal
cuts. Finally, we require that the decay lepton from the @xmath should
be an electron, which cuts none of the real signal (supposing that the
heavy lepton is of E-type without any mixing to the @xmath or @xmath )
but should cut more than half of the background.

##### Statistical Error

The last step in the optimization procedure is somewhat arbitrary in the
choice between keeping a lot of signal events and obtaining a high
@xmath . This is remedied by evaluating the results as they change by
varying the cuts ( @xmath GeV or @xmath 0.05 radians) and observe the
changes. More about this in the next chapter.

##### Comments

The @xmath is very low for low masses, while @xmath is high for low
masses. @xmath also increases with the mass. Generally, the widths of
the distributions grow with the mass. In the end of the fine-tuning, the
cut on the @xmath turns out to be superfluous. The cuts are summarized
in tables 3.5 – 3.7 .

The principal variables and their cuts are plotted below. Two cases have
been chosen, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV, both for the center of mass
energy range of 191-200 GeV. Everything outside the region marked by the
arrows is cut away. As the cuts depend on order, each cut is shown with
the other cuts already applied. Note that the binning sometimes is too
small, giving the illusion of an excess in the data. Furthermore, the
Monte Carlo simulation are often less than one while data obviously is
integral. This will also produce the impression that the data does not
follow the simulated background.

For each background, the number of remaining events after each
consecutive cut is presented in tables 3.8 and 3.9 . This is useful to
see how much a specific background is affected be a certain cut. This
could eventually be used to find a different way of optimizing,
targeting the most dominant background.

### 3.6 Discussion of Heavy Charged Leptons

The process we are studying is shown in figure 2.1 (a). If the heavy
lepton mass is not close to the centre of mass energy ( @xmath GeV)
there will be much energy left for the recoiling lepton @xmath . This
energy will be mostly deposited in the beam direction, due to spin
conservation, making the lepton escape the detector. Consequently, both
the lepton and the high-energetic neutrino will be missing, thus making
the reconstruction very difficult.

Hence, for heavy leptons, only really high masses are easily detectable.
This is illustrated in figure ( 3.7 ). The problem with the higher
masses is that the cross sections are low (cf. figure 3.8 ). The low
electron energy also causes problems due to the background (see figure
3.3 ).

There are two possible approximations which might help to identify and
separate the lepton and the neutrino. In the first approximation, we
suppose that the @xmath , which could be a good estimate for high
masses. In the second approximation we assume that @xmath , which is a
good estimate for low masses, when the lepton has much energy and the
neutrino has little. Neither of these approximations has been tested
yet.

## Chapter 4 Data Analysis and Results

This chapter contains analysis of the data and the results in the form
of limits on the mixing parameter @xmath . The number of measured
data-events is referred to as data, @xmath , the simulated background
events as @xmath and the simulated signal @xmath . Furthermore, the
analysis has been grouped into three energy regions, 183-189 GeV,
192-200 GeV and 202-209 GeV as discussed in chapter 3 .

### 4.1 Heavy Neutral Lepton

Limits have been set on the mixing parameter, @xmath , rather than on
the production cross sections because the mixing parameter is constant
for all mass regions. The limits on the cross sections will be different
for every mass and center of mass energy. These limits can be obtained
by the use of the values in table 2.1 along with the limits on @xmath in
tables 4.3 to 4.5 below. The cross section, @xmath is proportional to
the square of the mixing parameter: @xmath .

-   For more than 15 background events or more than 20 data events, the
    limit is extracted with the assumption of gaussian statistics. We
    look at a single-sided gaussian distribution so that a 95%
    confidence limit corresponds to @xmath (like a 90% double-sided
    limit), where the standard deviation, @xmath , @xmath is the
    background, @xmath is the signal with a mixing required to obtain
    this confidence level (see figure 4.1 ).

    Thus, with 95% C.L., we solve the equation

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    for @xmath ( @xmath is the measured number of data-events). The
    number of data-events is proportional to the cross section which is
    proportional to the squared mixing angle, hence we obtain an upper
    limit on the mixing angle with 95% confidence level: @xmath where
    @xmath is the simulated signal and @xmath is the square of the
    nominal mixing (see section 3.2.2 ).

-   For small data and/or backgrounds the gaussian approximation is no
    longer valid, and the method in [ 60 ] has been used to determine
    the limits. In the article, there are tables for different
    confidence limits, data, and expected background.

The number of signal, background, and data events, preceeding each
consecutive cut, is shown in tables 4.1 and 4.2 . The tables show two
representative cases, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV, both in the 191-200 GeV
energy region.

In the @xmath GeV case (table 4.1 ), we note that the cut on the polar
angle seems to reduce the @xmath , but this is because the result is
order-dependent (as discussed in section 3.5.1 ). The final result
(Type=E) has a better @xmath with the @xmath cut than without it. In
this case, the cut on @xmath proves to be useless, which can easily be
understood in the light of table 3.6 where we see that there is no cut
on this variable for this mass. The background corresponds pretty well
to the data all along.

In the @xmath GeV case (table 4.2 ), we note that the @xmath never even
gets close to that of @xmath GeV. One of the reasons for this is the
lower cross section (because of its mass), another reason is the
persistence of the llqq background (see table 3.9 ) caused by the
similarity of the lepton and neutrino energy for the signal and the llqq
background (see 3.5 and 3.1 ). In this case, the @xmath cut turns out to
be unecessary, though it is still included for completeness.

#### 4.1.1 Lower Limits on the Mixing

In the first attempt to analyse the data, there were considerably more
data left, after the cuts, than expected. This excess called for a more
thorough analysis, which, however, did not confirm the excess. There are
still a couple of masses around @xmath 140 GeV, which have an excess,
but considering that there are 24 results, this is not considered
significant.

Just before applying the last cut (requiring that the lepton should be
an electron) there is a noticeable excess in the data for certain points
in the @xmath -plane. In these cases we can also calculate lower limits
on the mixing. In the energy region 180-190 GeV there is one lower limit
with 99% CL at @xmath 120 GeV, two lower limits with 90% CL at @xmath
=100 and 130 GeV, and one lower limit with 68% CL at @xmath 160 GeV.
This means that the probability of not having a new particle is less
than 1% for @xmath . However, the total number of events remaining after
all cuts is too small to allow any definite conclusions. Furthermore, in
the energy region 191-200 GeV, there is a lower limit with 95% for
@xmath =140 GeV and a lower limit with 68% CL at @xmath =150 GeV.
Finally, in the energy region 201-208 GeV, there are two lower limit
with 68% CL at @xmath =120 and 130 GeV. This seems to indicate that
something special is going on at @xmath 130 GeV. Nevertheless, it is
peculiar that this excess only appears before the final cut. After that
cut, the excess disappears and the data corresponds well to the expected
background. The signal we are looking for requires the lepton to be of
electron type. Hence, the observed excess doesn’t come from the expected
process. However, if the lepton is of muon type it could possibly give
this result. This is definitely something that is worth to investigate
further.

Nevertheless, the excess is not detected in all the energy regions, thus
weakening the probability of the excess to be a real signal.

#### 4.1.2 Upper Mixing Limits

The upper limits on the mixing between ordinary and heavy leptons for
each energy region is presented in tables 4.3 to 4.5 . We note that in
most cases, the data and the expected background correspond very well.

Furthermore, table 4.6 shows the combination of the three energy
regions. The combination has been obtained like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath it has been ignored, nothing can be concluded from this. For
certain masses, the upper limits are improved with respect to the
estimated 0.005 [ 36 , 37 ] . The reason for the higher limits for
masses @xmath GeV is a certain excess in the data (compare with section
4.1.1 ). It is also noteworthy that the statistics are rather low and
the results should therefore be regarded with certain caution.

#### 4.1.3 Systematic Errors

There are several types of systematic errors: theoretical, simulation,
normalization and reconstruction. These errors are presented below.

##### Theoretical

-   Intergenerational mixing could exist.

-   Extra light gauge bosons (e. g. @xmath ) could affect an eventual
    signal.

##### Simulation

-   The simulation of the backgrounds is inexact, especially the
    hadronization.

-   More background simulations for @xmath GeV could help as discussed
    in section 3.3 .

-   The GOPAL detector simulator is not exactly correct.

##### Normalization

-   Luminosities could be somewhat different.

##### Reconstruction

-   The reconstruction of leptons is not perfect.

-   The use of energy regions instead of optimizing the cuts
    individually for every energy. This can be particularly important
    for high masses in the center of mass energy region 180-190 GeV.

-   Problems with the detector (e. g. calibration).

The number of events before cuts is very similar for the background and
the data (see table 4.1 ), which means that the background is well
simulated. The signal would be far too small to be seen without any
cuts.

In tables 4.7 and 4.8 , the sensitivity of the cuts is shown. The first
table presents @xmath GeV and the second @xmath GeV, both in the 191-200
GeV energy region. Every cut has been changed individually, modifying
the cut @xmath GeV (or @xmath for angles). As we can see, there is no
major change in the results ( @xmath ). We note that the @xmath cut in
the @xmath GeV case is very significant. This is quite normal
considering the form of the background for this variable (see figure 3.1
). The low mass does not allow for an agressive cut on the lepton
energy. This results in leptons close to the beam-pipe, i. e. leptons
with @xmath . However, when @xmath is very close to 1, the leptons
escape the detector (see section 1.6 ).

## Chapter 5 Conclusions and Outlook

### 5.1 Conclusions

This is a search for heavy neutrinos in the single production channel
with charged current decay, which gives two jets ( @xmath jets @xmath ).
No traces of additional neutrinos have been found, which is quantified
by new limits on the mixing parameter, established for different masses
(see table 4.6 ). Masses between 100 and 170 GeV have been analysed at
intervals of 10 GeV. The search has been done on OPAL data in the energy
region 180-209 GeV with a total integrated luminosity of 663 pb @xmath .
The data has been divided in three energy regions, 180-190 GeV, 191-200
GeV, and 201-208 GeV. Main as well as minor backgrounds have been
considered and every energy region and mass has been individually
optimized.

### 5.2 Outlook

In order to complete the analysis, it would be interesting to
investigate the neutral current channel as well as heavy charged
leptons. For the heavy charged leptons, an approximation has to be made
(see section 3.6 ) and it would be important to evaluate its validity
and/or look for other options. The neutral current channel has a lower
branching ratio than the charged current channel, but for high masses it
could still be a competitive complement.

The peculiar excess in the data just before the last cut is also
something that is worth investigating. This could be a signal of a heavy
muon even though the number of measured data-events is low. Even though
the optimization would be different, there are many common points
between a heavy muon and a heavy electron and the cuts could be rather
similar for the two cases. However, for the muon it would be an @xmath
-channel process, which has a lower cross section.

Furthermore, the cuts can be optimized differently. The fine-tuning
described in section 3.5.1 has not necessarily been pushed to its limit.
Some cuts could be harder for some mass cases and loser for others. It
would also be possible to do a likelihood analysis. This could be a good
method of analysis considering the many cuts and the fact that several
of them are interdependent.

## Appendix A Glossary

  Antimatter  

    Antimatter is constituted of antiparticles .

  Antiparticle  

    An antiparticle is defined as having the opposite quantum numbers of
    the corresponding particle, but the same mass. Particles with their
    quantum numbers zero, except for spin which should be integer, (like
    the photon ) are their own antiparticles.

  Branching ratio  

    The relative probability that a particle will decay in a specific
    way. Example: @xmath has a branching ratio of about 3 percent. The
    sum of all branching ratios should be unity.

  Charge conjugation( @xmath )  

    @xmath is an operation that reverses the charge of a particle.

  Charged Current (CC)  

    Charged current is an interaction via a @xmath boson.

  CP-violation  

    The violation of the charge (C) and parity (P) quantum numbers.

  CKM-matrix  

    The mixing between quarks.

  Decay channels  

    The possible decays of a particle.
    Example:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the different processes have different branching ratios .

  Exotic  

    An exotic particle is either heavy or excited.

  Fermion  

    A fermion is a lepton or a quark.

  Final state radiation  

    Final state radiation is decays of particles or emission of gluons
    or photons that occur after the event.

  Higgs boson  

    A hypothetical particle required in the standard model of particle
    physics. The Higgs boson explains why @xmath , and @xmath have a
    mass.

  Initial state radiation  

    Initial state radiation is decays of particles or emission of gluons
    or photons that occur before the event.

  Preons  

    Preons are the consituents of leptons and/or quarks.

  Indices L and R  

    These indices refer to left-handed and right-handed particles (for
    left-handed particles the spin is antiparallell with the direction
    of the particle, the spin points ”backwards”).

  Massshell  

    On the mass shell means that the particle is real ( @xmath ). Off
    the mass shell means that it is virtual ( @xmath ).

  Mixing/Mixing parameter/Mixing Angle  

    The mixing between a heavy lepton and an ordinary lepton. For
    further explanation, see section 1.5.1 .

  Neutral Current (NC)  

    Neutral current is an interaction via a @xmath boson.

  Parity ( @xmath )  

    Parity is an operation that gives a particle the same properties as
    if is was observed in a “point-like mirror”. In other words, the
    spin of the particle will be inversed. @xmath . The left-parity
    operator is represented by @xmath , where @xmath is defined in
    appendix B . The right-parity operator is defined as @xmath .

  Signal  

    The signal is the signal of the exotic lepton.

  Symmetry  

    A symmetry operation does not change the physical solution. For
    example, the position of the origin in the coordinate system does
    not change the physical solution to problem.

 @xmath  -channel  

    The @xmath -channel is the merging of two particles into one, e. g.
    @xmath (see figure 2.1 ).

 @xmath  -channel  

    The @xmath -channel is the exchange of one particle between two
    other (see figure 2.4 ).

  Quantum numbers  

    The numbers that can be said to best describe the state of a
    particle. Examples: electric charge ( @xmath ), lepton number (
    @xmath ), baryon number ( @xmath ), parity ( @xmath ), spin ( @xmath
    ), isospin ( @xmath ), strangeness ( @xmath ), and charge
    conjugation ( @xmath ).

## Appendix B List of Symbols

Regarding the notations used, a capital letter in fermion names
signifies a heavy fermion (e. g. @xmath =heavy lepton, @xmath =heavy
electron) while a star signifies an excited fermion (e. g. @xmath
=excited up-quark, @xmath =excited muon). A fermion is either a lepton
or a quark, and an exotic particle is either heavy or excited. A lepton
@xmath can be either charged or neutral. In both cases a @xmath denotes
a charged fermion (e. g. @xmath =charged heavy lepton). A bar denotes an
anti-particle and unless otherwise specified, @xmath .

### b.1 Exotic Particles

  -------- ---------------------------------
  @xmath   Exotic fermion
  @xmath   Exotic lepton
  @xmath   Heavy fermion
  @xmath   Heavy lepton
  @xmath   Heavy charged lepton
  @xmath   Heavy neutral lepton (neutrino)
  @xmath   Heavy electron
  @xmath   Heavy electron neutrino
  @xmath   Heavy quark
  @xmath   Heavy up-quark
  @xmath   Heavy down-quark
  @xmath   Excited lepton
  @xmath   Excited charged lepton
  @xmath   Excited neutrino
  @xmath   Excited electron
  @xmath   Excited electron neutrino
  @xmath   Excited muon
  @xmath   Excited muon neutrino
  @xmath   Excited tau
  @xmath   Excited tau neutrino
  -------- ---------------------------------

### b.2 Standard Model Particles

  -------- ------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath   Photon
  @xmath   Fermion (quark or lepton, origin: Enrico Fermi)
  @xmath   Lepton (origin: greek leptos=small)
  @xmath   Electron (origin: greek elektron = amber,
           the rubbing of which causes electrostatic phenomena)
  @xmath   Electron neutrino (origin: latin ”small neutron”)
  @xmath   Muon
  @xmath   Muon neutrino
  @xmath   Tauon
  @xmath   Tau neutrino
  @xmath   Quark (origin: ”Three quarks for Muster Mark” in
           James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake (1939))
  @xmath   Up quark
  @xmath   Down quark
  @xmath   Strange quark
  @xmath   Charm quark
  @xmath   Top quark
  @xmath   Bottom quark
  @xmath   Jet of particles, produced by a quark or a gluon
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------

### b.3 Variables

  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath            Momentum
  @xmath            Transverse momentum, @xmath if @xmath is the beam direction
  @xmath            Luminosity
  @xmath            Cross-section
  @xmath            Polar angle
  @xmath            Azimuthal angle
  @xmath            Time
  @xmath            Standard deviation
  @xmath            Imaginary number, defined as @xmath
  @xmath matrices   @xmath @xmath
                    @xmath @xmath @xmath
  ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

### b.4 List of Constants

  -------- ---------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath   28.7 degrees                 The weak mixing angle @xmath
  @xmath   1.054571597 @xmath Js        @xmath , where @xmath is Planck’s constant ¹ ¹ 1 Unless otherwise specified, we set @xmath
  @xmath   299792458 ms @xmath          Speed of light in vacuum ^(†) ^(†) footnotemark:
  @xmath   1.3806503 @xmath JK @xmath   Boltzmann’s constant ^(†) ^(†) footnotemark:
  eV       1.6022 @xmath J              Electron Volt
  -------- ---------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### b.5 Abbreviations

  -------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  OPAL     Omni-Purpose Apparatus at LEP
  CERN     European Laboratory For Particle Physics
           (earlier: Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire)
  LEP      Large Electron Positron collider
  MSSM     Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
  GUT      Grand Unified Theory
  PYTHIA   A FORTRAN program to simulate collisions between particles
  grc4f    GRC (Grace) four fermions
  kk2f     KK two fermions
  QCD      Quantum ChromoDynamics, the field theory for strong interactions
  QED      Quantum ElectroDynamics, the field theory for electromagnetic interactions
  SUSY     SUper SYmmetry
  -------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
