This thesis is concerned with two topics in Hamiltonian lattice gauge
theory (LGT): improvement and the application of analytic techniques. On
the topic of improvement, we develop a direct method for improving
lattice Hamiltonians for gluons, in which linear combinations of gauge
invariant lattice operators are chosen to cancel the lowest order
discretisation errors. A number of improved Hamiltonians are derived and
the level of improvement tested for the simple cases of U(1) in 3+1
dimensions and SU(2) in 2+1 dimensions. In each case the improved
calculations are closer to the continuum limit, when working at a given
lattice spacing, than their unimproved counterparts.

On the topic of analytic methods, we extend the techniques that have
been used in 2+1 dimensional SU(2) variational calculations for many
years, to the general case of SU( @xmath ). For this purpose a number of
group integrals are calculated in terms of Toeplitz determinants. As
generating functions these group integrals allow the calculation of all
matrix elements appearing in variational glueball mass calculations in
2+1 dimensions. Making use of these analytic techniques, the lowest five
glueball masses, or massgaps, in various symmetry sectors are
calculated, with improved and unimproved Hamiltonians, for @xmath . For
simplicity, a minimisation basis containing only rectangular states is
used. Large scaling regions are obtained for each of the five lowest
mass states in the @xmath and @xmath sectors. The results are comparable
to competing calculations. However, the enumeration of the states
obtained requires further work.

The large @xmath limit of the glueball mass spectrum is also explored.
Making use of analytic variational techniques, glueball mass
calculations with @xmath as large as 25 are carried out on a desktop
computer and the results extrapolated accurately to the @xmath limit.
Evidence of leading order @xmath finite @xmath corrections is obtained
for a number of excited states. An interesting empirical observation is
made which demonstrates a close similarity between the glueball mass
spectrum and the simple harmonic oscillator spectrum in 2+1 dimensions.

We finish with a feasibility study of applying analytic Hamiltonian
techniques in 3+1 dimensional calculations. After developing analytic
techniques specific to 3+1 dimensions, we study the variational glueball
mass spectrum for SU( @xmath ) on a single cube, with a minimisation
basis containing only two states. Memory limitations do not allow
calculations with @xmath . We observe promising signs of an approach to
asymptotic scaling in the @xmath sector as @xmath is increased,
warranting larger volume studies with additional states in the
minimisation basis.
