##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Brief review of the IIB matrix model
    -    2.1 Definition and symmetry of the IIB matrix model
    -    2.2 Interaction between the BPS object
    -    2.3 Interpretation of the diffeomorphism invariance
    -    2.4 Alternative totally reduced models
    -    2.5 Other related studies
-    3 Studies of the @xmath supermatrix model
    -    3.1 Definition of the @xmath super Lie algebra
    -    3.2 @xmath (nongauged) cubic matrix model
    -    3.3 @xmath gauged cubic matrix model
    -    3.4 Curved-space classical solutions of the massive @xmath
        nongauged supermatrix model
    -    3.5 Other related studies
-    4 Matrix model with manifest general coordinate invariance
    -    4.1 Bosonic part of the matrix model
    -    4.2 Supersymmetric action
-    5 Monte Carlo simulation of the fuzzy sphere solutions
    -    5.1 Nonperturbative studies of the fuzzy sphere initial
        condition
    -    5.2 Analysis of the Yang-Mills phase
    -    5.3 Metastability of the multi-sphere solutions
    -    5.4 Miscellaneous future directions
-    6 Conclusion
-    A Notation
    -    A.1 Definition and properties of the gamma matrices and the
        fermions
    -    A.2 Supermatrices
-    B Calculation of the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients
-    C Basic knowledge for the numerical simulation of the matrix model
    -    C.1 Review of the Monte Carlo simulation
    -    C.2 Simulation of the quadratic matrix model
    -    C.3 Simulation of the quartic matrix model
    -    C.4 Simulation of the bosonic IIB matrix model with the
        Chern-Simons term
    -    C.5 Jackknife (binning) method

## 1 Introduction

One of the main themes in the elementary particle physics is
unification. There are four kinds of interaction in the nature; the weak
interaction, the strong interaction, the electromagnetic interaction and
the gravitational interaction. In 1967, Glashow, Weinberg and Salam
succeeded in the unification of the weak and electromagnetic interaction
in terms of the @xmath gauge group. The ensuing success is the advent of
the ”Standard Model”, described by the @xmath gauge group. The Standard
Model is striking in the sense that it describes all the experimental
phenomena by setting the 18 parameters in the model.

However, there are two serious drawbacks to the Standard Model. First is
that we cannot explain theoretically how these 18 parameters are fixed.
Namely, we have to rely on the experimental data in setting these
parameters. Second is that the Standard Model does not unify the
gravitational interaction.

Now, the superstring theory is regarded as the most promising candidate
to resolve these two drawbacks. The superstring theory regards not a
zero-dimensional point but a one-dimensional string with the length
@xmath cm as the fundamental object. Here, @xmath is called ”the Planck
Scale”, which is the fundamental scale in the superstring theory. The
superstring theory incorporates not only the gauge particles but also
the gravitons in its oscillation modes. There is an infinite tower of
the mass level in the oscillation modes. The massless modes of the open
string, which has two ends, are regarded as the gauge particle. On the
other hand, the massless modes of the closed string, which constitutes a
closed circle like a rubber band, gives the spin-2 graviton. In this
sense, the superstring theory is thought to include not only the
Standard Model but also the gravitational theory in the low-energy
limit, where the massive modes of the superstring theory are ignored.
The superstring theory is fascinating in that it incorporates no free
parameters. It is in contrast to the Standard Model, which suffers the
problem of a plethora of free parameters. The superstring theory has a
possibility to explain the gauge group of the Standard Model, the number
of the generations of the quarks, the mass of the Higgs particle, quarks
or leptons, the dimensionality of our spacetime @xmath , from a theory
without any parameter.

We have seen the so-called ”first string boom” in the early 1980’s, in
which the perturbative aspects of the superstring theory have been
elucidated. The striking discovery in 1984 is that the superstring
theory is free from the divergence of the gravitational energy.
Physicists have been so far puzzled by the UV divergence in the
quantization of the gravitational interaction. This conundrum has been
resolved by the superstring theory which alleviates this divergence.
Moreover, it has also been known that there are only five kinds of
superstring theory well-defined in the ten dimensions. They are the type
I, type IIA, type IIB, @xmath heterotic and @xmath heterotic superstring
theory. Especially, the @xmath heterotic superstring theory is
propitious for the immersion of the Standard Model in the superstring
theory. The exceptional Lie algebra @xmath includes the Lie algebra
@xmath , which is the gauge symmetry of the Standard Model, as its
subalgebra.

The superstring theory is defined in the ten-dimensional spacetime, but
this is not so problematic because it is a theory of gravity. The
spacetime is regarded as being given not a priori but dynamically from
the classical solution of the theory. It is now believed that the
superfluous six dimensions are compactified at an extremely small size
at the incunabula of the universe. Mathematically, the six superfluous
dimensions are compactified by the Calabi-Yau manifold.

However, the superstring theory suffers a serious setback. Since the
superstring theory is defined only perturbatively, there is no telling
which is the true vacuum. While there are only five well-defined
superstring theories, there are a myriad of ways to compactify the
ten-dimensional superstring theory into the four dimensions and thus we
are overwhelmed by the infinite vacua. This means that the superstring
theory does not have the ability to predict our four-dimensional world,
and we cannot tell whether the superstring theory dynamically generates
the Standard Model. In order to surmount this difficulty, we definitely
need the constructive definition (i.e. the definition without the
perturbation).

The so-called ”first string boom” was over at the end of the 1980’s.
However, there were important discoveries at this period about the
noncritical string theory and the bosonic matrix model (the extensive
review can be found in [ 1 , 2 ] ). Distler and Kawai [ 72 ] succeeded
in the quantization of the non-critical string theory up to one
dimension via the conformal gauge. In addition, there is a striking
relation between the bosonic string theory and the matrix model,
proposed by F. David [ 70 ] . For the simplest zero-dimensional
non-critical string, the corresponding matrix model is a one-matrix
model described by a simple @xmath hermitian matrix. The correspondence
has been found for the central charge @xmath (for @xmath ), in which the
string corresponds to the multi-matrix model. The path integral of the
worldsheet for all genera has been approximated by the random
triangulation of the worldsheet. This has led us to identify the Feynman
rule with that of the one-matrix model. In this way, we have seen the
formal correspondence between the matrix model and the string theory.
Even more crucial is that the matrix model can be solved
nonperturbatively. Brezin and Kazakov [ 74 ] solved the matrix model by
means of the orthogonal polynomial method. They extracted the
nonperturbative aspects of the bosonic matrix model via the differential
equation called Painlevè equation. They calculated the parameter called
the string susceptibility, and found that this agrees with the
calculation of Distler and Kawai [ 72 ] for the noncritical string.

We have failed in extending this idea to the ”super”string, and this
progress is limited to the bosonic string. This is due to the same
difficulty as we face in putting the chiral fermion onto the lattice.
Thus, these discoveries, per se, do not give a technical clue to the
constructive definition of the superstring theory. The
’state-of-the-art’ matrix models (such as the IIB matrix model) do not
inherit the same techniques as the old matrix model. Nevertheless, these
discoveries serve as an important touchstone for the legitimacy of the
large- @xmath reduced models as the constructive definition of the
string theory.

In the late 1990’s we have seen the so-called ”second string boom”, in
which we grasped the nonperturbative aspects of the superstring theory.
During the second string boom, Polchinski discovered the soliton-like
object called the D-brane. The discovery of the D-brane led to the idea
of the two kinds of the duality of the string theory. First is the
T-duality, which is the duality between the large and small radius of
the compactification. Second is the S-duality, which relates the strong
coupling and the weak coupling. It is now believed that the five
ten-dimensional superstring theories are related with one another
through the T/S duality. This is an illuminating discovery, in the sense
that it is reminiscent of the more fundamental theory whose certain
limit might reproduce these five superstring theories.

Another big progress is the proposal for the constructive definition of
the superstring theory via the large- @xmath reduced model. Here, the
’large- @xmath reduced model’ means the model defined by the @xmath
hermitian matrices. In 1996, Banks, Fischler, Shenker and Susskind
proposed the matrix model defined by the dimensional reduction of the
ten-dimensional super Yang-Mills theory to one dimension @xmath the
so-called BFSS model [ 4 ] . This matrix model is more related to the
type IIA superstring theory, and the effect of the type IIA supergravity
is induced by the one-loop effect.

Other attempts are the IIB matrix model (the IKKT model) [ 5 ] and the
matrix string theory [ 6 ] , which are defined by the dimensional
reduction of the ten-dimensional super Yang-Mills theory to the zero and
two dimensions, respectively. Especially, the IIB matrix model is now
regarded as one of the most promising candidates for the constructive
definition of the superstring theory (this model is extensively reviewed
in [ 16 , 75 ] ). As its nomenclature shows, this model is deeply
related to the type IIB superstring theory. The simplest and the most
direct correspondence is that the IIB matrix model is defined by the
matrix regularization of the Green-Schwarz action of the type IIB
superstring theory; namely by replacing the Poisson bracket with the
commutator of the @xmath matrix. In addition, it has been shown [ 7 ]
that the Wilson loops satisfy the string field equations of motion for
the type IIB superstring in the light-cone gauge. The prominent feature
of this model is that it does not include any free parameter. The
overall coefficient which is an artifact of the coupling constant before
being reduced is absorbed by a simple field redefinition.

There have been hitherto a lot of progresses with respect to the IIB
matrix model. First is the relation to the gravitational interaction.
The most fundamental feature is the spacetime @xmath supersymmetry [ 5 ]
when we regard the eigenvalues of the bosonic matrices as the spacetime
coordinate. This urges us to interpret the eigenvalues as the spacetime
coordinate. In addition, the graviton and dilaton exchange has been
calculated in [ 5 ] . The interpretation of the general coordinate
invariance is proposed in [ 14 ] , in which the permutation invariance
of the eigenvalues is identified with the general coordinate invariance
of the low-energy effective action.

Second is the relation to the noncommutative geometry, which has been
widely investigated since Seiberg and Witten elucidated the relationship
with the superstring theory [ 18 ] . By expanding the IIB matrix model
around the classical background, it reproduces the noncommutative
Yang-Mills theory [ 17 ] .

Third is the dynamical generation of the four-dimensional spacetime. In
[ 11 ] , it has been found that the Hausdorff dimension of the
eigenvalue distribution is four. In [ 36 ] , Nishimura and Sugino
proposed the breakdown of the Lorentz symmetry from @xmath to @xmath by
means of the third order of the Gaussian expansion. Their analysis has
been extended to the seventh order in [ 39 , 48 ] .

The discovery of the IIB matrix model implies the trilateral
relationship of the three important notions in the elementary particle
physics; the superstring theory, the quantum field theory and the matrix
model. The discovery of the relationship between the one-matrix model
and the bosonic string theory is another good example to relate these
notions. In the course of the ”second string boom” we have other
important discoveries for this trilateral relationships. In 1997,
Maldacena advocated the duality between the type IIB superstring theory
on the @xmath spacetime and the @xmath , four-dimensional super
Yang-Mills theory. This is the so-called ”AdS/CFT correspondence” [ 9 ,
12 , 15 ] . This correspondence has been conjectured through the
coincident symmetries of these two theories. Since the proposal of
Maldacena, the AdS/CFT correspondence has been rigorously investigated
by many authors (among them is the author’s work [ 32 ] , while we do
not delve into this work in this thesis). Another important discovery is
the so-called Dijkgraaf-Vafa duality [ 41 , 43 , 45 ] . This is a
duality between the @xmath four-dimensional super Yang-Mills theory and
the one-matrix model, which used to attract much attention in relation
to the bosonic string theory in the early 1990’s. This discovery
reinstated the one-matrix model into many authors’ attention. At first [
41 , 43 , 45 ] , this relationship is understood with the intervention
of the topological string theory. However, Cachazo, Douglas, Seiberg and
Witten [ 47 , 49 , 53 ] explained this duality directly through the
super Yang-Mills theory without topological string theory. They
elucidated that these two theories comply with the same Schwinger-Dyson
equation, employing the notion of the chiral ring and the Konishi
anomaly [ 67 , 68 ] . Moreover, in [ 54 , 58 ] , the direct relationship
between the large- @xmath reduction and the Dijkgraaf-Vafa duality has
been found. In this way, in the course of the ”second string boom”, many
interesting discoveries, including the IIB matrix model, have been
unraveled. In the future, we will surely have a synergy in the studies
of these three germane areas.

While the IIB matrix model has a lot of interesting properties, there is
a plenty of room to investigate. The more manifest correspondence with
the gravitational interaction is definitely a $64,000 question. If the
IIB matrix model or its extensions are to be the eligible frameworks to
unify the gravitational interaction, we must take seriously the relation
to the gravitational interaction. While several important evidences have
been found, there are a lot of questions to clarify. It has been an
enigma how we can describe the local Lorentz symmetry in terms of the
large- @xmath reduced models. In addition, the definition of the IIB
matrix model relies heavily on the flat background. Especially, the IIB
matrix model incorporates the background of the flat space, not the
curved space. This prohibits the perturbation around the curved space
background.

In this thesis, we discuss some of the attempts [ 26 , 38 , 46 , 60 ] to
address these issues. This thesis is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we give a brief review of the IIB matrix model. Especially, we focus on
the development of the IIB matrix model in relation to the gravitational
interaction. Moreover, we have a careful look at the alterations of the
IIB matrix model that incorporate a curved-space background, in relation
to some of the author’s works [ 46 , 60 ] .

In Section 3, we review the author’s works about the supermatrix model [
26 , 46 ] , based on the @xmath super Lie algebra. The studies of the
supermatrix models give a rich perspective for the generalization of the
IIB matrix model in relation to the gravitational interaction. We start
with investigating the correspondence of the nongauged @xmath model with
the IIB matrix model, paying attention to the supersymmetry. We next
consider the so-called ”gauged version”, namely the model whose Lorentz
symmetry and the gauge symmetry are mixed together. This is an important
idea in realizing the matrix model equipped with the local Lorentz
symmetry, because the eigenvalues of the bosonic matrices are identified
with the spacetime in the IIB matrix model. We next go back to the
nongauged version of the @xmath supermatrix model including the mass
term [ 46 ] . It has been known that the IIB matrix model with the
tachyonic mass term, whose review we give in Section 2, incorporates the
curved-space background because the trivial commutative background is
destabilized. We focus on the similarity of such models and the massive
supermatrix model.

In Section 4, we elaborate on the idea of the ”gauged matrix model”
without the supermatrix model [ 38 ] . Especially, we allocate the
odd-rank matrices of the ten dimensions for the matter field, and the
even-rank matrices to the parameters of the local Lorentz
transformation. When we mix the Lorentz symmetry and the gauge symmetry,
the model must inevitably include the higher-rank fields in order for
the action to be invariant and for the algebra of the symmetry to close
with respect to the commutator. This is a good news in that the rank-3
fields are identified with the spin connection in the curved space. We
consider the explicit identification of the matrices with the
differential operator, and clarify that the bosonic part actually
reduces to the Einstein gravity in the low-energy limit. We also discuss
the structure of the @xmath supersymmetry.

In Section 5, we study the stability of the fuzzy sphere background in
the quantum sense. While it is easy to discuss the stability of the
curved-space background (all we have to do is just to plug the solution
into the action), it is by no means easy to discuss the stability in the
quantum sense. In this section, we address this question via the heat
bath algorithm of the Monte Carlo simulation. We focus on the simplest
case; namely the bosonic three-dimensional IIB matrix model with the
Chern-Simons term. We find that this bosonic matrix model has a
first-order phase transition between the Yang-Mills phase (in which the
quantum effect is large and the fuzzy sphere classical solution is
unstable) and the fuzzy sphere phase (in which the model is subject to
the meager quantum effect and the fuzzy sphere is stable), as we change
the radius of the fuzzy-sphere solution (equivalently, the coefficient
of the Chern-Simons term). Moreover, we find that this model has a
one-loop exactness in the fuzzy sphere phase in the large- @xmath limit.
The latter result is especially exciting, in the sense that this helps
the analysis of the dynamical generation of the gauge group.

Section 6 is devoted to the conclusion and the future outlook of the
work.

In Appendix A, we summarize the notation of this thesis. We give the
detailed notation of the gamma matrices and the supermatrices. In
addition, we give a proof of the miscellaneous formulae of the gamma
matrices.

In Appendix B, we give the calculation of the Seeley-de-Witt
coefficients, which plays an important role in Section 4.

In Appendix C, we give the detailed recipe for the heat bath algorithm
of the matrix model. We start with the quadratic one-matrix model in
full detail, because this gives the key idea of the simulation of the
IIB matrix model with/without the Chern-Simons term. We nextly discuss
the simulation of the quartic one-matrix model. Finally, we discuss the
heat bath algorithm for the IIB matrix model with/without the
Chern-Simons term.

## 2 Brief review of the IIB matrix model

In this section, we give a brief review of the IIB matrix model [ 5 ] .
As we have mentioned in the introduction, the IIB matrix model is
regarded as the most promising candidate for the constructive definition
of the superstring theory. This model is also called ”the IKKT model”,
where IKKT is the acronym for the authors of [ 5 ] ; Ishibashi, Kawai,
Kitazawa and Tsuchiya.

### 2.1 Definition and symmetry of the IIB matrix model

The IIB matrix model is defined by the dimensional reduction of the
ten-dimensional @xmath super Yang-Mills theory to zero dimension as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath are the ten-dimensional bosonic vector, and @xmath is the
ten-dimensional Majorana-Weyl (hence sixteen-component) fermion. Both
@xmath and @xmath are promoted to the @xmath hermitian matrices. This
model incorporates the @xmath Lorentz symmetry and the @xmath gauge
symmetry. This model is a totally reduced model in that it is reduced to
zero dimension. The prominent feature of this model is that it has no
free parameter. The overall coefficient @xmath can be trivially absorbed
into the fields by the following redefinition.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coefficient @xmath is an artifact of the coupling constant of the
super Yang-Mills theory before being reduced, and is nothing but a
scaling parameter.

The path integral of the IIB matrix model is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined in the ten-dimensional Euclidean space by the
Wick rotation of @xmath and @xmath in the action ( 2.1 ). The
convergence of the path integral of the IIB matrix model is not trivial,
because the gauge group @xmath is not compact. However, the convergence
of the path integral is discussed in the paper [ 24 , 28 ] (the review
is found in the Ph.D. thesis of Austing [ 34 ] ). The authors
corroborated that the path integral converges for ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath is the
dimension of the IIB matrix model, and the model ( 2.1 ) is defined for
@xmath . More explicitly, the @xmath -dimensional supersymmetric IIB
matrix model means the following action

@xmath

which is well-defined for @xmath . The explicit definition of the @xmath
-dimensional bosonic IIB matrix model is given by

@xmath

@xmath . Only for the bosonic part, the path integral is shown to
converge for @xmath . Here, @xmath for the @xmath gauge group, @xmath
for the @xmath and @xmath for all the other simple Lie group.

#### 2.1.1 Relation to the type IIB superstring theory

The IIB matrix model has a deep relation to the type IIB superstring.
Here, we discern that the IIB matrix model is obtained by the matrix
regularization of the Green-Schwarz action of the type IIB superstring
theory. The Green-Schwarz formalism is defined so that the spacetime
supersymmetry should be more manifest. The bosonic Nambu-Goto action is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a metric on the worldsheet, and has a Lorentz signature
@xmath . A naive guess for a supersymmetric extension is to replace
@xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is trivially invariant under the supersymmetry transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath runs over @xmath , and this is an index for the
supersymmetry. However, the naive replacement of @xmath with @xmath for
the action ( 2.4 ) is not enough, because it does not have a @xmath
symmetry and hence it has twice as many degrees of freedom as it should.
Instead, we give the following action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this section, we define the rank-2 epsilon tensor as @xmath (and
hence @xmath ). This action is defined for the @xmath dimensional
spacetime, and the index @xmath runs over @xmath . The supersymmetry
transformation of this action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we drop the surface terms. The term ( 2.7 ) is shown to vanish
(i.e. the action @xmath is supersymmetry invariant) by noting the
following rewriting:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath . @xmath can be further
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term vanishes due to the Fierz identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We delegate the proof of this Fierz identity to Appendix A.1.6 . The
second and third terms vanish because they are nothing but surface
terms.

This model also incorporates the symmetry named the @xmath symmetry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a projection operator defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This satisfies the following properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follow from the inversion rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the parameters of the @xmath -symmetry is subject to the following
projection rule:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

The @xmath -symmetry transformation varies the action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

up to the surface terms that vanish in the integral. We can show that
the Green-Schwarz action is invariant under the @xmath -symmetry with
the help of the identity ( 2.10 ).

Nextly, we explain how the matrix regularization of the Green-Schwarz
action of the type IIB superstring theory leads to the IIB matrix model.
For the type IIB superstring theory, the chirality of the two spinors
@xmath and @xmath is identical. Therefore, we set @xmath . This
simplifies the term @xmath as @xmath . Then, the action is simplified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating out @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last equality, we note that this determinant can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We introduce the Schild action and discern that this reduces to the
Green-Schwarz action. The Schild action is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we introduce the scalar density @xmath as an independent variable.
The Poisson bracket @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying this Schild action with respect to @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This scalar density is clearly identical to the determinant in the
Green-Schwarz action @xmath up to a constant. Plugging this into the
action, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reduces to the Green-Schwarz action by setting @xmath . We discuss
the matrix regularization of the Schild action ( 2.20 ). We perform the
following replacement:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

By setting @xmath and dropping the term @xmath , the Schild action
arrives at the IIB matrix model.

We next discuss the supersymmetry of the Green-Schwarz action. We
identify the two combinations of the parameter of the original
supersymmetry and the @xmath symmetry, to obtain a new supersymmetry
transformation. To this end, we relate the parameters of the
supersymmetry and the @xmath symmetry as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We take the following gauge for the Schild action of the type IIB
superstring theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the fermionic supersymmetry transformation is written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Thus, the @xmath symmetry transformation for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We introduce the following redefinition of the supersymmetry parameter:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The combination of the supersymmetry and the @xmath symmetry is thus
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.1.2 Supersymmetry

Now, let us have a careful look at the supersymmetry of the IIB matrix
model. We have formulated the supersymmetry of the Schild action of the
type IIB superstring. In the IIB matrix model we consider that the
matrix-regularized version of that supersymmetry is inherited. The
@xmath supersymmetry of the IIB matrix model is then distinguished by

-   homogeneous: @xmath .
    The feature of the ’homogeneous supersymmetry’ is that this
    supersymmetry transformation depends on the matter fields @xmath and
    @xmath . And this supersymmetry transformation vanishes if there is
    no matter field.

-   inhomogeneous: @xmath .
    The feature of the ’inhomogeneous supersymmetry’ is that the
    translation survives without the matter fields.

The commutators of these supersymmetries give the following important
results:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
        @xmath               (2.32)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

These properties can be verified by taking the difference of the two
supersymmetry transformations.

1.  This is the most complicated to compute. For the gauge field, we
    should consider the following transformation

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    Then, the commutator is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Utilizing the formula @xmath , we obtain

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    For the fermions, we have only to repeat the similar procedure:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    Using the formula of the Fierz transformation,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    whose proof we present in Appendix A.1.5 , we verify that the
    commutator of the supersymmetry transformation is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here, we utilize the equation of motion

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    in order to eliminate the second and the third terms of the Fierz
    identity ( LABEL:AZM31fierz ).

    Next, we note that the commutators of the supersymmetry
    transformation ( 2.37 ) and ( 2.41 ) vanish up to the gauge
    transformation. The gauge transformation of the IIB model is to
    multiply the unitary matrix @xmath . The gauge transformation is
    expressed in the infinitesimal form as follows :

      -- -- -- --------
               (2.43)
      -- -- -- --------

    The supersymmetry transformation ( 2.37 ) and ( 2.41 ) can be gauged
    away by the gauge parameter @xmath . We now complete the proof of (
    2.31 ) up to the gauge transformation.

2.  This is trivial because the supersymmetry @xmath involves only a
    constant.

3.  This can be proven by taking the difference of these two
    transformations

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath               (2.44)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This completes the proof of the commutation relation of the
supersymmetry transformation. When we take the linear combination of the
homogeneous and the inhomogeneous supersymmetry as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

the commutator is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath run over @xmath . The commutation relation ( 2.46 ) has a
serious consequence. When we regard the eigenvalues of the bosonic
matrices @xmath as the spacetime coordinate, the IIB matrix model
carries a spacetime @xmath supersymmetry. Namely, the commutator of the
supersymmetry transformations gives a translation of the spacetime by
@xmath . This urges us to interpret the spacetime as emerging from the
eigenvalues of @xmath . This is a crucial property in order for this
model to include the gravitational interaction. If the IIB matrix model
has a massless particle, it must have a spin-2 graviton. We have a good
reason to reduce not the four or six-dimensional, but the
ten-dimensional @xmath super Yang-Mills theory. This model has the 32
maximal supersymmetry only if we reduce the ten-dimensional super
Yang-Mills theory. The maximal supersymmetry is an essential aspect for
the theory of gravity.

### 2.2 Interaction between the BPS object

We next review the interpretation of the BPS objects (such as the
D-brane) in terms of the IIB matrix model. We start with considering the
classical equation of motion of the IIB matrix model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we set the fermion @xmath to zero. The corresponding equation of
motion for the type IIB superstring theory is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the type IIB superstring theory, this has a solution
representing the D1-brane:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.49)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the compactification radii of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The parameter @xmath and @xmath take values
@xmath and @xmath . The Poisson bracket is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding commutator for the matrix regularization is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

This commutation relation is realized only for the infinite-size
matrices (we can see that this is impossible for the finite-size
matrices by using the cyclic rule of the trace @xmath ). Namely, we have
the following solution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the infinite-size canonical pair satisfying @xmath .

We discern that the solution ( 2.52 ) is a BPS saturated state in the
following way. We substitute the solution ( 2.52 ), along with @xmath
and @xmath , into the supersymmetry transformation in the previous
section to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The homogeneous supersymmetry can be clearly canceled by the
inhomogeneous supersymmetry, when we properly choose the parameter
@xmath . In this sense, the D1-brane solution of the IIB matrix model (
2.52 ) actually preserves half of the supersymmetry, and thus is a BPS
saturated object.

By the same token, we can establish the solutions of the IIB matrix
model that correspond to the @xmath brane, by taking the similar
canonical pairs as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This nicely corresponds to the fact that the type IIB superstring theory
accepts the D1,3,5, @xmath -branes.

We next see that the bosonic matrices @xmath of the IIB matrix model
describe the multi-body system. We can easily build the solution for the
two D1-branes located at @xmath by taking the following block-diagonal
matrices.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the size of each block, and @xmath satisfy @xmath .

By the same token, we can build the @xmath brane system through the
following classical solution.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, the IIB matrix model describes not only the single
D-objects , but also the multi-body system by allocating the plural
matters on the block-diagonal components. In this sense, there is a
great difference from the action of the D-instanton action, which
appears to be the same action. Unlike the D-instanton action, the IIB
matrix model accepts the multi-body system and thus is a
second-quantized action.

Not only do the matrices of the IIB matrix model @xmath accommodate the
multi-body system but also the interaction is embedded in the same
matrices. Namely, the off-diagonal part can be interpreted as
representing the interaction of each block.

We next investigate the interaction between the D-objects by the
one-loop calculation. To this end, we derive the one-loop effective
action. We separate the matrices with the classical solution and the
fluctuation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the classical solution, and @xmath and
@xmath are the fluctuation. Since the IIB matrix model is invariant
under the @xmath gauge transformation ( 2.43 ), we need the gauge
fixing. Here, we adopt the background gauge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding gauge-fixing term @xmath and the ghost term @xmath are
respectively

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.59)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the ghosts and the anti-ghosts respectively.
In the following, we set the parameter @xmath to 1. Then, we extract the
quadratic term of the fluctuation for the total action @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we introduce the following adjoint operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality for @xmath follows from the Jacobi identity of
the commutators. Integrating the fluctuation, we obtain the following
effective action.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, the trace @xmath is for the @xmath matrices, while the trace
@xmath and @xmath are respectively for the ten-dimensional vector
indices and the ten-dimensional gamma matrices ( @xmath is the Weyl
projector, and effectively the size is not 32 but 16).

We evaluate the interaction between the diagonal blocks using the
one-loop effective action ( 2.62 ), and elucidate that the IIB matrix
model includes the gravitational interaction. We consider the
backgrounds having a block-diagonal form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, each block @xmath represents the separate D-object and is an
@xmath matrix. We decompose the classical background between the trace
and the traceless part as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the eigenvalues of the bosonic matrices are regarded as the
spacetime coordinate in the IIB matrix model, the trace @xmath should be
identified with the collective coordinate of the D-objects. We assume
that the classical D-objects are separated with each other so that the
distances @xmath are sufficiently large.

The adjoint operator @xmath operates on the @xmath components of the
matrix @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent the operation of @xmath from the left
and right, respectively. Similarly, we simplify the notation of the
operation of the adjoint operator @xmath . The background field strength
is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operation of @xmath can be likewise decomposed into the left and
right operation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the left and right operation are independent, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

We obtain the one-loop interaction for these D-objects. To this end, we
expand the effective action ( 2.62 ) with respect to the power of @xmath
. The first bosonic term is expanded as

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Whereas, the third fermionic term of ( 2.62 ) is expanded as

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

In this derivation, we utilize the following formulae of the gamma
matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Along with the second ghost term @xmath , we discern that the effect of
the boson and the fermion cancels up to the @xmath order. This
cancellation is ascribed to the supersymmetry of the IIB matrix model.
Due to this cancellation, the leading effect of the one-loop interaction
is of the order @xmath . Namely, the interaction complies with the power
law @xmath (where @xmath is the distance of the two D-objects, and the
dimensionality is @xmath ). In this sense, we regard this one-loop
interaction as the gravitational interaction. This is an important
evidence that the IIB matrix model describes the gravitational
interaction, and this is a consequence of the supersymmetry. Especially,
the contribution of the @xmath block is expressed using the notation for
the left and right operation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.69)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The tensor structure indicates that the first and second term of the
last line of ( 2.69 ) represent the graviton and dilaton exchange
respectively. This result augurs very well for the IIB matrix model to
be a bona fide framework for the gravitation interaction. This argument
is limited to the background gauge, and it is an interesting future work
to extend this argument in a gauge independent way.

### 2.3 Interpretation of the diffeomorphism invariance

In this subsection, we review the interpretation of the diffeomorphism
invariance on the target space for the IIB matrix model. In [ 14 ] , it
has been pointed out that the invariance under the permutation of the
eigenvalues @xmath is interpreted as the diffeomorphism invariance of
the low-energy action. Since the permutation invariance is of course a
subgroup of the @xmath symmetry, this means that both the diffeomorphism
invariance and the gauge invariance emerge from the @xmath invariance!
This is a surprising aspect of the IIB matrix model, in that the
unification of these two symmetries has been achieved in a natural way.

In discussing the dynamics of the spacetime, we expand the IIB matrix
model around the diagonal background

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where these satisfy the constraint @xmath and @xmath , because they
belong to the @xmath gauge group. We delegate the details to the
references [ 11 , 14 , 16 , 75 ] , but after we integrate the
fluctuation at the one-loop level and further the fermion zero mode
@xmath , we finally obtain the following interesting result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the graphs that connects the eigenvalues @xmath ,
and @xmath is the Boltzmann weight for the graph @xmath and the
configuration of the eigenvalues @xmath . An explicit calculation also
indicates that the dependence on the two different eigenvalues @xmath
and @xmath contributes at the order @xmath , when @xmath and @xmath are
connected by the graph @xmath .

The important property of the integral ( 2.71 ) is that it is invariant
under the permutation of the eigenvalues @xmath . We note that this is
of course not the case with each graph @xmath , because the way to
connect the eigenvalues by the graphs impairs the @xmath invariance.
Nevertheless, this symmetry is retrieved when we take a summation for
all the graphs. This phenomenon is somewhat reminiscent of the dynamical
triangulation approach to the quantum gravity, in which the
diffeomorphism invariance is retrieved by summing over all the
triangulation.

Here, we see how the permutation invariance of the eigenvalues leads to
the diffeomorphism invariance. In a sense, this is a very natural
interpretation, since we identify the eigenvalues with the spacetime
coordinate. To elaborate on this viewpoint, we consider the scalar field
@xmath propagating in the distributed eigenvalues. Namely, we consider
the following effective action as an example;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a function damping fast sufficiently at infinity. We introduce
the density function @xmath . Along with the continuous function @xmath
that satisfies @xmath , the action ( 2.72 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we take an average with respect to the eigenvalue configuration
@xmath and the graphs @xmath . In order to see clearly the
correspondence between the gravitational background, we further rewrite
the action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we normalize the density correlation as @xmath . This urges us to
identify the eigenvalue density with the gravitational background as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Nextly, we see how the diffeomorphism invariance is realized. Since the
IIB matrix model itself is @xmath invariant, the model itself is of
course invariant under its subgroup @xmath . Under the permutation
@xmath for @xmath , the fields @xmath transform to @xmath . We extend
the permutation of the eigenvalue to the transformation of the
continuous transformation @xmath , where @xmath is a continuous function
such that @xmath . It is trivial that @xmath is subject to the general
coordinate transformation as a scalar field. In addition, the background
metric given in ( 2.75 ) also receives a transformation as a rank-2
tensor, when the function @xmath decreases rapidly and has a support
only near the origin @xmath . In this sense, we can fairly interpret the
@xmath invariance as the general coordinate invariance of the low-energy
limit.

While the IIB matrix model has only a flat noncommutative background and
depends heavily on the flat metric, we have an interpretation for the
curved space background. A nontrivial background is induced dynamically
through the condensation of the graviton.

### 2.4 Alternative totally reduced models

In this subsection, we review the attempts for the generalization of the
IIB matrix model. The IIB matrix model augurs well for the unification
of the gravity. The @xmath supersymmetry is a fundamental object for the
theory of gravity. In the preceding two sections, we have reviewed some
of the evidences for the gravitational interaction: the graviton-dilaton
exchange in the one-loop calculation and the interpretation of the
diffeomorphism invariance. However, the IIB matrix model suffers a
serious drawback in that it has only the flat noncommutative background.
However, if a matrix model is to be a bona fide framework to describe
the gravitational interaction, it should accommodate a curved space
background in a natural way. In this section, we introduce several
generalizations of the IIB matrix model, so that they should incorporate
a curved space background.

#### 2.4.1 The IIB matrix model with the Chern-Simons term

Firstly, we introduce the matrix model with the Chern-Simons term,
defined by the following action [ 25 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the indices @xmath run over @xmath and this model is defined on
the three-dimensional Euclidean space. @xmath are the three-dimensional
bosonic vectors and @xmath is the three-dimensional Majorana fermion.
This is also a totally reduced model like the IIB matrix model, and
@xmath and @xmath are promoted to the @xmath hermitian matrices. @xmath
are the Pauli matrices and in the following @xmath denotes @xmath . This
model has the @xmath rotational symmetry and the @xmath gauge symmetry.

In [ 56 ] , Tomino performed the calculation of the path integral for
the @xmath case as a toy model, and elucidated that the path integral
converges for the @xmath case (while the bosonic model ( 5.1 ) which we
analyze in Sec. 5 does diverge). This is in contrast to the IIB matrix
model without the Chern-Simons term, in which the path integral diverges
for @xmath and arbitrary @xmath . Austing and Wheater in [ 57 ]
corroborated that adding the Chern-Simons term does not affect the
convergence as long as the original path integral (without the
Chern-Simons term) converges absolutely.

The interesting property of this matrix model is that it incorporates
the classical solution of the fuzzy sphere. Its classical equation of
motion is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fuzzy-sphere solution is given by the @xmath -dimensional
irreducible representation of the @xmath Lie algebra @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is regarded as the sphere, firstly because it satisfies the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation ( 2.79 ) determines the radius of the sphere as @xmath . In
addition, the eigenvalues of @xmath are distributed sphere-like. In this
sense, this classical solution is interpreted as the sphere in the
three-dimensional spacetime. That this matrix model has the @xmath fuzzy
sphere classical solution is a great advantage. While the @xmath fuzzy
sphere is nothing but a simple manifold, it is of significance as a
prototype of the curved space background, which is a fundamental
principle of the general relativity.

This matrix model also incorporates the @xmath supersymmetry. Like the
IIB matrix model, this model also has the homogeneous and the
inhomogeneous supersymmetry.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
                 (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

This model has the similar commutation relation to that of the IIB
matrix model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
                 (2.83)
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof of these commutation relations goes in the same way as in the
IIB matrix model, and we give only the proof of ( 2.82 ). Using the
formula @xmath , we obtain the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . For the fermion, we obtain the commutator by
taking the difference likewise:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the following Fierz transformation whose detailed proof we give
in Appendix A.1.5 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 2.87 ), we omit the rank-0 contribution, since we are interested in
the commutator @xmath . Then, we obtain the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference from the IIB matrix model is that the commutation
relation ( 2.88 ) is satisfied without using the classical equation of
motion. The relations ( 2.85 ) and ( 2.88 ) indicate that the
commutators vanish up to the @xmath rotation by @xmath , as well as the
gauge transformation by @xmath . The appearance of the @xmath symmetry
is a novelty of this matrix model.

We likewise take the linear combination of the supersymmetry as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.89)
  -- -- -- --------

Their commutation relation gives the translation of the bosonic matrices
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fuzzy-sphere classical solution is a BPS saturated state. Plugging
the classical solution ( 2.78 ) and @xmath into the homogeneous
transformation ( 2.80 ), we immediately find that the homogeneous
supersymmetry vanishes. Whereas, the inhomogeneous supersymmetry ( 2.81
) survives. In this sense, the fuzzy-sphere solution ( 2.78 ) preserves
half of the supersymmetry.

We next discuss the expansion of this matrix model around the fuzzy
sphere solution ( 2.78 ). In the case of the IIB matrix model, we derive
the noncommutative Yang-Mills theory by the expansion around the flat
noncommutative background [ 17 ] . This derivation of the noncommutative
Yang-Mills theory is quite natural, because the matrices, per se, are
noncommutative objects. The studies of the noncommutative field theory
have become explosively popular since Seiberg and Witten [ 18 ]
elucidated the relation to the superstring theory. In the noncommutative
spacetime, we impose the noncommutativity on the spacetime as @xmath .
This relationship is reminiscent of the canonical commutation relation
of the space and the momentum in the quantum mechanics. Just as the
spacetime and momentum have the uncertainty principle, the
noncommutative spacetime incorporates the uncertainty of the spacetime.
In the context of the superstring theory, the noncommutativity of the
spacetime is introduced by turning on the B field [ 18 ] , which gives
the noncommutativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the uncertainty of the spacetime at the string scale
@xmath .

When we expand the matrix model ( 2.76 ) around the fuzzy sphere
background ( 2.78 ), we obtain a noncommutative Yang-Mills theory on the
@xmath sphere. The expansion around the sphere is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fluctuation. The fluctuation is expanded by the
noncommutative spherical harmonics as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the noncommutative spherical harmonics @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

The indices @xmath run over @xmath , and @xmath is a symmetric and
traceless tensor. We can understand that this is a @xmath -dimensional
tensor as follows. Firstly, when we allocate @xmath to @xmath in a
symmetric way, we have @xmath ways. On the other hand, the tracelessness
condition implies that @xmath vanishes. This condition stems from the
constraint @xmath . This eliminates @xmath ways. Therefore, the
dimensionality of this tensor is @xmath . Its normalization is defined
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

This of course corresponds to the expansion in terms of the c-number
spherical harmonics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we can build the mapping rule between the matrices and the
functions on the @xmath sphere. The rule is listed below:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.98)
     @xmath      (2.99)
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We need to look more closely at the star product ( 2.100 ). Firstly, the
correspondence ( 2.98 ) is rewritten, using the orthogonality condition
( 2.95 ), as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, we require that the maximum value of @xmath is @xmath . This leads
us to define the star product as follows. Here, we require that @xmath
should not exceed @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then, the action ( 2.76 ) is mapped as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.103)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we define the field strength @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The subscript @xmath indicates that the product is defined by the
noncommutative star product. Therefore, the commutator survives even for
the @xmath abelian gauge group of the Yang-Mills theory.

This gives the relationship between the coupling constant of the
Yang-Mills theory @xmath and the artifact of the coupling constant of
the Yang-Mill theory before being reduced as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We go on to the symmetry of this Yang-Mills theory. Firstly, the @xmath
symmetry is interpreted as the gauge symmetry. For the element of the
@xmath Lie group @xmath , it is expanded as @xmath , where @xmath is an
element of the @xmath Lie algebra . The gauge transformation for @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This transforms the fluctuation as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is immediately translated in terms of the Yang-Mills theory as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Secondly, we note that this noncommutative Yang-Mills theory preserves
the following @xmath supersymmetry.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have hitherto discussed the perturbation around the irreducible
representation of the fuzzy sphere ( 2.78 ). In this case, we obtain a
@xmath abelian noncommutative Yang-Mills theory. The matrix model ( 2.76
) also accommodates the fuzzy sphere solution of the reducible
representation

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.110)
  -- -- -- ---------

When @xmath is the @xmath representation of the @xmath Lie algebra, the
size of the matrices @xmath satisfies @xmath . The perturbation around
this reducible representation gives the @xmath nonabelian theory.

#### 2.4.2 Other attempts for higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere solution

We next review the extension of the above discussion to the
higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere classical solution. To this end, there
are two strategies. First is the addition of the higher-dimensional
Chern-Simons term, and second is the addition of the tachyonic mass
term.

The first attempt is achieved by defining the following action [ 40 , 50
] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, we define this matrix model in the @xmath -dimensional Euclidean
space. The indices @xmath run over @xmath . The supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory can be defined only for the @xmath case, and the
supersymmetric matrix model cannot be defined except for the
three-dimensional case as we have reviewed before. Hence, we focus on
the bosonic matrix model in the following. Except for the @xmath
(three-dimensional) case, the convergence of the path integral is not
yet manifestly proven. Nevertheless, we surmise that the fuzzy-sphere
classical solution might be a metastable state, in that it is barriered
by a high potential. We attribute this metastability to the similar
reasoning to the @xmath matrix model. As we explain in Appendix C , the
@xmath matrix model retains the metastability near the origin despite
its unbounded-below potential.

The illuminating feature of this higher-dimensional matrix model is that
it incorporates the classical solution of the @xmath fuzzy sphere. The
equation of motion is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It has the following classical solution of the @xmath fuzzy sphere [ 10
, 31 , 43 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We define the symmetric tensor product more explicitly, for @xmath case
(namely, for the @xmath and @xmath fuzzy sphere). We denote the matrix
element using the orthonormal state @xmath and @xmath as @xmath . The
usual tensor product (two-fold product, for brevity) is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, the symmetric tensor product is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The coefficient @xmath is determined, so that the symmetrized state may
retain the orthonormality. Here, we give a more explicit definition for
the two-fold tensor product of the Paulian matrices ( @xmath case). For
the two-fold tensor product, the symmetrized orthonormal state is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This difference comes from the fact that the states @xmath and @xmath
are symmetrized ab ovo and hence that we do not need symmetrization or
normalization. We elaborate on these definitions in terms of explicit
representation in terms of matrices. The usual tensor product ( 2.114 )
is rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, its symmetrization is rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficient @xmath is related to the radius parameter of the fuzzy
sphere @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the coefficient @xmath is given later in the self-dual relation
relation ( 2.126 ).

The @xmath fuzzy sphere is mathematically more involved than the @xmath
fuzzy sphere. We introduce the properties of the higher-dimensional
fuzzy sphere solution. Firstly, the gamma matrices @xmath is defined by
the Wick rotation of those for the Minkowski spacetime given in Appendix
A . The definition is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath runs over @xmath . Namely, we identify @xmath in the
Minkowski space with @xmath in the Euclidean spacetime.

The size of the representation ( LABEL:fspsolution ) is given in [ 31 ]
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see a grave difference between the @xmath (three-dimensional) case
and otherwise. For @xmath , the representation ( LABEL:fspsolution ) can
be defined for an arbitrary integer-size matrices (of course, except for
1). However, this never holds true for @xmath case. For example, the
representation ( LABEL:fspsolution ) is possible only for a limited
integer size; namely @xmath .

The important property is that @xmath does not generically close with
respect to the commutator for @xmath . This is also a tremendous
difference between the three-dimensional case and the higher-dimensional
case. Here, we denote @xmath . These satisfy the following relations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
     @xmath      (2.123)
     @xmath      (2.124)
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In addition, @xmath satisfies the following self-dual relation.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Before verifying these properties, we start with convincing ourselves
that the notion of the higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere solution is a
generalization of the @xmath Lie algebra. To this end, we focus on the
relation between the @xmath (three-dimensional) case and the @xmath Lie
algebra.

Firstly, the @xmath -fold symmetric tensor product for @xmath is
identical to the @xmath -dimensional irreducible representation of the
@xmath Lie algebra. We explicitly give the matrix element of the @xmath
case as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.128)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

These are clearly identical to the @xmath representation of the @xmath
Lie algebra. In addition, the 2-fold tensor product obeys the following
important relation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.129)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Utilizing this relation, the radius of the fuzzy sphere is derived as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.130)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we used ( 2.129 ) in the second equality and recall that @xmath .
This proves the relation ( 2.122 ) for @xmath . This is identical to the
Casimir of the @xmath , which satisfies @xmath . Here, the relation
between @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath .

The self-dual relation ( 2.126 ) clearly reduces to the commutation
relation of the @xmath Lie algebra:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We next go into the proof of the relations ( 2.122 ) @xmath ( 2.126 ).
We immediately discern that ( 2.124 ) and ( 2.125 ) are verified from
the commutation relations of the gamma matrices. ( 2.122 ) can be
substantiated by repeating the same argument as for ( 2.130 ) in the
@xmath case. In promoting to the higher-dimensional case, we note that
the similar relation to ( 2.129 ) holds true of the general case; namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , this relation can be verified as

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

by using ( 2.129 ) twice. We can verify the higher- @xmath case
recursively in the same way. Once we prove ( 2.132 ), the proof of (
2.122 ) goes in the same way as for ( 2.130 ).

The relation ( 2.123 ) is verified by the following calculation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.133)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Lastly, we prove the relation ( 2.126 ). The brutal-force proof up to
@xmath is given in [ 46 ] . However, the Gordian knot is cut in one
stroke in [ 50 ] by noting the following reduction law. We consider the
algebra at the north pole of the fuzzy sphere; @xmath . Then, @xmath are
the generator of the @xmath rotation around the north pole, where the
indices @xmath run over @xmath . For @xmath , the elements for the
@xmath fuzzy sphere can be identified with those of the @xmath fuzzy
sphere;

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gives the recursive relation of the coefficient @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This shows that the coefficient @xmath obeys the recursion relation (
2.127 ).

This completes the relations ( 2.122 ) @xmath ( 2.126 ). We can see that
( LABEL:fspsolution ) represents the sphere simply due to the relation (
2.122 ). This gives the radius of the @xmath fuzzy sphere as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The relation ( 2.119 ) has a serious consequence for the radius. For the
@xmath case, the radius is proportional to the coefficient @xmath .
However, for @xmath case, the radius becomes smaller for the larger
coefficient @xmath .

Nextly, we point out that the @xmath fuzzy sphere is attached to the
@xmath fuzzy sphere at each point. This property is understood by
considering the algebra on the north pole @xmath . As we mentioned
before, @xmath are the generators of the @xmath rotation. Since
identification ( 2.134 ) gives the algebra of the @xmath sphere, we see
that the @xmath sphere is attached on the north pole. While we see only
the north pole, it is clear that this holds true of all the points of
the @xmath sphere due to the rotational symmetry. Due to the
identification ( 2.134 ), the radius of the @xmath fuzzy sphere attached
to the @xmath sphere is clearly given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This property can be understood from the viewpoint of the stabilizer
group. The stabilizer group of the @xmath fuzzy sphere is @xmath . This
is identical to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.138)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This solidifies the fact that the @xmath sphere is attached on the
@xmath sphere.

We see another grave difference between the @xmath and the
higher-dimensional @xmath fuzzy sphere with respect to the classical
stability. The classical energy is easily calculated by plugging the
fuzzy sphere solution @xmath into the action as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this derivation, we use the relation ( 2.122 ) and ( 2.123 ), as well
as the self-dual relation ( 2.126 ). The classical energy ( 2.139 ) is
negative for the three-dimensional ( @xmath ) case, and thus
energetically favored than the flat background @xmath , for which @xmath
. However, the reverse is the case with the @xmath case. In this case,
the fuzzy sphere solution is less energetically favored.

We have seen the alternative matrix model incorporating the
higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere solution and the properties of the
solution. Another choice is to add the tachyonic mass term to the
bosonic part of the IIB matrix model as [ 29 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This model is defined by the general @xmath -dimensional Euclidean space
(here, the indices @xmath run over @xmath ). The convergence of the path
integral of this matrix model is not clear, while it is balanced by the
mass term and the quartic term. This comes from the diagonal part of the
matrices @xmath . The diagonal part of @xmath of course contributes to
the tachyonic mass term. Whereas, the quartic term comprises the
commutator, so that the diagonal part is canceled. This is a serious
drawback, compared with the matrix model with the Chern-Simons term.

The equation of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

gives a variety of the curved-space classical solution. Due to the
commutation relation ( 2.124 ) and ( 2.125 ), (for @xmath ) it
accommodates the @xmath fuzzy sphere solution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the mass @xmath is now related as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The classical energy of the fuzzy sphere solution @xmath for the action
( 2.141 ) is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This matrix model model has a wider class of the non-trivial classical
background than the matrix model with the Chern-Simons term. While we
delegate the explicit definition to the paper [ 29 ] , this matrix model
accommodates the classical solution of the fuzzy torus. This property is
not shared with the matrix model with the Chern-Simons term. In this
sense, the matrix model with a tachyonic mass term is an interesting
attempt for a richer curved space background of the matrix model.

### 2.5 Other related studies

In this brief review, we do not exhaust all the recent developments of
the IIB matrix model. Instead, we touch on the other important studies
of the IIB matrix model to conclude this review. Firstly, in [ 11 ] ,
the reasoning for the IIB matrix model to induce the four-dimensional
spacetime dynamically has been found. The novelty is that they related
the branched polymer and the eigenvalue distribution of the IIB matrix
model. In this way, they found that the Hausdorff dimension of the set
of the eigenvalues of the matrices @xmath is four. This is a great
discovery, in that the IIB matrix model implies the dynamical generation
of our real four-dimensional world. This issue is reviewed in detail in
[ 16 , 75 ] .

Another proposal for the dynamical generation of the four-dimensional
spacetime is proposed in [ 36 ] . In this paper, they discussed the
Gaussian expansion of the IIB matrix model, by taking the quadratic
action to be the ”test action”. They conducted the third-order
calculation of the Gaussian expansion, and found that the @xmath Lorentz
symmetry breaks down to the @xmath symmetry. This also serves as an
important evidence for the generation of the four-dimensional spacetime.
In [ 39 , 48 ] , they refined the calculation by means of the improved
Taylor expansion and the notion of the 2PI (two-particle irreducible)
Feynman diagram. They substantiated the breakdown of the @xmath Lorentz
symmetry to the @xmath up to the seventh order of the Gaussian
expansion.

The IIB matrix model is a successful proposal for the constructive
definition of the superstring theory, and possesses many exciting
properties which solidify the confidence that it is an authentic
constructive definition.

## 3 Studies of the @xmath supermatrix model

In this section, we discuss the matrix model based on the @xmath super
Lie algebra, as a natural extension of the IIB matrix model. Firstly, L.
Smolin [ 19 ] proposed the matrix model based on the @xmath super Lie
algebra as an M-theory matrix model. Smolin discussed the possibility
for this matrix model to induce both the BFSS model [ 4 ] and the IIB
matrix model [ 5 ] .

As we have briefly reviewed in the previous section, the IIB matrix
model enjoys a lot of successful aspects. And, we have also discussed
some of the attempts for the extensions of the IIB matrix model for a
more manifest formulation of the gravitational interaction. Here, we
introduce the ”supermatrix models”, which are defined by the ”super Lie
algebra”. There are a lot of illuminating features to the supermatrix
model. Firstly, the models include both the bosons and the fermions in a
unified way, since the bosons and the fermions are embedded in the same
multiplet. Secondly, as we will see more closely in the definition, the
supermatrix models accommodate the higher-rank tensor fields, as well as
the rank-1 bosonic fields @xmath . Especially, this opens the door to
the generalization of the spin connection in terms of the large- @xmath
reduced models. If we are to describe a gravitational interaction more
manifestly, we should take this question more seriously. Thirdly, the
action is described by the cubic term of the supermatrix. This might be
a natural aspect for the generalization of the superstring theory,
because the cubic interaction is the fundamental one in the sense that
the four-point interaction is identical to the connection of the two
cubic interactions due to the conformal invariance. Moreover, this model
might be solvable in relation to the Chern-Simons theory. The
Chern-Simons theory is known to be exactly solvable by means of the
Jones Polynomial in the knot theory [ 73 ] . If we find a correspondence
between the cubic matrix model and Witten’s technique of solving the
Chern-Simons theory, we may obtain a way to solve the superstring theory
exactly in the distant future. This section is based on the author’s
works [ 26 , 46 ] .

### 3.1 Definition of the @xmath super Lie algebra

Before entering the investigation of the superstring action, we settle
the definition of a super Lie algebra. A super Lie algebra is an algebra
of supermatrix in which both bosonic matrices and the fermionic matrices
are embedded in one matrix. Supermatrices possess many properties
different from (ordinary) matrices, and these properties and the
notations are summarized in detail in Appendix. A.2 .

Let us start with the definition of the @xmath super Lie algebra.

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We confirm that, for the first condition, @xmath forms a closed super
Lie algebra. Suppose matrices @xmath and @xmath satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is to be a closed super Lie algebra, we call for the following
condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Multiplying @xmath on both ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.2 ) from the left, we
respectively obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The proof that @xmath is a closed super Lie algebra is
equivalent to deriving ( 3.4 ) utilizing ( 3.3 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This statement, per se, can be satisfied whatever the matrix @xmath may
be so long as @xmath has an inverse matrix.

Here comes one question: Why do we define a metric @xmath as @xmath ?
This stems from the requirement that @xmath should be a real matrix;
namely @xmath . Let us consider the consistency between this reality
condition and the very definition of @xmath super Lie algebra. Take a
hermitian conjugate of the definition @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Utilizing the properties introduced in the Appendix. A.2.3 , and the
reality condition, this is rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order for the relationship ( LABEL:AZM3ccdef ) to be consistent with
the very definition of @xmath , we must call for a condition @xmath .
And the starting point of @xmath is well-defined if we take a metric as
@xmath .

The next issue is to investigate the explicit form of this super Lie
algebra. This is expressed by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath contains only the terms of rank 1,2,5. In other words, @xmath
    is expressed as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Here @xmath denotes @xmath . However, this is equivalent to @xmath ,
    because we are now considering a real super Lie algebra.

The proof of this restriction goes as follows. Let @xmath be the element
of @xmath and @xmath :

-   @xmath is defined as @xmath .

-   Because @xmath is a real supermatrix, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
    real, while @xmath is pure imaginary (and hence @xmath is real).

By substituting this formula into the very definition, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We immediately obtain the relationship between two fermionic fields
@xmath and @xmath from this definition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By multiplying @xmath on the both hand sides from the left , we obtain
the relationship between @xmath and @xmath . We immediately note that
@xmath is equivalent to the equation ( 3.10 ).

The constraint on @xmath is trivial, and @xmath must vanish. On the
other hand, the constraint on @xmath is worth a careful investigation.
@xmath is imposed on the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the very definition of the Lie algebra called @xmath , and this
statement indicates that the bosonic @xmath matrix of the @xmath super
Lie algebra must belong to the @xmath Lie algebra. In analyzing this
supermatrix model, it is more convenient to decompose the bosonic part
@xmath in terms of the basis of arbitrary @xmath matrices ² ² 2 Actually
this is a @xmath dimensional basis, because the dimension of this basis
is @xmath . . Namely, we decompose the bosonic part @xmath in terms of
the eleven-dimensional gamma matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , rather than to obey the expression in the paper [
19 ] .

The relationship ( 3.11 ) determines what rank of the 11 dimensional
gamma matrices survive. Suppose @xmath are expressed in terms of the
gamma matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition ( 3.11 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, performing the following computation for @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the rank of the gamma matrices. Combining this result
with the constraint of the @xmath Lie algebra ( 3.13 ), we discern that
only the gamma matrices of rank 1, 2 and 5 survive. We are thus finished
with verifying the explicit form of the @xmath super Lie algebra.

### 3.2 @xmath (nongauged) cubic matrix model

#### 3.2.1 Action of the cubic supermatrix model

We first discuss the nongauged action of the @xmath super Lie algebra
(we postpone the meaning of the ”(non)gauged action” later). We start
with the following action proposed by L. Smolin [ 19 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath is a supermatrix belonging to the @xmath super Lie algebra.
The indices @xmath and @xmath respectively run over @xmath and @xmath .
These indices are respectively allocated for the whole @xmath @xmath
supermatrix, and the @xmath bosonic part. Here, we promote each
component of the @xmath super Lie algebra to the @xmath hermitian
matrices. In the following, the lowercase trace and the uppercase trace
are for the @xmath matrices and the @xmath matrices, respectively.
@xmath is a structure constant of the @xmath Lie algebra, and @xmath is
necessitated in the overall definition of the supermatrix model in order
to render the action real.

This model apparently possesses the following pathological properties [
19 ] . The first is that this theory is not bounded from above or below.
This pathology stems from the fact that the action is cubic , and can be
seen by a naive field redefinition @xmath . The action is rewritten as
@xmath , and we can set this action to be @xmath by setting the
parameter to be @xmath . This means that the path integral of the theory
@xmath does not converge. However, note that this pathology is shared by
general relativity. This pathological property of general relativity can
be seen by Weyl transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Although this pathology of Smolin’s proposal is not a happy aspect, this
may be regarded as a good news because this may indicate that Smolin’s
proposals may include general relativity by taking a due limit. The
second problem is that this theory possesses no explicit time
coordinate. This is again a property shared by the general relativity.
We can introduce a time coordinate by expanding the theory around a
certain background. Once a time coordinate is introduced, we can
construct a Hamiltonian of this theory.

We mention the symmetries of this matrix model. Firstly, this model
naturally has the @xmath symmetry, which is the extension of the @xmath
Lorentz symmetry. We note that this symmetry is possible only when we
define the theory in terms of the supertrace, which is defined as @xmath
. The cyclic rule of the supermatrix holds true not for the ordinary
trace but for the supertrace. This property can be verified by the
following argument. We consider the following two arbitrary matrices
@xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are 32 @xmath 32 bosonic
matrices, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are 32-component fermionic
vectors, and @xmath and @xmath are c-numbers. We consider the supertrace
of @xmath and @xmath , which are calculated as @xmath , and @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath are fermionic quantities, the sign flips if we
change the order. Therefore, we establish that it is not an ordinary
trace but a supertrace that the cyclic rule @xmath holds true of the
supermatrix.

We next discuss its gauge symmetry. This model is invariant under the
following @xmath transformation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this symmetry, we do not mix the @xmath transformation and the @xmath
transformation. We have a closer look at the mixed symmetry in an
attempt to realize the local Lorentz symmetry, and we call such models
”gauged models”. On the other hand, we call the action ( 3.15 )
”nongauged”, because we do not mix these two symmetry. This ”nongauged
symmetry” is close to the symmetry of the IIB matrix model, in which the
@xmath Lorentz symmetry and the @xmath gauge symmetry are separate.

In addition, this model incorporates the trivial shift of the
supermatrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action ( 3.15 ) is rewritten in terms of the explicit expression of
the @xmath super Lie algebra @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We consider the reduction of the model to the ten-dimensions. To this
end, we first rewrite the action ( 3.15 ) in terms of the expansion for
the eleven-dimensional gamma matrices as ( 3.9 ). In order to see the
correspondence between the ten-dimensional IIB matrix model, we perform
a reduction to the ten dimensions. To this end, we specialize the tenth
direction @xmath , and we retain the @xmath rotational symmetry. We
define the ten-dimensional fields by the following chiral decomposition
of the bosonic matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we also recall the notation of the left(right)-handed fermion:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are self-dual to each other. Namely,
they satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action is thus expanded as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the bosonic and fermionic parts of the
action @xmath , respectively. The whole action is @xmath . The
computation of this action is lengthy, and we delegate the proof to
Appendix B.2. of [ 27 ] .

#### 3.2.2 Identification of the supersymmetry with the IIB matrix model

We next discuss the identification of the supersymmetry with that of the
IIB matrix model. This model has two kinds of supersymmetry
transformation, corresponding to the @xmath rotational symmetry and the
translation symmetry.

-   The former supersymmetry corresponding to the @xmath rotation is
    called the ”homogeneous supersymmetry”, in the same sense as for the
    IIB matrix model. This is defined by the rotation by the supercharge
    @xmath . Namely, the transformation of the matrices @xmath is given
    by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The latter supersymmetry corresponds to the translation symmetry.
    This is called the ”inhomogeneous supersymmetry”, and is defined by
    the simple translation of the fermion @xmath .

In this way, the @xmath supermatrix model has @xmath supercharges. This
is twice as much as the IIB matrix model. This simply leads us to
speculate that the double structures of the IIB matrix model are
embedded in this supermatrix model. We elaborate on this point, by
scrutinizing the commutation relation. Especially, we elucidate that
there is a nice correspondence with the supersymmetry of the IIB matrix
model, with the chiral decomposition ( 3.19 ). Namely, we identify
@xmath with the vector fields of the IIB matrix model, and consider its
supersymmetry transformation.

Since the fields @xmath are given by ³ ³ 3 We recall that @xmath while
@xmath . Here, we do not take a summation with respect to the duplicate
indices @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

the homogeneous transformation of the vector fields @xmath and @xmath is
computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The transformation of the vector fields @xmath is beautifully
reminiscent of the homogeneous transformation of the IIB matrix model.
In this sense, we see a correspondence between the chirality of the
vector fields and the fermions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The chirally-decomposed fermions @xmath clearly have 16 components,
which coincides the number of the supercharges for the IIB matrix model.
In this sense, this identification augurs very well for the reproduction
of the supersymmetry of the IIB matrix model. On the other hand, the
homogeneous transformation of the fermion is given by ( 3.26 ), and is
devoid of the commutator of the vector fields like the IIB matrix model.
This is a downside in the identification of the supersymmetry
transformation with that of the IIB matrix model.

Nextly, we have a close look at the commutation relation of the
supersymmetry transformation. We wish to find the similar structure of
the commutation relations as that of the IIB matrix model. We consider
the following commutation relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is trivial that the commutator (2) vanishes, because the
inhomogeneous supersymmetry is nothing but a translation of the fermion.
Here, we scrutinize the rest of the commutators one by one.

##### Supersymmetry transformation @xmath

In the IIB matrix model, only the commutator ( 2.33 ) remains
nonvanishing. We attempt to extract the similar structure to the
commutation relation ( 2.33 ). The commutator of the supersymmetry
transformation for each @xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be derived in the same way as ( 2.33 ). Namely, we take the
difference of the following paths:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The commutator of the supersymmetry transformation for each @xmath can
be extracted as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Extracting the specific chirality of the SUSY parameters, we obtain the
nonvanishing commutators as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The commutators with different chirality of the two supersymmetry
parameters clearly vanish:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

These combinations of the supersymmetry transformations clearly resemble
the structure of the IIB matrix model. The correspondence between the
vector fields and the chirality of the fermionic fields matches that
obtained by the correspondence of the homogeneous transformation itself.

##### Supersymmetry transformation @xmath

In the case of the IIB matrix model, this supersymmetry transformation
vanishes on shell up to the gauge transformation, as we have seen in (
2.31 ). We want to find the same vanishing in our cubic model, if we are
to identify the supersymmetry transformation. However, it turns out that
this commutator does not vanish. In investigating this commutation
relation, it is easier to utilize the following identity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This commutator of the SUSY transformation is thus obtained by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.36)
  -- -- -- --------

This relation reveals that the commutators of the two homogeneous
transformation are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have seen in ( 3.33 ) which chiralities of the supersymmetry
parameters correspond to the vector fields @xmath . According to this
correspondence, we examine the commutation relation with respect to the
following cases.

We first investigate the commutation relation @xmath . We examine this
commutation relation of this SUSY transformation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we recall that the commutator @xmath belong to the @xmath Lie
algebra (namely, only the rank-1,2,5 contributions remain).
Unfortunately, this commutation relation does not vanish exactly in the
ten-dimensional reduction. Now, we have a close look at which components
survive or vanish: Since the chirality of the supersymmetry parameter is
identical, the contribution of the odd-rank fields of @xmath (with
respect to the ten-dimensional indices) clearly vanishes. On the other
hand, the contribution of the even-rank fields @xmath survives. For
example, the contribution of the rank-0 field @xmath is obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next investigate the commutation relation of other chirality. @xmath
. The corresponding field is now @xmath , and the commutation relation
is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

by completely computing in the same fashion as in ( 3.39 ), and we note
that the contribution of the even-rank fields @xmath remains
nonvanishing.

Even the worse news comes in the commutator for the different chirality
of the supersymmetry parameter. The commutator for the rank-1 vector
field is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (3.42)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The disastrous fact is that these commutators include the fields @xmath
and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

These commutation relations reveal that the two-fold supersymmetry is
not independent of each other, but are connected by not the impurity
@xmath and @xmath , but the fields @xmath . This is an unfavorable
situation in the analysis of the supersymmetry transformation of this
cubic model.

##### Summary of the supersymmetry structure

We recapitulate what we have obtained from the above argument of the
supersymmetry. Firstly, we have noted that this supermatrix model
incorporates the two-fold structure of the supersymmetry of the IIB
matrix model. This is predictable from the number of the supercharges.
This model has the homogeneous supersymmetry and the inhomogeneous
supersymmetry coming from the @xmath rotation and the translation
symmetry, respectively. Therefore, this model has 64 supercharges, which
is twice as many as the IIB matrix model. The IIB-like structure of the
supersymmetry is extracted by the chiral decomposition of the rank-1
field and the supercharges, and we have seen the correspondence ( 3.28
). While we have reproduced the commutation relation ( 2.31 ) and ( 2.32
) from the commutator @xmath and @xmath , the commutator @xmath does not
trivially vanish, unlike the IIB matrix model. Moreover, the commutation
relation ( 3.44 ) unravels that these two supersymmetries are not
independent of each other. Its physical interpretation will be reported
elsewhere.

#### 3.2.3 Induction of the IIB matrix model

We have seen the correspondence of the supersymmetry with the IIB matrix
model, and we have elucidated the correspondence of the chirality
between the rank-1 vector fields and the supersymmetry parameter as (
3.28 ). This leads us to the idea that we may be able to induce the IIB
matrix model if we integrate out certain fields. To this end, we retain
the field @xmath and @xmath , and integrate out the other fields.
However, the solid discussion for the extraction of the IIB matrix model
is an onerous question, and we contend ourselves with a hand-waving
argument. This supermatrix model possesses no time spacetime derivative
from the outset, as is true of the IIB matrix model. Its classical
equation of motion @xmath clearly incorporates the following
noncommutative background

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath satisfies the canonical commutation relation @xmath . When
we denote the fluctuation as @xmath , the commutator is mapped as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, the bosonic and the fermionic terms of the action are expanded as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The cubic action, per se, does not include a quartic term of vector
fields in the action. However, we can interpret that the bosonic term is
induced by the fermionic term of the the IIB matrix model. The idea that
the theory consisting of fermionic fields and a Dirac operator induces
the Einstein gravity and the Yang-Mills theory has long been suggested.
The proposal of Connes and Chamseddine is one of these suggestions of
the induced gravity [ 3 ] . Based on these suggestions, we find it a
natural idea that the bosonic term of the IIB matrix model is induced
from its fermionic term. And we hypothesize that the whole IIB model
should be induced only by the fermionic field.

Our goal is thus to find the fermionic terms in this cubic matrix model
to be identified with that of the IIB matrix model. We have seen in the
previous section the correspondence between the vector fields and the
fermionic fields according to the identification of @xmath supersymmetry
with that of the IIB matrix model. And the fermionic terms to be
identified with that if the IIB matrix model is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

If either of these terms exists in the action, this can be identified
with the fermionic term of the IIB matrix model. However, the kinetic
term of the fermionic fields ( 3.2.3 ), per se, does not include such
terms as ( 3.50 ), and does not serve to induce the IIB matrix model due
to the discrepancy of the correspondence of the vector fields and the
chirality of the fermions. In order to remedy this situation, we
consider inducing the terms ( 3.50 ) by the multi-loop effect. The
action ( 3.47 ) @xmath ( 3.49 ) just tells us that there is no terms to
be identified with the IIB matrix model at a tree level . Since the idea
of ’inducing the IIB matrix model’ is to construct the bosonic term by
the one-loop effect of the fermionic Lagrangian, the idea of ’induced
theory’ is a notion based on the multi-loop effect of the perturbative
theory. In this sense, there is no problem if the fermionic term is
induced by the multi-loop effect.

We can read off the Feynman rule from the above action. The typical
propagators and the vertices are given below:

Our goal is to build a fermion vertex ( 3.50 ) by means of the
multi-loop effect. In order to build such a term, the above Feynman
diagrams do not suffice. Especially we are lacking the propagators of
the fields. It is thus necessary to build an induced propagators by
means of the multi-loop effect of the existing Feynman rule. These
induced propagators are constructed by the following loop effect.

-   @xmath : It is easy to construct this induced propagator. All we
    have to do is to connect the fermions using the existing fermion
    propagators @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath : The construction of these propagators is a
    difficult problem. Unfortunately, it is impossible to construct
    these propagators perturbatively, and we delegate the disproof of
    their existence in Appendix B.4. of [ 27 ] . However, this is not
    the end of the story. Even if we fail to induce these propagators
    perturbatively, we have a choice to induce these propagators by
    means of the nonperturbative effect. These propagators may be
    induced by the following recursive structure.

    This structure is reminiscent of the self-consistency condition of
    Nambu-Jona-Lasino model. And when we consider the nonperturbative ⁴
    ⁴ 4 Here, we mean the word ’nonperturbative’ by the effect not
    stemming from the multi-loop effect of Feynman diagram. effect,
    there is no particular conservation law which prohibits the
    existence of the propagators @xmath or @xmath . Throughout our
    discussion, we assume the existence of these propagators.

Now we are ready to construct the induced propagators of this cubic
model. In constructing the vertices of the fermionic terms ( 3.50 ). The
answer is now easy, and the IIB-like vertex is constructed by the
following procedure.

-   To construct the induced vertex corresponding to ( 3.50 ), we must
    first construct two objects. One is the propagator @xmath . This is
    easily constructed once we admit the existence of the propagator
    @xmath .

-   Another object is the vertex @xmath . It is also easy to construct
    this vertex utilizing the induced propagator @xmath .

-   These two objects serve to induce our desired term @xmath . Note
    that this induced propagator indicates that the kinetic term @xmath
    . This is diagrammatically regarded as the vertex of @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath , where @xmath , around which we have expanded the
    theory. Therefore, the sum of these two objects is regarded as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

We thus build the vertex for the bosonic field @xmath and the
corresponding fermionic field @xmath . This fermionic operator serves to
derive the bosonic quartic terms of the IIB matrix model. In this way,
we expect that the IIB matrix model is induced from the @xmath
supermatrix model.

### 3.3 @xmath gauged cubic matrix model

We next investigate the gauged version of the supermatrix model.
Originally, L. Smolin [ 19 ] touched on the suggestion to enhance the
symmetry of the matrix model, by regarding the tensor product as not for
the Lie group but for the Lie algebra. This attempt is fascinating, in
that it broadens the symmetry greatly. Smolin’s proposal turns out to be
essential to build a matrix model with local Lorentz invariance. To
elaborate on this point, let us think about the extension of the IIB
matrix model to the local Lorentz invariant model. In the IIB matrix
model, we regard the eigenvalues of the matrices as the spacetime
coordinate. Therefore, in order to render the Lorentz symmetry ”local”,
it is imperative that the parameter of the Lorentz transformation should
be dependent on the @xmath element in a nontrivial way [ 26 , 38 ] .
Then, we introduce the so-called ”gauged matrix model”, in order to
build such a matrix model.

In the IIB matrix model, the @xmath Lorentz symmetry and the @xmath
symmetry are totally decoupled. Now, let @xmath and @xmath be the
generator of the @xmath and the @xmath symmetry, respectively (i.e.
@xmath and @xmath ). The symmetry is a tensor product of the group;
namely they are decoupled in terms of the Lie algebra as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

This holds of the nongauged version of the supermatrix model.

On the other hand, in the gauged model, we enhance the symmetry
drastically by mixing these two symmetry. Namely, the element of the
transformation group is not @xmath but

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, we build a Lorentz symmetry dependent on the @xmath
symmetry. We define a generator with the tensor product of the two Lie
algebra. However, we need a caution in defining a tensor product of the
Lie algebra. Suppose @xmath are two different Lie algebra whose bases
are @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Generally, the space @xmath ,
which is spanned by the basis @xmath , does not close with respect to
the commutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rather, we define the tensor product by @xmath , which is the smallest
Lie algebra that includes @xmath as a subset ⁵ ⁵ 5 To illustrate this
idea, we introduce the following simple case. The Lie algebra @xmath is
known as the tensor product of the Lie algebras @xmath and @xmath :

@xmath

This fact is discerned as follows. Let @xmath and @xmath be the basis of
the Lie algebra @xmath and @xmath , respectively. @xmath and @xmath are
8 and 3 dimensional Lie algebras respectively, and the indices run
@xmath and @xmath . The tensor product @xmath consists of the following
elements. @xmath : These are the elements of the tensor product as a set
of matrices: @xmath . This set, per se, does not constitute a closed Lie
algebra. @xmath and @xmath : These are the generators of the group
@xmath . These elements are known to constitute the algebra of @xmath .
This example shows in a pedagogical way how the notion of ’gauged
theory’ enhances the gauge symmetry. While the Lie algebra of the gauge
group @xmath is a @xmath dimensional algebra, the tensor product @xmath
is a @xmath dimensional Lie algebra. This is the structure of the
enhancement of the gauge symmetry. Note that the similar enhancement of
the gauge symmetry is seen in Smolin’s proposal [ 19 , 23 ] . .

In the large- @xmath reduced models, there are several ways to interpret
the spacetime coordinate. In the twisted reduced models [ 65 , 66 ] ,
the matrices @xmath represent the covariant derivative in the spacetime.
On the other hand, in the IIB matrix model, the eigenvalues of the
matrices @xmath are regarded as the spacetime coordinate. Both relations
are linked by the expansion around the flat noncommutative background

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The IIB matrix model reduces to the non-commutative Yang-Mills theory
after this reduction. The fermionic term of the IIB matrix model @xmath
reduced to the action of the fermion in the flat space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

This reminds us of the correspondence between the differential operators
and the matrices.

With this idea in mind, we attempt to formulate a matrix model with the
local Lorentz invariance, in which the matrices @xmath look like
differential operators. The action should reduce in the classical
low-energy limit to the fermionic action on the curved spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the indices @xmath and @xmath both run over @xmath . The former
and the latter denote the indices of the Minkowskian and the curved
spacetime, respectively. In considering the correspondence with the
matrix model, we need to absorb @xmath into the definition of the
fermionic field, since it is not @xmath but @xmath that corresponds to
the trace of the large @xmath matrices. And we regard the ”spinor root
density”

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the fundamental quantity. Then, the action is rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have utilized in the last equality the fact that the fermionic
field @xmath is Majorana, which leads to the cancellation @xmath . The
corresponding matrix model is formulated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

In promoting the action ( LABEL:AZ1bonafidefermion ) to the matrix
model, we have identified the covariant derivative with the commutator
with the rank-1 matrix @xmath . The rank-3 term is a naive product of
the spin connection and the fermion, and it is natural to promote the
product to the anticommutator of the large @xmath hermitian matrices ⁶ ⁶
6 For the readers’ convenience, we summarize the commutation relations
of the hermitian and anti-hermitian operators. Let @xmath and @xmath be
the set of the hermitian and anti-hermitian operators, respectively.
When @xmath and @xmath , their commutation relations are as follows:

We prove only the first relation, because the others are easily derived
in the same way:

@xmath

. In the rank-3 term, the pure imaginary number @xmath is necessary so
that the action should be hermitian. The action ( 3.60 ) is an addition
of the rank-3 term to the fermionic term of the action of IIB matrix
model. Especially when @xmath is a Majorana fermion, ( 3.60 ) is
equivalent to the following action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equivalence between ( 3.60 ) and ( 3.61 ) is verified as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let us next consider the local Lorentz transformation of this matrix
model. Originally the local Lorentz transformation of the fermionic
field @xmath should be promoted to the anticommutator of the hermitian
matrices as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to retain the hermiticity. However, it is a very onerous
problem to find an action invariant under this transformation. The
conundrum stems from the noncommutativity of the matrices . The local
Lorentz transformation of the fermion ( 3.62 ) with respect to the
action ( 3.61 ) entails the terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is extremely difficult to absorb this transformation via the local
Lorentz transformation of the bosonic fields @xmath .

This obstacle forces us to abstain the hermiticity of the matrices. We
instead promote this transformation to the matrix version as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we take the action ( 3.61 ). Since the fermion is no longer
hermitian, the actions ( 3.60 ) and ( 3.61 ) are no longer equivalent.
There are two prices we must pay for this alteration. One is that the
product @xmath does not directly correspond to the covariant derivative.
The other is that the matrix model ( 3.61 ) is no longer invariant under
the translation @xmath , which is a spacetime translation in the
original interpretation of the IIB matrix model.

The local Lorentz transformation of the action ( 3.61 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are now considering the local Lorentz transformation and their
space-time dependent parameters are promoted to @xmath matrices, the
infinitesimal parameters @xmath are @xmath matrices. Then, the
commutator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must include the rank-5 gamma matrices, and the action ( 3.61 ) is not
invariant under the local Lorentz transformation.

The similar thing holds true of the generator of the local Lorentz
transformation ( 3.64 ). In order for the algebra to close, only the
rank-2 terms are not sufficient, because the commutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

includes the rank-4 gamma matrices.

Let us recapitulate what we have obtained through this observation.

-   Since the information of the spacetime is encoded in the bosonic
    matrices @xmath , the parameter of the local Lorentz transformation
    must depend on the @xmath element in a nontrivial manner. This leads
    us to consider the ”gauged” action.

-   The correspondence of the matrices @xmath and the covariant
    derivative motivates us to construct a matrix model in which the
    matrices @xmath looks like a differential operators.

-   It is difficult to retain the hermiticity of the fermionic field,
    when we build a local Lorentz invariant action. This forces us to
    abstain the hermiticity of the fields, despite the following
    drawbacks.

    -   The term @xmath no longer corresponds to the covariant
        derivative @xmath .

    -   The matrix model ( 3.61 ) is no longer invariant under the
        translation @xmath , which is a spacetime translation in the
        original interpretation of the IIB matrix model

-   The ”gauged” symmetry necessitates the higher-rank fields and the
    local Lorentz transformation parameters.

This observation leads us to regard the ”gauged” version of the
supermatrix model as a mesmerizing candidate for the local Lorentz
invariant extension of the IIB matrix model. To this end, we consider
the @xmath super Lie algebra, which is the analytic continuation of the
@xmath , the complexification of the @xmath . In addition, we mix the
@xmath symmetry and the @xmath gauge symmetry.

This observation is also elaborated in another angle without the
supermatrix models in Section 4 .

#### 3.3.1 Definition of the @xmath and @xmath super Lie algebra

The @xmath super Lie algebra is a cousin of the @xmath super Lie
algebra. More accurately, @xmath is obtained by the analytic
continuation of the imaginary part of the @xmath . Therefore, we start
with introducing the @xmath super Lie algebra.

The very definition of this super Lie algebra is that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

That this is a complexification of @xmath can be seen from the following
aspect. Unlike the @xmath super Lie algebra, we do not restrict @xmath
to be a real supermatrix, where the reality of the supermatrix is
defined as @xmath . Therefore, we must replace the transpose by the
hermitian conjugate . Note that in the real version the complex
conjugate is equivalent to the transpose according to the property in
Appendix. A.2 .

We can confirm that the super Lie algebra @xmath actually closes in
totally the same fashion as in @xmath . The legitimacy of the metric
@xmath also stems from the same logic as in @xmath . We specify the
element of @xmath group according to the above definition. The result is
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath is restricted to be a pure imaginary number.

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real numbers, while @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath are pure imaginary numbers.

This result is derived from the very definition of the super Lie algebra
@xmath . The complex conjugate of supermatrices is defined in Appendix.
A.2 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

-   Since @xmath , ( LABEL:AZ51su116162 ) immediately constrains @xmath
    to be a pure imaginary number.

-   We first investigate the constraint of the bosonic matrix @xmath .
    These are decomposed as ( 3.12 ), like the @xmath super Lie algebra.
    We use the relationship of the gamma matrices @xmath . Therefore,
    @xmath . This is real for @xmath and pure imaginary for @xmath .

-   We investigate the relationship between two fermions @xmath and
    @xmath utilizing the result @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.71)
      -- -------- -- --------

    We can verify that this is consistent with the condition @xmath .

We are thus finished with the determination of the elements of @xmath
super Lie algebra.

The important property of @xmath super Lie algebra is that these can be
uniquely decomposed into the direct sum of two different representations
of @xmath . We introduce two different representations of @xmath super
Lie algebra

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (3.73)
                          @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

And let @xmath and @xmath be the element of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Because these are real (pure imaginary), these elements
respectively satisfy @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, these elements
satisfy the following property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The set @xmath is, by definition, the @xmath super Lie algebra itself.
We investigate an important property of the subset of these two
subalgebras. The commutation and anti-commutation relations are
properties of grave importance in getting acquainted with their
algebras.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .
Here, we only give the proof of the first property, because the others
can be easily verified likewise.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Utilizing these relations, we can discern that @xmath , as well as
@xmath is the representations of @xmath and also that the algebra @xmath
is a representation of @xmath super Lie algebra by the commutation
relation @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . This commutation relation states
that @xmath remain in the super Lie algebra @xmath after the
infinitesimal translation by the elements @xmath . In this sense, we can
understand that @xmath is another representation of @xmath .

The introduction of these two representations of @xmath teaches us the
relationship of @xmath and @xmath super Lie algebras. @xmath is a real
part of @xmath Lie algebra, while @xmath is its imaginary part. It is
clear that the elements of @xmath can be uniquely decomposed into the
direct sum of @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the direct sum of two sets.

Nextly, we introduce the @xmath super Lie algebra, especially paying
attention to the relation with the @xmath . The definition of @xmath
super Lie algebra is, per se, simple:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath is an element of the Lie algebra @xmath , id est, @xmath is
    allowed to be an arbitrary @xmath bosonic matrix . Decomposing this
    by the gamma matrices, this can be expressed by @xmath , where the
    coefficients @xmath are all real.

-   @xmath and @xmath are independent fermionic vectors. Each of them
    possesses 32 components, and the components are fermionic real
    number.

-   @xmath is also a real number.

The definition of @xmath states nothing. This definition just states
that an arbitrary real @xmath supermatrix is an eligible member of the
super Lie algebra @xmath . Although this definition does not give any
restriction to the elements, the correspondence with the complex group
@xmath is an interesting aspect of @xmath super Lie algebra. Since
@xmath and @xmath are independent fermionic vectors, these can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

And the bosonic @xmath matrices are separated by @xmath , where @xmath
is rank-1,2,5 and @xmath is rank-0,3,4. Then, we define the sets @xmath
as follows.

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The super Lie algebra @xmath is clearly the direct sum of these two
super Lie algebras

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

These two subalgebras are also the two different representations of
@xmath super Lie algebra. @xmath is @xmath itself, and the same super
Lie algebra as in introduced in @xmath . On the other hand, the
subalgebra @xmath is @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 This means that, if @xmath , then
@xmath . And the elements of these subalgebras readily satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

And it is clear that these two subalgebras obey totally the same
commutation relations as those of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The proof is completely the same as that of (
3.75 ), and we do not repeat it. The commutation relation @xmath
indicates that @xmath is a representation of @xmath super Lie algebra.

Now, the relationship of the three super Lie algebras @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath is clear. We have seen that both @xmath and @xmath are
represented by the direct sum of two different representations of @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relationship between @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this sense, we can regard @xmath super Lie algebra as the analytic
continuation of @xmath . Although we adopt a matrix theory with the
gauge symmetry @xmath unlike Smolin’s original proposal [ 23 ] , we note
that @xmath is a cousin of the original @xmath .

Nextly, we explain why we have to introduce the complexification of the
@xmath from the outset. It turns out that the simple tensor product
@xmath does not close with respect to the commutator in mixing these two
symmetries. Using the relation ( 3.75 ), we obtain the following
commutation relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the tensor product @xmath is not a closed Lie algebra. In
order to build a closed Lie algebra, we are urged to include @xmath .
This satisfies the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we establish the smallest closed Lie algebra that include
@xmath as a subset as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is analogous to the situation in which we had to introduce the
higher-odd-rank fields in the action and the higher-even-rank fields as
a parameter of the local Lorentz transformation once we mix the
symmetries, as we have seen in ( LABEL:higheroddgauged ) and ( 3.67 ).

Here, instead of promoting each element to a hermitian matrix, we can
make a closed Lie algebra by restricting them to real matrices. It is
clear that @xmath forms another closed algebra. In this case, we embed
the spacetime into real matrices, instead of hermitian matrices.

#### 3.3.2 Action of @xmath supermatrix model

The next job is to investigate the action of this theory. The basic idea
is similar to @xmath non-gauged cubic matrix model, and we proceed
rather quickly. The action is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.88)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is now a multiplet of @xmath super Lie algebra, with each
component promoted to the element of @xmath Lie algebra. The indices
@xmath runs @xmath , while @xmath .

We have promoted the @xmath matrix @xmath to a large @xmath matrices.
However, the structure of the promotion is completely different from
@xmath model. The gauge transformation is with respect to not the
separate @xmath and @xmath , but the tensor product of the Lie algebra
@xmath . This drastically enhances the gauge symmetry of the theory. The
gauge transformation is thus @xmath for an arbitrary element of @xmath .

We can express this supermatrix model in terms of the basis of the
@xmath . Here, @xmath is expanded as @xmath . Then, the trace is written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the structure constant @xmath and @xmath are real. Using this
decomposition, we can rewrite the action ( 3.88 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

This supermatrix model can be expressed using its explicit expression (
3.78 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.3 Wigner-Inönü contraction and supersymmetry

In considering the relation to the IIB matrix model, we need to reduce
the model to the ten dimensions. However, this matrix model has a grave
difference from the @xmath nongauged supermatrix. Since the action (
3.88 ) is no longer based on the commutator for the @xmath matrices, it
is not invariant under the inhomogeneous supersymmetry, namely the
translation of the fermion. Nevertheless, the matrix model ( 3.88 )
accommodates @xmath supercharges. This leads us to speculate that this
model may also have the two-fold supersymmetry structure of the IIB-like
supersymmetry.

Here, we reduce the model to the ten dimensions by the Wigner-Inönü
contraction, in order to extract the translation symmetry. Just as we
perceive the earth as a flat two-dimensional space because the earth is
much bigger than we are, we consider the physics in apparently
’ten-dimensional’ space because of the large radius of the hyperboloid.
To this end, we add the linear term of @xmath to the action ( 3.88 ) and
start from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

By adding the linear term, the matrix model ( 3.92 ) incorporates the
classical solution ⁸ ⁸ 8 This classical solution is impossible in the
original @xmath gauged theory, because the (33,33) component @xmath is
restricted to be an anti-hermitian matrix. If we are to consider the
Wigner-Inönü contraction, one way is to consider the quintic action
@xmath . Then, the classical solution @xmath is possible because @xmath
is now an anti-hermitian matrix. Another caution is that the gauge group
must be not @xmath but @xmath . If the gauge group is @xmath , the
linear term in ( 3.92 ) vanishes because the generators are @xmath , and
the Wigner Inönü contraction is impossible from the beginning. .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expansion around this classical solution amounts to the Wigner-Inönü
contraction. We separate the original matrix between the classical
solution and the fluctuation and the classical solution as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

We ignore the terms of @xmath , because this is just a constant. The
terms of @xmath vanish, because this is a linear term with respect to
the fluctuation. Then, the action is expressed as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

We divide the bosonic fluctuation @xmath into @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath consist of the even-rank and the odd-rank components in terms of
the ten dimensions. Namely, they should be explicitly expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.97)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.98)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Later, we further decompose @xmath as @xmath according to the @xmath ,
namely the plus or minus chirality, in the above decomposition. The
fermions are divided according to its chirality. The action is then
written as follows.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.99)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We integrate out the fields of order @xmath and consider the effective
theory. In order to cope with the cubic term @xmath , we consider the
following rescaling:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Following this rescaling, @xmath and @xmath are excluded, because this
is rescaled as @xmath . This theory is thus rescaled to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We integrate out the fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by Gaussian
integration. Completing this action square, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we have utilized the fact that @xmath , and thus @xmath possesses
an inverse matrix. The effective action is given by the following path
integral ⁹ ⁹ 9 The analogy of this path integral is a following toy
model. (i)For the action @xmath , the path integral is @xmath . And thus
the effective action is @xmath . (ii)The second example is the following
action, @xmath , with @xmath being auxiliary fields. This integration is
performed by @xmath , and thus the effective action is @xmath . This
holds even if @xmath are Grassmann odd quantities. . However, this
effective action turns out to vanish:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

That the first term vanishes is discerned from the anti-commutativity of
the matrices @xmath and @xmath ; namely @xmath . Noting this fact, we
rewrite this term as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

While the effective action in the ten dimensions turns out to vanish, we
investigate its symmetry. This model is invariant under the @xmath
rotation @xmath where @xmath . Like the @xmath nongauged model, the
fermionic part of this rotation serves as the supercharge. In this
sense, the @xmath supermatrix model also has @xmath supercharges. We
consider the following rescaling of this parameter:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the @xmath rotation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

each component is transformed as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.107)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.108)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.109)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.110)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.111)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.112)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These results possess two major significances. First is that this
reconfirms that the effective action ( 3.3.3 ) vanish. The effective
action is invariant under the transformation of the fields @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the effective action makes no difference
if we translate these fermions arbitrarily. Taking the fields @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath to be all zero, we find that the effective action is
@xmath . Therefore, the effective action remains @xmath even if we
translate these fields into non-zero values.

The second significance is that this clarifies the structure of the
supersymmetry of the effective theory. This gauged theory originally
possesses no trivial translation like the @xmath non-gauged model,
because this theory is deprived of the symmetry of the commutator.
However, the Wigner-Inönü contraction serves to retrieve the translation
in the ten dimensions. Actually, the underlined transformation of (
3.108 ), ( 3.110 ) and ( 3.111 ) represents a translation independent of
the matter field @xmath . We thus find it natural to extract the
structure of the IIB matrix model from the fields @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Their supersymmetry transformation is read off from ( 3.108 ),
( 3.110 ) and ( 3.111 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This immediately gives the correspondence of the chirality among the
bosonic fields and the fermionic fields: @xmath and @xmath . This
pairing also resembles the case of the @xmath nongauged model.

We first scrutinize the former correspondence. In this case, the
homogeneous and the inhomogeneous supersymmetry is identified as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.115)
  -- -- -- ---------

Then, the rank-1 fields are transformed by this homogeneous
transformation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The inhomogeneous translation of course do not affect the transformation
of the vector fields.

We next explore the commutation relations. Firstly, we discern that the
commutator @xmath , as well as @xmath , manifestly vanish.

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.117)
           (3.118)
  -- -- -- ---------

This is a great advantage compared with the @xmath case, in which we are
beset by the nonvanishing commutator of the homogeneous supersymmetry.
The commutation relation @xmath is obtained by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The correspondence of the latter case goes in totally the same way. The
supercharges are defined by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.120)
  -- -- -- ---------

Then, the supersymmetry transformation of the rank-1 fields is obtained
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The commutators @xmath and @xmath vanish likewise, and the commutation
relation @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see a better correspondence of the supersymmetry with the IIB matrix
model than the @xmath model. However, the supersymmetry transformation
of the fermion is not balanced by the commutator @xmath . This obstacles
are shared with the @xmath case. The decisive drawback of this argument
is that the ten-dimensional effective action totally vanishes. This
comes from too large a symmetry of the model. However, it may be related
to the notion of the topological matrix model [ 8 ] , in which the IIB
matrix model is induced ex nihilo. The exploration of such a gauged
matrix model are interesting from various points of view, especially the
existence of the local Lorentz invariance, and it is worth further
investigations.

### 3.4 Curved-space classical solutions of the massive @xmath nongauged
supermatrix model

In this section, we review the work [ 46 ] , in which we elaborated on
the relation between the supermatrix model and the curved-space
background. In Section 2.4 , we have introduced several generalizations
of the IIB matrix model to accommodate the curved-space background. The
work [ 46 ] focuses on the similarity between the massive IIB matrix
model ( 2.140 ) and the @xmath supermatrix model with the quadratic
term. This has led us to expect that the @xmath supermatrix model could
also have interesting noncommutative static solutions. We delegate the
detailed properties of the higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere, which plays
a main role in this analysis, to Section 2.4.2 .

#### 3.4.1 Action

Here, we go back to the @xmath nongauged supermatrix model instead of
the gauged matrix model, since our aim is to unravel the similarity with
the alteration of the IIB matrix model described in ( 2.140 ). We start
with the following massive model with the cubic interaction ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We
warn the readers that the notation of this section is different from
that of [ 46 ] . In this paper, we define the path integral of the
action @xmath as

@xmath

where @xmath is defined in the ten-dimensional Euclidean space by the
Wick rotation of the components @xmath and the gamma matrices @xmath ,
Therefore, the action is different from that of [ 46 ] by the overall
sign. :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.123)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here, @xmath and @xmath likewise run over @xmath and @xmath . Here, we
focus on the nongauged action, and this action has the separated @xmath
rotational symmetry and the @xmath gauge symmetry. We reduce the above
matrix model to ten dimensions, by specializing the tenth space
direction @xmath . In Section 3.2 , we focused on the identification of
the supersymmetry with that of the IIB matrix model, and we resorted to
the chiral decomposition. However, we now focus on the nontrivial
curved-space background, which leads us to reduce the bosonic @xmath
matrix @xmath to the ten dimensions without the chiral decomposition.
Namely, @xmath is reduced as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the relevant action ( 3.123 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In the purely cubic supermatrix model (without mass term, which has been
studied in [ 19 , 23 , 26 , 27 ] ), the rank-2 field @xmath possesses a
cubic interaction term but has no quadratic term. This has been a severe
obstacle to the appearance of a Yang-Mills-like structure in the
supermatrix model, because it has been impossible to identify @xmath
with the commutators of the rank-1 fields @xmath (or @xmath ). In the
eleven-dimensional case, this difficulty has been overcome in [ 37 ]
through the addition of a mass term, and we thus expect this model to
contain the massive IIB matrix model, the bosonic part of which has been
studied in [ 29 ] to investigate perturbation theory around
noncommutative curved-space backgrounds.

#### 3.4.2 Resolution of the equations of motion

We proceed to search for possible curved-space classical configurations
solving the equations of motion that follow from the action ( 3.123 ).
To get a clearer picture of the problem, we now set the fermions and the
positive mass-squared bosonic fields to zero:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since their masses are positive (at least in the spatial directions,
while the time-like direction of quantum fields is generally
unphysical), ( 3.126 ) is a stable classical solution. Furthermore, we
choose to identify the tachyonic ten-dimensional vector field @xmath ,
rather than the well-defined @xmath with the bosonic fields of the
massive IIB matrix model, in order to obtain a possibly stable
curved-space classical solution. The classical equations of motion for
the remaining tachyonic fields @xmath and @xmath following from ( 3.123
) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.127)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Although it is difficult to solve these equations in full generality,
the equation of motion for @xmath suggests to take @xmath for @xmath ’s
satisfying a fairly simple commutator algebra. If we look for objects
having a clear geometrical interpretation, it is tempting to look for
solutions building fuzzy spheres.

##### @xmath classical solution

The simplest tentative solution is the product of three fuzzy 2-spheres
with the symmetry @xmath . Such a system is described by @xmath
hermitian matrices building a representation of the @xmath Lie algebra
in the following way:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with similar relations for @xmath and @xmath , trivial commutators for
indices that do not belong to the same group of 3, and @xmath ( @xmath
is defined as usually).

This set of fields ( 3.129 ) describes a space formed by the Cartesian
product of three fuzzy spheres located in the directions @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , whose radii are all @xmath . @xmath is the quadratic
Casimir operator of the @xmath Lie algebra. Note that any
positive-integer value of @xmath is possible here, since @xmath indexes
the dimensions of irreducible representations. For @xmath , the irreps
have dimensions @xmath , for all integer values of the spin @xmath .
However, we can also use spinorial representations with half-integer
spins in this case. We have to consider this classical solution instead
of the single @xmath fuzzy sphere

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because the solution @xmath is unstable in the directions 4 to 9 due to
the negative mass-squared ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The classical solution with @xmath
has no problem, because it has a positive mass unlike the other
directions of the field @xmath . of the rank-1 fields @xmath . Without
restricting the generality, we can focus on the first sphere located in
the direction @xmath , since the three fuzzy spheres all share the same
equations of motion.

In the framework of fuzzy 2-spheres, we can solve the equations of
motion ( 3.127 ) and ( 3.128 ) with the following ansatz for the rank-2
field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a function depending on the radius parameter @xmath .
Indeed, the equation of motion ( 3.128 ) reduces then to:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

( 3.132 ) has two solutions: @xmath . When we plug this result in the
equation of motion for @xmath ( 3.127 ), this leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gives the same condition on the radius parameter @xmath for both
@xmath and @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, when we assume the ansatz ( 3.131 ), we obtain the classical
solution ( 3.129 ) with the radius parameter set to @xmath , which is
fortunately real. Indeed, @xmath would indicate that the fuzzy sphere
solution is unstable. For example, in the IIB massive matrix model
described by ( 2.140 ), the sign of the squared radius of the fuzzy
2-sphere is linked to the sign of the mass term in the action and it
would become negative for a correct-sign mass term, which is to be
expected, since in that case, the trivial commutative solution becomes
the stable vacuum of the theory.

We next want to discuss the stability of the @xmath classical solution
in more qualitative terms [ 25 ] . To this end, we compare the energy of
the trivial commutative solution @xmath with that of the fuzzy-sphere
solution. The classical energy for @xmath is obviously @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12
Since we now consider a classical solution with @xmath (thus no need of
Wick rotation), the energy is simply equal to the classical action in
which we substitute the solution.

In the @xmath fuzzy-sphere background, the 2-form field @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the total energy is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.136)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This result shows that the @xmath fuzzy-sphere classical solution has a
lower energy compared to the trivial commutative solution and hence a
higher probability.

##### Other curved-space solutions and the fuzzy 8-sphere

So far, we have considered the simplest curved-space solution @xmath .
Here, we consider the other curved-space solutions. We focus on the
fuzzy 8-sphere solution, which has the @xmath rotational symmetry and is
spanned by the nine-dimensional space. We assume the following fuzzy
sphere solution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath runs over the space component @xmath , and @xmath is
already defined by ( LABEL:fspsolution ). We likewise assume the ansatz
for the rank-2 field @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the equation of motion ( 3.128 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We again have two choices for the function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equation of motion ( 3.127 ) for the rank-1 field @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, unlike the case of the @xmath fuzzy sphere, @xmath does not have
any real positive solution for @xmath . However, there is exactly one
such solution for @xmath , which is @xmath .

More generally, for an @xmath fuzzy sphere @xmath , the same ansatz
would give

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We discuss the stability of the @xmath fuzzy-sphere classical solution
by computing its classical energy. At the classical level, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is given by ( 2.121 ), and we recall that this is given by @xmath
. In contrast with the @xmath case, @xmath can take here only certain
precise values. For example, the smallest non-trivial representation (
@xmath ) has dimension 16, the following one ( @xmath ) 126, then 672,
etc… The classical energy for the @xmath fuzzy-sphere solution is of the
order @xmath while that of the fuzzy 8-sphere solution is of the order
@xmath . Therefore, at large @xmath , the @xmath triple fuzzy-sphere
solution is energetically favored compared to the @xmath solution at the
equal size @xmath of the matrices. The presence of a spherical solution
for all @xmath in the @xmath case may indeed be a stabilizing factor. On
the other hand, at equal value of @xmath , whose physical meaning is
less clear, the fuzzy 8-sphere solution has lower energy.

We have seen that the fuzzy 8-sphere is energetically favored. This is
in contrast to the matrix model with the Chern-Simons term ( 2.111 ), in
which the classical energy is given by ( 2.139 ) and thus the fuzzy
8-sphere is positive. In this case, the fuzzy 8-sphere is less
energetically favored than the trivial commutative background. In this
sense, this situation has more similarity to the IIB matrix model with
the tachyonic mass term ( 2.140 ), in which the higher-dimensional fuzzy
sphere, as well as the @xmath fuzzy sphere, is more energetically
favored, as we have seen in ( 2.144 ).

The single fuzzy @xmath -spheres for @xmath do not constitute a stable
classical solution of our model. When the @xmath sphere occupies the
direction @xmath , the solution @xmath is trivially unstable because of
the negative mass-squared. Whereas, the Cartesian product of several
fuzzy spheres, such as @xmath , is a possible candidate for a stable
classical solution.

#### 3.4.3 Nucleation process of spherical branes

Starting from a vacuous spacetime, it is interesting to try to guess how
spherical brane configurations could be successively produced through a
sequence of decays into energetically more favorable meta-stable brane
systems. The reader may have noticed that we have so far limited
ourselves to the study of curved branes building irreducible
representations of their symmetry groups. This could seem at first to be
an unjustified prejudice, but it turns out that such configurations are
energetically favored at equal values of @xmath . For example, for
@xmath , an irreducible representation @xmath of dimension @xmath
contributes as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

per fuzzy 2-sphere, while a reducible representation @xmath of equal
dimension @xmath would contribute as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is obviously a less negative number, especially for big values of
@xmath . A similar conclusion was reached in [ 25 ] for the case of a
Euclidean three-dimensional IIB matrix model with a Chern-Simons term
and it seems to be a fairly general feature of matrix models admitting
non-trivial classical solutions. This property is particularly clear for
low-dimensional branes, since the classical energy is of order @xmath
for the @xmath fuzzy sphere, but it remains true for any fuzzy @xmath
-sphere solution, whose energy is of order @xmath , which also shows
that low-dimensional configurations are favored. As hinted for in the
preceding subsection, this latter fact can be physically understood by
remarking that there are more irreps available for low-dimensional fuzzy
spheres, which makes it easier for them to grow in radius through
energetically favorable configurations. A third obvious fact is that
configurations described by representations of high dimensionality are
preferred.

Put together, these comparisons give us a possible picture for the brane
nucleation process in this and similar matrix models. As they appear,
configurations of all spacetime dimensions described by small
representations will be progressively absorbed by bigger representations
to form irreducible ones, that will slowly grow in this way to bigger
values of @xmath . Parallel to that, branes of higher dimensionalities
will tend to decay into a bunch of branes of smaller dimensionalities,
finally leaving only 2-spheres and noncommutative tori of growing radii.
If the size of the hermitian matrices is left open, as is usually the
case in completely reduced models, where the path integration contains a
sum on that size, no configuration will be truly stable, since the size
of the irreps will grow continuously.

Of course, this is a relatively qualitative study, which could only be
proven correct by a full quantum statistical study of the model.
However, it seems to be an interesting proposal for the possible physics
of such theories.

#### 3.4.4 Supersymmetry

We next comment on the structure of the supersymmetry. The biggest
difference with the purely cubic supermatrix model, due to the addition
of the mass term, is that this model is not invariant under the
inhomogeneous supersymmetry

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is a translation of the fermionic field. However, this model has 2
homogeneous supersymmetries in ten dimensions, which are part of the
@xmath symmetry:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which transforms the bosonic and fermionic fields as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the IIB matrix model, the supersymmetry has to balance between a
quartic term @xmath and a trilinear contribution @xmath in the action (
2.1 ), which implies that the supersymmetry transformation of the
fermionic field has to be bilinear in the bosonic field. On the other
hand, the homogeneous supersymmetries are all linear in the fields in
the purely cubic supermatrix model [ 26 , 27 ] . By incorporating the
mass term, we are allowed to integrate out the rank-2 field @xmath by
solving the classical equation of motion iteratively as in [ 37 ] ¹³ ¹³
13 The Yang-Mills-like structure of the homogeneous supersymmetry
transformation on the fermion comes from @xmath , which is a part of
@xmath . The explicit form of the iterative solution of the equations of
motion ( 3.127 ) and ( 3.128 ) is

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

.

Thanks to this procedure, the homogeneous SUSY transformation for the
fermionic field becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the transformation of the field @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In that sense, the mass term is essential to realize the Yang-Mills-like
structure for the homogeneous supersymmetries. On the other hand, if we
want to preserve the homogeneous supersymmetries, we cannot just put a
mass term for @xmath by hand. The @xmath symmetry forces all fields to
share the same mass, since they all lie in the same multiplet. In
particular, we are forced to introduce a mass term for the fermions as
well, which breaks the inhomogeneous supersymmetries. In other words, it
seems difficult to have super-Yang-Mills-type structure for both
homogeneous and inhomogeneous supersymmetries in the context of
supermatrix models.

Indeed, in contrast with the purely cubic supermatrix model [ 26 , 27 ]
, which has twice as many supersymmetry parameters, the massive
supermatrix model has only @xmath supersymmetries in ten dimensions,
because it lacks the inhomogeneous supersymmetries. In consequence, we
cannot realize the translation of the vector field @xmath as a
commutator of two linear combinations of the homogeneous and
inhomogeneous supersymmetries ( 3.145 ) as in the IIB matrix model,
where it leads to the interpretation of the eigenvalues of @xmath as
spacetime coordinates. On the contrary,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

vanishes up to an @xmath rotation. This problem is a serious obstacle
for the identification of the supersymmetry of this model with that of
the IIB matrix model. More analysis will be reported elsewhere.

### 3.5 Other related studies

We have so far gone over the author’s works [ 26 , 46 ] concerning the
supermatrix models. We conclude this section by touching on other
related studies. In [ 37 ] , Bagnoud, Carlevaro and Bilal discussed the
@xmath supermatrix model in the twelve-dimensional and the
eleven-dimensional contexts. Especially, they indicated how to perform
the infinite momentum frame limit and used the matrix version of the
T-duality to obtain a supersymmetric matrix quantum mechanics. They
introduced the quadratic terms as in Sec. 3.4 , and resorted to the
perturbative technique that led to an infinite tower of the higher-order
interaction among the physical fields. On the other hand, the
lower-order term reproduced the BFSS model with an additional mass term
together with interaction terms involving the five-brane degrees of
freedom.

Other attempts for a background-independent matrix models have been
achieved by the cubic action of the exceptional Jordan algebra. Firstly,
L. Smolin proposed a matrix model based on the exceptional Jordan
algebra whose automorphism group is @xmath (in this sense, we refer to
this model as ”the @xmath model” here). The exceptional Jordan algebra
is related to the octonion, and gives a theory that has a
compactification which reduces to the matrix string theory [ 6 ] . Its
complex extension has been proposed in [ 35 ] . The @xmath exceptional
Lie algebra is known to be the automorphism of the complexification.
Therefore, the @xmath matrix model has twice as many degrees of freedom
as the @xmath model, and derived the effective action of the matrix
string type.

## 4 Matrix model with manifest general coordinate invariance

In the pervious section, we have investigated various aspects of the
supermatrix models based on the @xmath super Lie algebra. This extension
of the IIB matrix model poses a lot of interesting questions.
Especially, in Sec. 3.3 , we have investigated the gauged @xmath model
as a candidate for the extension of the IIB matrix model equipped with
the local Lorentz invariance. The key idea is to render the parameter of
the @xmath Lorentz transformation dependent on the @xmath matrices in a
nontrivial manner. This is an essential alteration from the IIB matrix
model, since the spacetime is interpreted as being immersed in the
eigenvalues of the bosonic matrices @xmath . In addition, the @xmath
(and its analytic connection @xmath ) supermatrix model incorporates the
higher-rank tensor field. Especially, the rank-3 field has a possibility
to be identified with the spin connection in the quantum field theory on
the curved spacetime.

In this section, we review the author’s work [ 38 ] that inherits the
above idea. The most serious obstacle of the @xmath supermatrix model is
that the effective action reduced to the ten dimensions by the
Wigner-Inönü contraction finally vanishes. This is ascribed to the fact
that the element of @xmath of all ranks are allocated for both the
matter fields and the parameter of the local Lorentz transformation.
These two elements had to be mixed in the eleven-dimensional theory, due
to the self-duality condition of the gamma matrices ( A.11 ). Namely,
even when the rank-6 fields come in the local Lorentz parameter due to
the rule ( 3.67 ), this is identified with the rank-5 fields due to the
self-duality rule ( A.11 ). By the same token, the rank-7 matter fields
coming from ( LABEL:higheroddgauged ) are tantamount to the rank-4
fields.

In [ 38 ] , we address the above approach in a different angle without
the supermatrix model. We start from the ten-dimensional action from the
outset, without the reduction from the eleven-dimensional model. Since
we start from the ten-dimensional field theory, we can separate the
matter fields and the local Lorentz parameter. We allocate the odd-rank
fields for the matter fields, and the even-rank fields go for the local
Lorentz parameter. In addition, we explicitly give an expansion of the
matrices with the differential operators, to embody the idea of the
identification of the matrices and the differential operators. In these
senses, the work [ 38 ] gives a clearly different angle from our
previous work in Sec. 3.3 .

### 4.1 Bosonic part of the matrix model

This time, we start from the following action, defined in the
ten-dimensional spacetime from the outset:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The uppercase @xmath and the lowercase @xmath denote the trace for the
@xmath and @xmath matrices, respectively. The indices @xmath and @xmath
both run over @xmath .The former is allocated for the flat Minkowskian
spacetime, and the latter is for the curved spacetime. @xmath is some
function determined later, and @xmath consists of the odd-rank fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath ( @xmath ) are all hermitian matrices, and this satisfies
@xmath . In this sense, our action is shown to be hermitian as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, we exclude the odd-power of @xmath in the action, because @xmath
all consists of the odd-rank gamma matrices and thus couple the fermions
of the different chirality.

#### 4.1.1 Identification of large @xmath matrices with differential
operators

We identify the space of the large- @xmath matrices with that of the
differential operators. By this identification, we can describe the
differential operators on an arbitrary spin bundle over an arbitrary
manifold in the continuum limit simultaneously, because they are
embedded in the space of large @xmath matrices, as is depicted in Fig. 8
.

To illustrate this idea, we visit several simple examples on the
differential operators of the scalar fields on two different bundle over
the @xmath circle (see Fig. 9 ).

We first consider the trivial bundle with the periodic condition @xmath
. We discritize the region @xmath into small slices of spacing @xmath .
Then, the differential operator is approximated by the finite difference
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the periodic condition, this finite difference is expressed by
the large @xmath matrix as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We next consider the similar problem with respect to the @xmath -twisted
bundle, in which the antiperiodic condition @xmath is imposed. Paying
attention to this antiperiodicity, we understand that the finite
difference in the discritized space is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following, from the big space of large @xmath matrices, we pick
up a subspace consisting of the differential operators over one
manifold. We regard @xmath as the differential operators over this
manifold. Then, we analyze the effective theory of the fields appearing
in the expansion of the differential operators (the explicit form is
given later).

The space of the differential operator is infinite-dimensional. The
trace @xmath for this space is generally divergent. However, we can
render this trace finite by choosing the function @xmath damping
rapidly. We would like to identify this matrix @xmath with the Dirac
operator in the curved spacetime. Clearly, the Dirac operator has a
dimensionality [(length) @xmath ], while @xmath is a dimensionless
quantity. Then, we introduce a constant @xmath with the dimensionality
[(length) @xmath ], and express @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are matrices of dimensionality [(length) @xmath
]. @xmath is similar to the Regge slope @xmath in string theory, and is
introduced as a reference scale. This parameter @xmath is not a cut-off
parameter. @xmath is an exponentially decreasing function, and the
damping factor is supplied by the action itself. Since @xmath is a
function of the dimensionless quantity @xmath , @xmath represents a
damping scale. When we approximate the differential operators by finite
@xmath matrices, an @xmath -dependent ultraviolet cut-off naturally
appears. When we take @xmath to infinity, this cut-off becomes
infinitely small. But the scale @xmath is completely independent of this
ultraviolet cut-off, and takes a constant value even in the large @xmath
limit. Thus, we can fairly take @xmath to infinity and identify the
large @xmath matrices with the differential operators, at least when we
investigate the effective theory at tree level. In this sense, our model
differs from the induced gravity.

The matrices @xmath are expanded by the number of the derivatives. The
hermiticity of @xmath leads us to expand it by the anti-commutator of
the derivatives as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the indices @xmath are symmetric, while the indices @xmath are
anti-symmetric. Since we identify @xmath with the extension of the Dirac
operator in the curved spacetime, we find it natural to identify the
coefficients @xmath with the vielbein of the background metric. A simple
dimensional analysis immediately indicates that the coefficients @xmath
has a dimensionality [(length) @xmath ]. Then, @xmath is identified with
the Dirac operator in the curved space as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 4.1.2 Local Lorentz invariance

We next clarify that our matrix model is invariant under the local
Lorentz transformation. Here, the local Lorentz transformation is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is the parameter of the local Lorentz transformation, and it
satisfies @xmath . The coefficients @xmath are all hermitian matrices.
The discussion in ( 3.67 ) immediately indicates that the closure of the
algebra of the local Lorentz transformation necessitates all the
even-rank fields. The invariance of the action is verified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes @xmath . The vanishing of ( 4.11 ) can be verified
by noting the cyclic rule of the trace @xmath . Since we are now
discussing the space of the infinite-dimensional space, it is not
necessarily trivial whether the trace satisfies the cyclic rule.
However, the cyclic rule holds when the coefficients @xmath damps
rapidly. The only nontrivial part for the cyclic rule is the commutator
between the derivative and the fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, this surface term does not contribute when the coefficients
@xmath damp rapidly.

#### 4.1.3 Determination of @xmath

We next determine the function @xmath . We require that the action ( 4.1
) should have the flat metric @xmath as a classical background. However,
this turns out to be a draconian constraint on @xmath . The bosonic part
is expressed by the heat-kernel expansion. We delegate the details of
the heat-kernel expansion to Appendix B . We find it more convenient to
express @xmath in terms of its Laplace transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to see a more transparent correspondence with the heat kernel.
Then, the action is now expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients of the heat kernel
@xmath , namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath runs all the integers. We can show that the half-integer
@xmath can be excluded in the following way. The coefficients @xmath has
a dimensionality [(length) @xmath ]. On the other hand the terms @xmath
has a dimensionality @xmath . Therefore, this belongs to the
coefficients @xmath . On the other hand, this term has @xmath indices,
which is equal to @xmath modulo 2. Therefore, when @xmath is odd, these
terms cannot contract the indices, and thus cannot survive in the
action. If such terms existed, they would no longer be a scalar and thus
would violate the Lorentz invariance of the action. In this way, we
eliminate the contribution of the half-integer @xmath .

Then, let us think about the condition for @xmath to be a classical
solution. To this end, the linear terms of all the fluctuations must
vanish in the action. Now, only the scalar fields can contribute to the
action, we have only to consider the linear terms @xmath (for @xmath ).
Since @xmath is identified with the vielbein, its cancellation means the
cancellation of the cosmological constant. This amounts to the
cancellation of the Seeley-de-Witt coefficient @xmath . We disregard the
derivative terms @xmath , because these can be eliminated by the partial
integration. Since the fields @xmath has a dimensionality [(length)
@xmath ], it belongs to the Seeley-de-Witt coefficient @xmath .
Therefore, we generally demand that the coefficients @xmath for @xmath
should all cancel.

However, it turns out that this imposes a demanding condition on the
function @xmath . The above condition is translated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition can further be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . One example for such a function is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can show that the function ( 4.17 ) satisfies the condition ( 4.16 )
as follows [ 71 ] . Firstly, we note the following integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a real number when @xmath is a multiple of 4. Taking the
imaginary part of the both hand sides, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We make a substitution @xmath and perform the partial integration to
obtain the solution ( 4.17 ) ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 This is the famous counter-example
against Hausdorff’s moment problem when we replace the finite integral
with the infinite integral. When the function @xmath satisfies

@xmath

The function @xmath must be zero constantly. This problem is called
”Hausdorff’s moment problem” [ 71 ] . However, this is not the case with
( 4.16 ) because we are considering the infinite integral. .

We then derive the Einstein gravity in the low energy limit, from this
bosonic part. The linear term of the vielbein @xmath is eliminated, and
thus the graviton is now massless since the mass term vanishes due to
the general coordinate invariance. When we retain the curved-space Dirac
operator in the expansion ( 4.9 ), the Seeley-de-Witt expansion is now
obtained by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term should be clearly allocated for the coefficient @xmath .

We next give a qualitative argument for the mass and the kinetic terms
of the matter fields. While the explicit heat-kernel expansion of ( 4.9
) entails an involved calculation, it is easy to estimate which
coefficient @xmath the mass term and the kinetic term belong to via the
dimensional analysis. Since the coefficients @xmath and @xmath
respectively have the dimensionality [(length) @xmath ] and [(length)
@xmath ], we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath must be an even number. Firstly, the mass term and the
kinetic terms of the fields @xmath belong to @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The explicit heat-kernel calculation reveals that the
relevant mass terms are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We give the derivation of this result in Appendix. B . Thus, the fields
@xmath for @xmath are clearly massive. While ( 4.23 ) cancels the mass
term @xmath , the field @xmath is also presumably massive because there
is no reason to prohibit the cross terms @xmath .

Next, we consider the fields @xmath . Especially the fields @xmath (with
@xmath ) are identified with the anti-symmetric tensor fields in the
type IIB supergravity. Their mass terms are included in @xmath , while
the kinetic terms reside in @xmath . These fields are therefore regarded
as massless. This observation augurs well for the matrix model which
reduces to the type IIB supergravity.

However, it is not clear whether the higher-spin fields @xmath ( @xmath
) are massive, since the mass terms and the kinetic terms belong to the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath respectively and both of them vanish in
the action.

### 4.2 Supersymmetric action

In the previous section, we have discerned that the bosonic part of the
matrix model reduces to the Einstein gravity in the low energy limit.
Our goal is to establish the extension of the IIB matrix model that
reduces to the type IIB supergravity in the low energy limit. This leads
us to scrutinize the fermionic part. We pay attention of the
correspondence of the supersymmetry.

We start from the following action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is defined in the same way as in the bosonic model. @xmath
is a Weyl fermion. However, the crucial difference from the IIB matrix
model is that we abstain its Majorana property. Namely, we abstain its
hermiticity. It is extremely difficult to build a matrix model that
closes with respect to the local Lorentz transformation @xmath . That is
why we abandon the hermiticity and define the local Lorentz
transformation as @xmath . The fermionic field is also expanded by the
number of the derivatives as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, the fields @xmath has the dimensionality [(length) @xmath ]. We
put the damping factor @xmath , so that the action @xmath should be
finite. We choose this power in accordance with the function ( 4.17 ),
which leads us to set @xmath .

#### 4.2.1 Local Lorentz invariance

We discuss its local Lorentz invariance, which is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 4.10 ). @xmath is transformed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action is transformed by this local Lorentz transformation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This holds true when the coefficients @xmath and @xmath damp rapidly in
the infinite distance.

#### 4.2.2 Determination of @xmath

We next discuss the determination of the function @xmath . Here, we do
not give a specific form of @xmath and we just list up the conditions
for @xmath .

Firstly, the flat background @xmath must be a classical solution. As we
have seen in the bosonic case, this imposes a strict condition on the
function @xmath ; namely this must satisfy the criterion ( 4.16 ).

Secondly, this model must retain the even-rank anti-symmetric tensor
fields @xmath @xmath . The action @xmath must be determined so that
these fields should be massless and thus be bequeathed in the low-energy
limit.

It is not clear whether the function ( 4.17 ) satisfies the latter
condition, since we have yet to elucidate the mass of the higher-spin
fields.

#### 4.2.3 Supersymmetry

We next discuss its supersymmetry. We define the supersymmetric
transformation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath . Now, we assume that the function @xmath can be expanded
around @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the following argument does not apply to the function ( 4.17
), because it is not possible to expand this around the origin @xmath .
The supersymmetry transformation of @xmath is derived as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then, the supersymmetry invariance of the action can be easily verified
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next analyse the commutation relation of the supersymmetry
transformation. This is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the help of the equation of motion

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.35)
  -- -- -- --------

This can be verified by taking the difference of the two
transformations, as we did for the IIB matrix model or the supermatrix
model. For the boson, we compare the following two transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the fermion, we compare the following two paths:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order to see the structure of the supersymmetry transformation of the
@xmath supersymmetry. Since we now abstain the hermiticity of the
fermion, we separate the fermions into the real part and the imaginary
part as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Majorana-Weyl fermions. Now, we assume that
the supersymmetry parameters are proportional to the unit matrix for
brevity, namely

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are real Grassmann-odd c-numbers. Another
assumption is that the background metric is flat.

Firstly, the transformation of the bosonic field is calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We focus on the supersymmetry transformation of the vector field @xmath
. The commutator @xmath represents the translation and the gauge
transformation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the commutator of the bosonic fields represents the right
translation of the vector fields. However, this does not hold true of
the fermionic fields. The commutator is computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have a closer look at the term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the omission of the non-linear terms of the fields.
Therefore, each fermionic field is subject to the following
transformation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the fermionic fields are not subject to the translation by
the commutator of the supersymmetry.

However, the argument in this section is only applicable to the function
@xmath that can be expanded around @xmath , and does not hold true of
the function ( 4.17 ). We speculate that we may find a right
supersymmetry for such functions.

We surmise that the fermionic fields @xmath and @xmath , which are
respectively identified with the dilatino and the gravitino, would be
massless due to the supersymmetry, when the even-rank fields @xmath are
massless. It is an intriguing future problem to seek such an action more
rigorously.

## 5 Monte Carlo simulation of the fuzzy sphere solutions

We have seen several generalizations of the IIB matrix model to
accommodate the curved-space classical background in Sec. 2.4 . We have
reviewed the author’s work [ 46 ] in Sec. 3.4 about the curved-space
background in the context of the supermatrix model.

In this section, we address the stability of the curved-space background
in the quantum sense, based on the author’s work [ 60 ] . It has been a
conundrum to discuss the stability of the fuzzy sphere in the quantum
sense. There have been hitherto several attempts for the quantum
stability. In [ 25 ] , the quantum stability has been discussed in terms
of the one-loop effective action. In [ 51 , 55 , 59 ] , they performed
the two-loop perturbative calculation of the Feynman diagram, to unravel
the stability of the fuzzy sphere and other backgrounds. Another attempt
is to investigate the quantum stability via the Gaussian expansion, and
the first-order calculation is given in [ 52 ] .

Here, we address the quantum stability of the fuzzy sphere via the heat
bath algorithm of the Monte Carlo simulation, whose detail we delegate
to Appendix C . Our approach is totally different from these foregoing
works [ 25 , 51 , 52 , 55 , 59 ] , in the sense that we discuss the
stability nonperturbatively via the numerical simulation. The Monte
Carlo simulation has played a pivotal role in elucidating the
nonperturbative aspects of the lattice gauge theory. By the same token,
the application of the Monte Carlo simulation to the IIB matrix model
has given us many interesting nonperturbative insights. In [ 13 ] , the
bosonic IIB matrix model has been scrutinized nonperturbatively via the
Monte Carlo simulation. This analysis [ 13 ] was followed by the
supersymmetric extension [ 20 , 22 ] via the hybrid Monte Carlo
simulation.

Here, we scrutinize the simplest case for the matrix model with the
curved-space classical solution. Namely, we concentrate on the
three-dimensional bosonic IIB matrix model with the Chern-Simons term
which incorporates the @xmath fuzzy sphere solution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The notation is the same as that in Sec. 2.4.1 , except we set @xmath in
this section. We delegate the miscellaneous properties of the @xmath
fuzzy sphere classical solution @xmath to Sec. 2.4.1 .

### 5.1 Nonperturbative studies of the fuzzy sphere initial condition

We start with the Monte Carlo simulation for the initial condition of
the irreducible representation of the @xmath fuzzy sphere classical
solution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Starting from this initial condition, we see whether or not the fuzzy
sphere decays due to the quantum effect of the matrix model. Especially,
the histogram of the eigenvalues of the Casimir operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

describes the fuzzy sphere’s stability visually. In the following,
@xmath denotes the eigenvalues of @xmath , and @xmath denotes the
eigenvalue distribution function normalized as @xmath . At the initial
state, the histogram is peaked at @xmath , because the Casimir is
proportional to the unit matrix for the fuzzy sphere. If the fuzzy
sphere is stable in the quantum sense, the histogram does not decay
greatly from the peaked distribution. On the other hand, if the fuzzy
sphere is unstable, the histogram undergoes a drastic deformation.

#### 5.1.1 Nonperturbative stability of the fuzzy sphere

We first investigate the @xmath and @xmath case starting from the
initial condition ( 5.2 ). We see a clear difference between the @xmath
and the @xmath case.

We see from Fig. 10 the instability of the fuzzy sphere at @xmath . The
vertical lines in the histogram denote the radius-square of the fuzzy
sphere classical solution @xmath . Now, this value is @xmath for @xmath
, and the eigenvalues of @xmath were originally peaked there. This fuzzy
sphere decays due to the quantum effect and the eigenvalues are
concentrated far away from the original fuzzy sphere configuration.

However, this situation changes for @xmath . Fig. 10 indicates that the
eigenvalue distribution constitutes only one lump in the vicinity of the
classical value of the radius-square (which is @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath respectively), and that the eigenvalues are not
dissipated otherwise at all. This implies that the eigenvalues remain
constituting a thin sphere shell near its original fuzzy sphere
configuration. In this sense, we regard the fuzzy sphere classical
solution as stable. This stability is also reconfirmed in Section 5.3.1
, by demonstrating the dynamical evolution of the single fuzzy sphere
state from the initial condition @xmath .

#### 5.1.2 First-order phase transition

In the previous section, we have discerned that the fuzzy sphere
solution. In this section, we deepen the above observation and
demonstrate the first-order transition of the matrix model ( 5.1 ).

Firstly, we ascribe the above stability of the fuzzy sphere to the
meager quantum effect of the model. The effective action @xmath of this
matrix model is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effect of the classical fuzzy sphere solution is of the order @xmath
, as one can easily verify by plugging the fuzzy sphere solution ( 2.78
) into the action ( 5.1 ). On the other hand, the effect of the path
integral measure is of the order @xmath . This comparison leads to the
observation that the matrix model receives only a small quantum effect
at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

To elaborate on this observation, we next calculate the following
quantities, for @xmath with the fuzzy sphere initial condition ( 5.2 ).

1.  The action @xmath : This quantity gives the energy of the numerical
    configuration.

2.  The spacetime extent @xmath : This provides us with the information
    of the eigenvalue distribution, and hence the stability of the fuzzy
    sphere.

3.  The Yang-Mills term: @xmath : This quantity, as well as the
    spacetime extent, have been already investigated in the bosonic IIB
    matrix model without the Chern-Simons term (this amounts to the
    @xmath case) in [ 13 ] . For the bosonic IIB matrix model, both are
    shown to behave at the order @xmath . It is interesting to compare
    the behavior of this quantity with that of the bosonic IIB matrix
    model.

4.  We derive the following exact result from the Schwinger-Dyson
    equation of the matrix model:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Here, @xmath ( @xmath ) are the basis of the @xmath Lie algebra, and
    the matrices @xmath are expanded as @xmath . The Schwinger-Dyson
    equation ( 5.6 ) gives

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    as we prove explicitly in Appendix C.4 . While @xmath is given
    analytically, the numerical computation of its vacuum expectation
    @xmath is significant for the legitimacy of the algorithm.

5.  The Chern-Simons term:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    We have obtained the analytical result @xmath , which amounts to

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    While @xmath itself obviously behaves as @xmath , it is interesting
    to discern the behavior of each of the separate terms @xmath , as
    well as @xmath .

We postpone the plot of @xmath later, and plot the other four
quantities. The above power-counting observation for the quantum effect
motivates us to plot these quantities against @xmath , instead of @xmath
. For the fuzzy sphere classical solution, they respectively scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads us to plot the quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
against @xmath in Fig. 11 .

This plotting poses a serious consequence. This matrix model has the
first-order phase transition with the change of the parameter @xmath .
In the above four cases, we see a discontinuity at the critical point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also find that this discontinuity is steeper for the larger @xmath .
This indicates that there is a first-order phase transition between the
two phases.

We call the phase at @xmath the ”Yang-Mills phase”. In this phase, the
quantum effect of the matrix model becomes strong, and thus the fuzzy
sphere classical solution is no longer stable. Rather, the behavior for
this phase has a similarity to that of the bosonic IIB matrix model
without the Chern-Simons term. Fig. 11 clearly indicates that this model
undergoes a smooth transition from @xmath (the bosonic IIB matrix model
itself) to the small @xmath . The vacuum expectation values of @xmath
and @xmath have been analyzed in [ 13 ] , where they are shown to behave
at @xmath . This behavior is inherited in the Yang-Mills phase. We
elaborate on this phase more closely in Section 5.2.1 .

We call the phase at @xmath the ”fuzzy sphere phase”, where the quantum
effect is so small that the classical fuzzy sphere is stable. Now, we
discern that the fuzzy sphere is stable at @xmath , @xmath , because the
system is in the fuzzy sphere phase in this case. They are scaled as (
5.10 ), and this behavior is totally different from that of the
Yang-Mills phase.

This first-order phase translation is a product of the the Monte Carlo
simulation, which could not be seen by the perturbative approaches. In
this sense, we accentuate that this first-order phase transition is a
nonperturbative phenomenon.

We next exhibit the corresponding plot of the quantity @xmath in Fig. 12
. In the Yang-Mills phase, the observables @xmath and @xmath behave as
@xmath , similarly to the bosonic IIB matrix model. The fluctuation of
@xmath is thus small in the Yang-Mills phase.

On the other hand, @xmath and @xmath both behave as @xmath in the fuzzy
sphere phase. Nevertheless, the quantity @xmath is of the order @xmath ,
as is analytically verified. This is ascribed to the huge cancellation
between these two terms in the fuzzy sphere phase. Therefore, the
fluctuation of @xmath is naturally bigger in the fuzzy sphere phase than
in the bosonic Yang-Mills phase.

#### 5.1.3 One-loop dominance in the fuzzy sphere phase

The behavior of these four quantities in the fuzzy sphere phase gives an
even more striking consequence. The numerical value of these four
quantities coincides their one-loop results. The one-loop vacuum
expectation values are calculated in the large- @xmath limit as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We delegate the derivation of these results to the appendices of [ 60 ]
. The first term comes from the classical effect, while the one-loop
correction comes in the second term of each quantity. The dotted lines
in the graphs denote these one-loop result of these quantities ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
For @xmath , we omit the dotted line, because it is not subject to the
one-loop correction. . The coincidence of the numerical values of these
observables with the one-loop result suggests the higher-loop effects
are suppressed in the large- @xmath limit and hence that the one-loop
effect is dominant in the matrix model ( 5.1 ).

#### 5.1.4 Width of the eigenvalue distribution

We next discuss the dependence of the width of the lump in the histogram
of the Casimir @xmath on the parameter @xmath and @xmath . We define the
width @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath . The above three expressions
are all tautological. For the convenience of comparing the histograms
for different @xmath and @xmath , we plot the eigenvalue distribution
against the @xmath in Fig. 13 , instead of the usual argument @xmath ,
where @xmath are the mean of the observed eigenvalues for a particular
@xmath and @xmath and are functions of @xmath and @xmath .

The overlapping of the different @xmath histograms for a particular
@xmath shows that the width of the eigenvalue distribution does not
depend on @xmath . We also observe that the width of the distributions
for different @xmath has a linear dependence on @xmath in Fig. 14 . The
width @xmath turns out to behave as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is in agreement with the one-loop calculation @xmath , which is
also derived in the appendices of [ 60 ] .

### 5.2 Analysis of the Yang-Mills phase

We have so far investigated the numerical simulation starting from the
fuzzy sphere initial condition ( 5.2 ). We have found that there is a
phase transition between the Yang-Mills phase and the fuzzy sphere phase
at @xmath (namely, @xmath ). In this section, we elaborate on the
behavior of the Yang-Mills phase, and we launch the Monte Carlo
simulation from the initial condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.2.1 Eigenvalue distribution in the Yang-Mills phase

We start with discussing the eigenvalue distribution of the Casimir
@xmath , for @xmath with @xmath to indicate the @xmath dependence and
@xmath with @xmath to indicate the @xmath dependence. Here, we plot the
eigenvalue density @xmath against @xmath in Fig. 15 .

This @xmath trivially represents the distance from the origin. @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that this may represent the eigenvalue density. @xmath is normalized
so that @xmath .

The histogram for @xmath is devoid of the eigenvalue in the vicinity of
the origin, and the histogram soars around the radius 0.8. In this
sense, there is an ultraviolet cutoff in the eigenvalue distribution.
This phenomenon is interpreted in the following way. If a certain state
is an eigenstate of the Casimir @xmath with almost zero eigenvalues,
this implies that the same state is almost an eigenstate of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath individually with almost zero eigenvalues. However,
this violates the uncertainty principle, because a generic configuration
of @xmath do not commute with each other. In the bosonic IIB matrix
model [ 13 ] , the vacuum expectation value @xmath is of the order
@xmath . Therefore, the scale of the uncertainty @xmath is also of the
order @xmath . The above histogram is consistent with this
consideration.

The histogram for @xmath with @xmath demonstrates that the eigenvalue
distribution undergoes a gradual change as we vary @xmath within the
Yang-Mills phase.

#### 5.2.2 Phase transition and the hysteresis

We next investigate the phase transition of the simulation initiated
from ( 5.15 ). We find that the critical point differs in the initial
condition ( 5.15 ) from that for the fuzzy sphere initial condition (
5.2 ). When we initiate the simulation from @xmath , the critical point
is found at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We plot @xmath for @xmath with the two initial condition ( 5.2 ) and (
5.15 ) in Fig. 16 .

The important difference in the Yang-Mills phase is that the critical
point @xmath is independent of @xmath . Since the critical point @xmath
is larger than that for the fuzzy sphere initial condition @xmath for
the sufficiently large @xmath , we call the critical point for the
Yang-Mills (fuzzy sphere) phase ’the upper (lower) critical point’
respectively. The above hysteresis cycle is realized for the
sufficiently large @xmath . For the @xmath case, the lower critical
point is approximately @xmath , which is larger than @xmath . In this
case, the hysteresis disappears, as is discerned from Fig. 16 . On the
other hand, this is not the case with @xmath in which the hysteresis
cycle is realized.

### 5.3 Metastability of the multi-sphere solutions

In this section, we investigate the multi-fuzzy-sphere solution of the
matrix model ( 5.1 ). It accommodates the following multi-fuzzy-sphere
solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional irreducible representation of
the @xmath Lie algebra. The whole size of the matrices @xmath is @xmath
. For this multi-fuzzy-sphere solution, the eigenvalue distribution of
@xmath is peaked at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classical value of the action is easily calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of the action ( 5.20 ) for the multi-fuzzy-sphere condition is
bigger than that for the single fuzzy sphere state (namely, @xmath ).
Therefore, the multi-fuzzy-sphere state can be realized as a metastable
state. In the following, we report the results of the simulations to
unravel this metastability.

#### 5.3.1 Evolution of the multi-fuzzy-sphere solution

Firstly, we report the simulation with the initial condition ( 5.15 ),
and observe how the fuzzy sphere state evolves. Here, we focus on the
large- @xmath case in the fuzzy sphere phase @xmath and @xmath . We plot
the history of the vacuum expectation value of the action @xmath , and
the eigenvalues of @xmath against the sweeping time in Fig. 17 .

This indicates the process in which the multi-fuzzy-sphere state is
generated dynamically. Firstly, we start to see a tiny plateau in the
graph of @xmath corresponding to the multi-fuzzy-sphere state @xmath .
When we further undergo the sweeps, this multi-fuzzy-sphere state falls
into the lower-energy state @xmath . In this way, the state falls off to
the lower-energy state @xmath .

Finally the system arrives at the one-fuzzy-sphere irreducible
representation @xmath . Namely, the one-fuzzy-sphere state is
dynamically generated in the course of the thermalization. When we
further undergo the sweeps, the system is stuck in this one-fuzzy-sphere
representation, and never falls off to the other state any more. This
observation reinforces the stability of the one-fuzzy-sphere state in
the fuzzy sphere phase.

#### 5.3.2 Metastability of the fuzzy sphere solution

In this section, we obtain an insight into the metastability of the
fuzzy sphere state, by focusing on the dependence on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We adopt the initial condition of the @xmath case in ( 5.18 )
for brevity. Namely, we initiate the simulation from the
multi-fuzzy-sphere state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have observed in the previous section that the multi-fuzzy-sphere
state falls into the lower-energy state in the course of the
thermalization of the system. Firstly, we observe how the
multi-fuzzy-sphere classical solution ( 5.21 ) decays, for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in Fig. 18 .

This indicates that the multi-fuzzy-sphere state ( 5.21 ) decays faster
for larger @xmath (namely, for the smaller representation of the size
@xmath ). This is a natural result, and we elaborate on this dependence
on @xmath later.

Nextly, we show the first-order phase transition and the one-loop
dominance of the @xmath reducible representation. The observables @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are calculated in the appendices of [ 60 ]
as

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.22)
  -- -- -- --------

for the one-loop effect around the multi fuzzy sphere ( 5.18 ) with
@xmath . We launch the simulation from the initial condition ( 5.21 )
for @xmath . We plot these four observables in Fig. 19 .

We have seen in Fig. 18 that the multi fuzzy sphere decays in the course
of the thermalization. Here we undergo a sufficiently short sweep in the
fuzzy sphere phase, such that the multi fuzzy sphere ( 5.21 ) may not
decay. In the @xmath multi fuzzy sphere, we find two consequenses
similar to the @xmath irreducible representation. Firstly, we note that
there is a first-order phase transition. This time, the critical point
lies at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Secondly, the @xmath multi fuzzy sphere has the one-loop dominance in
the fuzzy sphere phase in the large- @xmath limit.

We can understand the critical point ( 5.23 ) from the one-loop
dominance. In the fuzzy sphere phase, the spacetime extent @xmath
behaves at the one-loop level as @xmath in the fuzzy sphere phase. This
is positive only when @xmath . In this sense, we obtain the lower bound
on the critical point from the one-loop dominance as @xmath . The
critical point ( 5.11 ) for @xmath and ( 5.23 ) for @xmath are
consistent with this observation.

We next discuss the sweeping time @xmath that takes for the initial
condition ( 5.21 ) to decay more qualitatively. To this end, we plot
@xmath against @xmath for @xmath in Fig. 20 . This indicates that the
sweeping time for the multi-fuzzy-sphere state to decay depends on
@xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 20 indicates that this power law is independent of the size of the
matrix @xmath .

This is in contrast to the intuitive observation that the decay
probability @xmath obeys @xmath ; namely the sweeping time for the decay
is @xmath . It is interesting to ruminate on the reasoning for the
deviation from this intuitive observation.

### 5.4 Miscellaneous future directions

We conclude this section by listing the future approaches to this work.
There are a lot of interesting future works in this direction. Firstly,
this toy model is expected to serve for the dynamical generation of the
gauge group. As we have reviewed in Section 2.4.1 , the expansion around
the reducible representation ( 5.18 ) for @xmath gives the
noncommutative Yang-Mills theory with the @xmath gauge group. Iso and
Kawai [ 14 ] suggested that the dynamical generation of the gauge group
is ascribed to the cluster distribution of the eigenvalues. By examining
the eigenvalue distribution of this model, we may gain insight into the
dynamical generation of the gauge group.

Secondly, it is also exciting to extend our analysis to the
supersymmetric case. For the simplest case, we start with the
four-dimensional supersymmetric model with the three-dimensional
Chern-Simons term ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Austing and Wheater [ 57 ] corroborated that
the three-dimensional action ( 2.76 ) has a divergent path-integral.
Therefore, the numerical simulation of the three-dimensional model is
not possible. . It is intriguing to investigate how the supersymmetry
affects the results we have obtained for the bosonic case.

Thirdly, the extension to the higher-dimensional extension is also an
intriguing issue. We can extend our analysis to the higher-dimensional
fuzzy sphere, as we have reviewed in Section 2.4.2 . There has been
hitherto no works which discuss the quantum stability of the
higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere @xmath , since it is much more
mathematically involved than the simplest @xmath fuzzy sphere. On the
other hand, it is easy to extend the algorithm for the matrix model with
the three-dimensional Chern-Simons term to the higher dimension. We
expect that the Monte Carlo simulation may open the door to the study of
the higher-dimensional fuzzy sphere.

The fourth future direction is to extend our analysis to the general
homogeneous space, which is proposed by Kitazawa in [ 44 ] . By
investigating several homogeneous spaces (such as @xmath ), we may be
able to understand which homogeneous space is the most favored in the
quantum sense. We expect that this direction may give us a clue to the
compactification of the spacetime.

In this way, the Monte Carlo simulation we have described here gives us
a lot of exciting prospects.

## 6 Conclusion

In this thesis, we have reviewed the author’s works [ 26 , 38 , 46 , 60
] about the relation between the gravitational interaction and the
matrix model. Now, it is believed that the ’Theory of Everything’, which
unifies all the interactions in the nature, is realized by the
superstring theory. The large- @xmath reduced model is now regarded as
the promising candidate for the nonperturbative formulation of the
superstring theory. If we build the nonperturbative formulation of the
superstring theory, this will be the right framework to unify all
interactions. Then, we will be able to solve all the riddles of the
Standard Model, such as the dimensionality of our spacetime, the
generation of the quark, the gauge group and the eighteen parameters of
the Standard Model, from the parameterless theory.

In order to arrive at this ultimate goal, it is an important step to see
the correspondence between the matrix model and the gravitational
interaction. In the future, it is indispensable to elucidate the more
manifest correspondence with the gravitational interaction. For example,
it is interesting to pursue the matrix model that is equipped with the
local Lorentz symmetry and reduces to the supergravity in the low-energy
limit, by inheriting the idea we described in Section 4. If we find such
a matrix model, it will be certainly a better extension of the IIB
matrix model, in the sense that it has clearer relation to the
gravitational interaction. In addition, it is also interesting how the
matrix model realizes the curved-space background. The curved spacetime
is also an essential feature of the general relativity. So far, it is
known that the IIB matrix model, per se, realizes the curved-space
background through the condensation of the graviton. In addition,
several alterations of the IIB matrix model have been advocated, so that
they may be equipped with the curved-space manifold. On the other hand,
the alterations of the IIB matrix model is merely limited to the simple
manifolds; such as the @xmath fuzzy sphere, fuzzy torus or @xmath
manifold. It is exciting to pursue how the matrix model realizes the
general curved spacetime more manifestly.

We finally mention the relation between the IIB matrix model and its
miscellaneous extensions. In the quantum field theory, some different
models which share the same symmetry are equivalent in the continuum
limit, known as universality. We expect that the similar mechanism may
hold true of the matrix models and hence that various matrix models may
have the same large @xmath limit. Thus, there is a possibility that
these new extensions are equivalent to the IIB matrix model. We can
expect that both the IIB matrix model and the new extensions are equally
authentic constructive definition of superstring theory in the large
@xmath limit. It is an intriguing future work to elaborate on this
conjecture of the universality.

Mankind has yet to grasp what is the true ’Theory of Everything’. We
must exert more effort to arrive at the answer to this ultimate and most
difficult question of the elementary particle physics.

##### Acknowledgment

It is my great pleasure to acknowledge the collaboration and the advice
to complete the present work.

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my immediate supervisor
Prof. Hikaru Kawai. Without his guidance, I could not have completed
these works.

I would also like to express my thanks to Dr. Subrata Bal, Dr. Maxime
Bagnoud, Prof. Satoshi Iso, Prof. Hikaru Kawai, Dr. Keiichi Nagao, Prof.
Jun Nishimura and Dr. Yuhi Ohwashi for the collaboration. Especially,
Prof. Nishimura’s pedagogical lecture at KEK invited me to the numerical
simulation of the large- @xmath reduced model.

I also thank Prof. Hajime Aoki, Dr. Shoichi Kawamoto, Dr. Yusuke Kimura,
Prof. Yoshihisa Kitazawa, Dr. Tsunehide Kuroki, Mr. Takeshi Morita, Dr.
Shin Nakamura, Dr. Shun’ichi Shinohara, Prof. Tsukasa Tada, Mr. Yastoshi
Takayama, Dr. Dan Tomino and Prof. Asato Tsuchiya for valuable
discussion.

I thank the Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics at Kyoto
University. Discussions during the YITP-W-02-11 and YITP-W-03-09 on
”YONUPA Summer School”, YITP-W-01-04, YITP-W-02-04 and YITP-W-03-07 on
”Quantum Field Theory”, YITP-W-02-15 on ”YITP School on Lattice Field
Theory” and YITP-W-02-18 and YITP-W-03-19 on ”Quantum Field Theories:
Fundamental Problems and Applications” were useful to complete the works
in this thesis. In addition, the numerical computations in the work [ 60
] were in part performed at the Yukawa Institute Computer Facility.

These works are supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology of Japan @xmath 01282.

## Appendix A Notation

### a.1 Definition and properties of the gamma matrices and the fermions

Basically, we follow the same notation as for [ 27 ] . Throughout this
thesis, the metric of the Minkowskian spacetime is taken so that the
time component should be minus and the space components should be plus.
Namely, the metric is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The gamma matrices are defined so that it may comply with the following
Clifford algebra:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the gamma matrices @xmath are the @xmath real matrices and the
indices @xmath run over @xmath . The explicit components are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath are the nine-dimensional (and thus @xmath ) gamma matrices,
and obey the Clifford algebra for the nine-dimensional Euclidean
spacetime @xmath , where @xmath run over @xmath .

The transpose of the gamma matrices are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The chirality matrices @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the indices @xmath in the eleven-dimensional Minkowski spacetime,
the gamma matrices comply with the Clifford algebra @xmath .

Next, we define the charge conjugation matrix @xmath . @xmath should
satisfy the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In our case, @xmath is identical to @xmath .

The anti-symmetrized gamma matrices are abbreviated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the set of the permutation of the integers @xmath .

#### a.1.1 Chirality of the Weyl fermion

We summarize the notation for the chirality of the fermion. The
left-hand (right-hand) fermion is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The left-handed (right-handed) fermions satisfy the following identities
for the ten-dimensional gamma matrices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, we prove only @xmath , so that the rest can be verified likewise.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

#### a.1.2 Epsilon tensors and the duality of the matrices

Here, we define the anti-symmetric epsilon tensors as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This definition leads the duality relations of the gamma matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.1.3 Multiplication law of the gamma matrices

The anti-symmetrized gamma matrices obey the following formula of the
product.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### a.1.4 Flipping property of the Majorana fermions

Here, we introduce a useful formula for the flipping of the Majorana
fermion. The gamma matrices has the following property:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the following relation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Then, the Majorana fermions are flipped as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Namely, the sign is minus for @xmath , and plus for @xmath .

#### a.1.5 Proof of the Fierz identity (LABEL:AZM31fierz) and (2.87)

We give a proof of the formula of the Fierz identity ( LABEL:AZM31fierz
) and ( 2.87 ), which contributes to the proof of the supersymmetry
algebra of the matrix model.

We start with the ten-dimensional formula ( LABEL:AZM31fierz ). The
fermions @xmath and @xmath are Majorana-Weyl fermions, and effectively
act on the @xmath space of the gamma matrices. The left hand side is
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the minus sign emerges because we have flipped the order of the
Grassmann odd fermions. The matrix @xmath can be decomposed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the fermions @xmath and @xmath have the same chirality, the terms
of the even rank vanish due to the relation ( A.7 ). We ignore the
rank-3 term because we are interested in the difference @xmath , and the
rank-3 term does not contribute due to the relation ( A.15 ). This leads
us to focus only on the rank-1,5 terms. The relevant gamma matrices are
computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When we substitute ( A.17 ), ( A.18 ) and ( A.19 ) into ( A.16 ), the
computation of the Fierz transformation goes as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We next go to the proof of ( 2.87 ) for the three-dimensional spacetime.
This time, the fermions are Majorana ones. The proof goes in the same
way as for ( LABEL:AZM31fierz ). Here, we note that the @xmath matrices
@xmath are decomposed by the Paulian matrices as @xmath Then, the Fierz
decomposition is verified as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, we drop the contribution of the rank-0 term @xmath , because we
are interested in the difference @xmath and the rank-0 term cancels.
Likewise, the latter formula is rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relevant Paulian matrices are calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Plugging ( A.23 ) and ( A.24 ) into ( LABEL:fierz3dimint1 ) and (
LABEL:fierz3dimint2 ), we complete the proof of the Fierz identity (
2.87 ).

#### a.1.6 Proof of the Fierz identity (2.10)

We next verify the Fierz identity ( 2.10 ). This formula plays an
important role in the supersymmetry of the super Yang-Mills theory or
the Green-Schwarz action of the superstring. This holds only for the
following cases:

1.  @xmath , and @xmath are Majorana.

2.  @xmath , and @xmath are Majorana or Weyl.

3.  @xmath , and @xmath are Weyl.

4.  @xmath , and @xmath are Majorana-Weyl.

To substantiate this relation, we carry out the following decomposition.

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (A.25)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Namely, our job reduces to verifying the vanishing of the following
quantity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We multiply @xmath and @xmath with ( A.26 ) to obtain ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The
flipping property @xmath holds true only for the Majorana fermion ,
because @xmath holds only for the Majorana fermions. However, the
property @xmath holds true without assuming the Majorana fermion.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

We verify the vanishing of ( A.27 ) by decomposing them by the gamma
matrices. For example, the @xmath matrices for the ten-dimensional case
are decomposed in the same way as ( A.17 ). This leads us to verify the
vanishing for the components of each rank.

For @xmath of the first term, it is trivial that only the rank-1
components contribute. For the second and third terms which entail the
fermions @xmath , we can limit the argument at most to the rank-5
components. We note that the rank-0,3,4 components do not contribute
because of the anti-symmetry of @xmath (for @xmath ). The even-rank
components do not contribute for the Weyl fermion either, because of the
Weyl projection. We list up which rank we should consider in the
following:

1.  For @xmath Majorana case, only the rank-1 matrices may contribute.

2.  For @xmath Majorana case, only the rank-1,2 components may survive.
    For the Weyl case, only the rank-1 may survive.

3.  For the @xmath Weyl case, we consider the rank-1 components.

4.  For the @xmath Majorana-Weyl case, we consider the rank-1,5
    components.

For the rank-1 case, we multiply @xmath , and we find that this quantity
vanishes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the size of the gamma matrices, and @xmath is the spacetime
dimensionality. Here, we utilize the following formula for the general
rank- @xmath gamma matrices @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The rank-1 terms cancel for @xmath , where @xmath respectively.

Next, we go on to the generic rank- @xmath ( @xmath ) case. We multiply
@xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the formula of the gamma matrices ( A.28 ), these contributions
actually vanish for @xmath for @xmath respectively.

### a.2 Supermatrices

This section is devoted to introducing the definitions of the notion of
supermatrices. In treating supermatrices, there are many points we
should be meticulous about, because what holds true of ordinary matrices
is not applicable to the supermatrices.

#### a.2.1 Transpose

We first introduce a notion of the transpose, emphasizing on the
difference from the ordinary matrices. In considering such objects, it
is extremely important to settle the starting point, because the other
notions are defined so that they are consistent with this starting
point.

##### Transpose of Vector

The guiding principle in considering the transpose of the supermatrices
is the transpose of the vector .

-   The guiding principle is that the transpose of a vector is defined
    as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

    We denote @xmath as the components of @xmath , and these components
    mean both bosons and fermions .

-   We define the vector as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are fermionic
    and bosonic real fields respectively.

##### Transpose of Supermatrices

The transpose of supermatrices must be defined so that the definition is
consistent with the transpose of a vector. Therefore the transpose of a
supermatrix must satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a supermatrix and @xmath is a vector. Following this
rule, the transpose of a supermatrix is defined as follows:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.32)
  -- -- -- --------

-   @xmath and @xmath are bosonic (i.e. Grassmann even) @xmath and
    @xmath matrices, respectively.

-   @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath fermionic (i.e. Grassmann
    odd) matrices, respectively.

-   @xmath ( @xmath ) denote the upper @xmath (lower @xmath )
    bosonic(fermionic) components of the supervector respectively.

(Proof) This can be verified using the very definition of the transpose.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the transpose of this vector is by definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The point is that the sign of @xmath has changed because these are
Grassmann odd. Noting this fact, we can read off the result ( A.32 ).
(Q.E.D.)

We have one caution about the transpose of the supermatrix. The
transpose of the transpose does not give an original matrix. This
’anomalous’ property can be immediately read off from the definition of
the supermatrix ( A.32 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Transpose of Transverse Vector

We have seen an important fact that the transpose of the transpose of a
supermatrix does not give the original supermatrix. In fact, the same
holds true of the transpose of the transpose of a vector. Conclusion
coming first, the definition is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We confirm that this is actually a well-defined settlement. This notion
is defined so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a transverse vector @xmath and @xmath is a supermatrix
@xmath . We compute both the L.H.S and the R.H.S and verify that they
actually match if we follow the above definition.

-   L.H.S. : @xmath .
    We have used the fact that in the transpose of @xmath , we must
    multiply @xmath because a fermion jumps over another fermion.

-   R.H.S. : @xmath .

Thus we have verified that the above definition of the transpose is
consistent with the condition @xmath . As we have mentioned before, the
transpose of the transpose of a vector does not give the original
vector, because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.2.2 Hermitian Conjugate

We introduce a notion of hermitian conjugate of the supermatrix. This
notion is much simpler than the transpose, and we do not see anomalous
properties as emerged in the transpose. The starting point of this
notion is

-   For a fermionic number @xmath , the complex conjugate is @xmath .

-   For a vector @xmath , the complex conjugate is @xmath .

Under this definition, the hermitian conjugate of a supermatrix is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Proof) The guiding principle to determine the hermitian conjugate of a
supermatrix is the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is computed to be, utilizing the
definition for the vector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The explicit form of the hermitian conjugate of a supermatrix can be
read off from ( A.41 ), and this completes the proof. (Q.E.D.)

The definition of the hermitian conjugate of a transverse vector is now
straightforward. This is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to verify that this definition is consistent with
the guiding principle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

because @xmath .

#### a.2.3 Complex Conjugate

We define a notion of complex conjugate for a supermatrix. The guiding
principle to define the complex conjugate is to require the matrices and
the vectors to satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to satisfy this condition, we define the complex conjugate of
the vectors and the matrices as follows ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Be careful about the
fact that @xmath is different from @xmath . They are computed to be
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and these are not the complex conjugate of
the vectors or the matrices. .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to verify that this definition is consistent with
the guiding principle ( A.44 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining the results obtained in the previous section, the explicit
form of the complex conjugate of the vectors and the matrices are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is clearly consistent with the guiding principle @xmath because
@xmath .

We have following properties which relates the transpose, hermitian
conjugate and the complex conjugate.

(Prop) (1) @xmath , (2) @xmath .

(Proof) These properties can be verified by noting that the hermitian
conjugate of the hermitian conjugate gives back the original quantity,
which can be readily verified by definition.

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath . In the last equality, we have utilized the fact that, for a
    supermatrix, @xmath , which can be readily verified from the
    explicit form of the complex conjugate ( A.47 ).

This completes the proof of the above properties. (Q.E.D.)

Now we are ready to answer the question : what do we mean by ’a
supermatrix is real ?’ . In considering physics, we must take into
account the reality condition. We utilize supermatrices in the context
of expressing the action of superstring theory, the action must be real,
and we are required to solidify the definition of the reality of a
supermatrix.

(Def) A supermatrix @xmath is real @xmath @xmath is a mapping from a
real vector to a real vector .

This statement is equivalent to, for the above definition of complex
conjugate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be verified by noting the starting guiding principle that
@xmath is designed to satisfy @xmath . If @xmath is satisfied, @xmath is
a real vector if @xmath is real, because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relationship ( A.48 ) tells us the conditions for the components of
@xmath to satisfy. Noting the explicit form of complex conjugate ( A.47
), we can derive @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , id est,

-   @xmath should be real.

-   @xmath should be pure imaginary.

## Appendix B Calculation of the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients

This appendix is devoted to introducing the basic technique of computing
the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients in the heat kernel expansion. There are
a number of ways to compute the coefficients, and here we focus on the
calculation based on the Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula. We consider
the general elliptic differential operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this section, we consider the @xmath -dimensional spacetime, and the
indices @xmath run over @xmath . These indices are allocated for the
curved spacetime.

We consider the trace of the large @xmath matrices in terms of the heat
kernel. The trace of the operators are expressed using the complete
system as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the bracket @xmath and @xmath satisfies @xmath . However, it is
difficult to consider the trace of a general operator, and we regard the
operator as the sum of the first term of ( B.1 ) and the perturbation
around it. This is a famous procedure, and the perturbation is expressed
in terms of the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients.

It is well known that the Green function is computed to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, its trace is easily derived as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, the heat kernel expansion of the general elliptic
operator ( B.1 ) is expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

These coefficients @xmath are called ”the Seeley-de-Witt coefficients”.
( B.4 ) trivially gives @xmath . However, the other coefficients give
nontrivial results. In the following, we derive the first order @xmath
for the general elliptic operator ( B.1 ).

To this end, we divide @xmath as @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

From now on, we compute the exponential @xmath via the
Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula, while the computation is rather
involved:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since we know that @xmath , the quantity in question is computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Before we enter the computation of the quantity @xmath , we summarize
the formula of the differentiation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.12)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### Computation of @xmath

We start with the computation of the easiest case:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, the trace is obtained by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Computation of @xmath

We next go on to a bit more complicated case, and we compute the
operator @xmath itself:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the trace is computed to be, with the help of the formulae (
B.13 ),

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

##### Computation of @xmath

We compute the operator @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the trace is computed as

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

##### Computation of @xmath

The next job is the computation of the term @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.20)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The trace is thus

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.21)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

##### Computation of @xmath

We next compute the commutator @xmath . From now on, the computation
becomes more complicated than before, and we give only the trace:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.22)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

##### Computation of @xmath

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.23)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

##### Computation of @xmath

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (B.24)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Summing up these terms altogether, we obtain the general form of the
first-order coefficient @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Especially, the Seeley-de-Witt coefficient of the Laplace Beltrami
operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

is important on the practical ground. This amounts to @xmath and @xmath
, in the general form ( B.1 ). Plugging this into the general formula of
@xmath ( B.25 ), we obtain the following important result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar of the spacetime metric. This result is
used in the context of the superstring theory in deriving the Weyl
anomaly and the corresponding Liouville action.

##### Derivation of (4.23)

With the above idea in mind, let us derive the result ( 4.23 ) for the
simplest example of the calculation in our case. We expand the
differential operator @xmath given by ( LABEL:AZ2expansionD ) around
@xmath . Namely, we express @xmath as @xmath , and perform a
perturbative expansion around @xmath . The heat kernel for @xmath is
given by @xmath . Here, we identify the field @xmath with the vielbein,
and we expand this around the flat background metric as @xmath , where
@xmath . Then, @xmath is more explicitly expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now, we are interested in the mass term of the vector fields @xmath . In
the Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula ( LABEL:cbh ), only the terms
@xmath and @xmath contribute to their mass terms. Now, we have a close
look at these two contribution.

For @xmath , only the elements of the rank-0 gamma matrices contribute
to the heat kernel, because the trace @xmath for the @xmath gamma
matrices projects out the higher-rank gamma matrices. Therefore, the
contribution to the mass term is clearly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the constant @xmath comes from the trace @xmath . We next compute
the effect of @xmath . This time, the higher-rank terms of @xmath
contribute, because the product of the gamma matrices survives. The
relevant terms are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the omission of the irrelevant terms. This gives
the contribution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.30)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have utilized the formula ( B.11 ) for @xmath . We obtain the
mass term ( 4.23 ) in question by the sum of ( B.29 ) and ( B.30 ).

## Appendix C Basic knowledge for the numerical simulation of the matrix
model

This appendix is devoted to introducing the basic knowledge of the Monte
Carlo simulation of the matrix model. While the following ideas can be
readily applied to the QCD, the programming for the matrix model is much
simpler than for the quantum field theory.

### c.1 Review of the Monte Carlo simulation

The Monte Carlo simulation plays an extremely important role in the
numerical simulation. In many cases, the analytical computation may be
too complicated to handle. Let us think about the four-dimensional
10,000-site lattice gauge theory. This system has 40,000 sites.
Therefore, even for the simplest @xmath gauge theory, we have to compute
the sum of the @xmath configurations. The analytical computation of the
partition function is almost impossible and this leads us to resort to
the numerical treatment.

To put it simply, the fundamental idea of the Monte Carlo simulation is
to produce the equilibrium ensemble artificially. In the case of the
matrix model, the state @xmath is identified with the element of the
@xmath matrices; namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the quantum field theory, @xmath of course corresponds to the gauge
field configuration @xmath . Since the sequential integral is
represented as @xmath , the partition function is rewritten as @xmath .
In the Monte Carlo simulation, we derive the configuration @xmath that
complies with the Boltzmann probability

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To this end, we consider the following Markov process. Namely, the
probability to transform from the configuration @xmath to the new one
@xmath depends only on the state @xmath and @xmath . This probability
never depends on the previous history @xmath . In this sense, this
probability is denoted as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

since the probability is the function of only @xmath and @xmath . The
following ”detailed balance condition” is a vital constraint on the
Boltzmann distribution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the transformation complying with the detailed balance condition, we
have the following two crucial properties:

1.  An equilibrium sequence of the state transforms into another
    equilibrium state.

2.  A nonequilibrium sequence approaches to the equilibrium state.

It is easy to prove the first statement. While it is trivial, we recall
the following properties of the probabilities. Firstly, @xmath .
Secondly, when @xmath is obtained from @xmath through the Markov process
and @xmath is the probability for the ensemble @xmath , we have @xmath .
The first property is verified by taking the sum of the both hand sides
of ( C.4 ) with respect to @xmath . Now, the previous state @xmath
complies with the Boltzmann distribution @xmath . Then, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the newly emerging state also complies with the Boltzmann
distribution.

The second property is substantiated by defining the distance of the two
ensembles @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the distance from the Boltzmann distribution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

This implies that the distance from the Boltzmann state is smaller as we
iterate the Markov process obeying the detailed balance condition.

There are two major algorithms that satisfy the detailed balance
condition. One is the heat bath algorithm. The heat bath algorithm is
used when we have a clear correspondence between the uniform random
number and the configuration of the fields. In this case, the
probability to transform to the configuration @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this process, the probability @xmath depends only on the new
configuration, and does not even depend on the previous state. It is
trivial that this satisfies the detailed balance condition. In analyzing
the matrix model, we resort to the heat bath algorithm. We postpone the
explicit example to the subsequent sections for the matrix model
simulation.

The other is the Metropolis algorithm. Firstly, we choose the
configuration @xmath at random. Then, we compute the difference @xmath .
We adopt the new state at the probability @xmath . Namely, the
probability is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.9)
  -- -- -- -------

We take a uniform random number @xmath . When @xmath we adopt the new
configuration @xmath , and otherwise we jettison the new configuration
@xmath and keep the status quo. It is easy to verify that the Metropolis
algorithm also satisfies the detailed balance condition, by noting that
the probability for the inverse transformation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The advantage of the Metropolis algorithm is that it can be applied to
more various systems. When it is impossible to build the heat bath
algorithm, the Metropolis algorithm is here to stay. A good example is
the supersymmetric matrix model. When the model has fermions, we often
use the hybrid Monte Carlo simulation. It is impossible to handle the
Grassmann numbers numerically. Therefore, if we are to treat the model
equipped with the fermion, we must integrate out the fermion
analytically. Then, we evaluate the Pfaffian composed of the bosonic
fields with the numerical method.

### c.2 Simulation of the quadratic matrix model

We first start with the simplest example of the matrix model. While it
is a very simple toy model, we scrutinize this case in full detail
because this is the heart of the heat bath algorithm of the more
complicated matrix models. We deal with the following quadratic matrix
model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is an @xmath hermitian matrix, and this model is invariant
under the @xmath unitary transformation. Its path integral is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analytically, the propagator of this matrix model is evaluated as
follows ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The result ( C.13 ) is applicable to the case @xmath .
Here, we touch on the propagator for the @xmath case. This can be
derived from ( C.13 ) by subtracting the trace part. Namely, we replace
@xmath with @xmath . The propagator @xmath is computed as

@xmath

Therefore, the Feynman rule is replaced for @xmath case by

@xmath

:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof of this propagator goes as follows. We note that, due to the
hermiticity of @xmath , the trace is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We separate @xmath into the real and the imaginary part as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are real c-number. The diagonal parts are real
numbers, and they are rewritten using the real numbers @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the quadratic term is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivation of the propagator reduces to the simple Gaussian
integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath survives only for @xmath .

-   For @xmath ( @xmath ), we note the following two results. Firstly,
    @xmath is shown to vanish as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (C.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here, (*) does not contribute ab initio, since this is a linear term
    of each @xmath and @xmath . Secondly, we note that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (C.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    survives (namely when @xmath ).

This completes the proof of the Feynman rule ( C.13 ).

Using the Feynman rule ( C.13 ), we can easily derive the following
vacuum expectation values:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next go into the numerical treatment of this matrix model, by means
of the heat bath algorithm. The rewriting of the action ( C.17 ) plays a
crucial role in the analysis. The advantage is that all @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are decoupled. Therefore, in the heat bath algorithm, we can
update each of these real numbers independently. Recall that, in the
heat bath algorithm ( C.8 ), the probability for the new configuration
depends only on the new configuration. Now, the partition function is
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for example, the new configuration of @xmath complies with the
following probability distribution.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is normalized so that @xmath . Namely, the updating of the
quantities @xmath all reduces to the Gaussian distribution. The process
of updating the matrix elements can be divided into the following three
steps.

##### Generation of the uniform random number

Firstly, we introduce the numerical method to generate the sequence of
the pseudo-random number. A simple way is the ”congruence method”. We
generate the sequence of the random numbers @xmath by the following
recursive formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial term @xmath should be given by hand as a random seed. When
we normalize this sequence as @xmath , we obtain a uniform pseudo-random
number [0,1]. Especially, it is known that we obtain a sensible
pseudo-random sequence by taking @xmath and @xmath . The drawback of the
congruence method is the price of its simplicity. This random sequence
has too short a cycle. However, this is not so problematic so long as we
undergo the simulation of the matrix model, while this is a serious
problem for the QCD simulation.

##### Generation of the Gaussian distribution

We next introduce the way to generate the Gaussian distribution from the
uniform random numbers, generated in the previous step. We take two
independent uniform random numbers @xmath . Then, we introduce the
quantity @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The probability distribution of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next introduce the quantities @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

We discern that this complies with the Gaussian distribution as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Especially when @xmath , @xmath and @xmath obey the normal Gaussian
distribution.

##### Updating of the matrix elements

Now that we introduce the random number complying the Gaussian
distribution, we update each of the matrix elements @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath by the Gaussian distribution. When we finish updating all of them
once, this means that we have completed one sweep. Then, we reiterate
the sweeps until the system is sufficiently thermalized.

### c.3 Simulation of the quartic matrix model

We next investigate the @xmath matrix model. This model has a lot of
lessons in treating the IIB matrix model and its extensions. The action
is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to perform the heat bath algorithm of this matrix model, we
introduce the auxiliary field @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and the auxiliary field @xmath is an @xmath hermitian
matrix. It is easy to verify that the action ( C.30 ) reduces to ( C.29
) by integrating out @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The idea to update the quantities @xmath and @xmath is similar to that
of the quadratic case, and we proceed rather quickly. We rewrite the
elements of @xmath as

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.31)
  -- -- -- --------

In this way, the action @xmath is written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following, @xmath @xmath , @xmath and @xmath @xmath denote the
real c-numbers that obey the normal Gaussian distribution.

We next update the elements of the matrix @xmath . To this end, we
extract the dependence of @xmath on each component @xmath . Firstly, the
dependence on the diagonal part @xmath is extracted as follows. In the
following (up to ( C.47 )), we sometimes do not take a summation with
respect to the duplicate indices.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath denotes the terms independent of @xmath . We omit them
because these do not concern the updating of @xmath Therefore, the
diagonal parts @xmath are updated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next go on to the updating of @xmath , whose dependence is extracted
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This leads us to update the nondiagonal parts @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the algorithm of updating the matrix elements. However,
we must recall that this matrix model is unbounded below. The
eigenvalues near the origin is stable only for the large- @xmath limit,
and only metastable for the finite @xmath .

The function @xmath has extrema at @xmath , at which @xmath . Therefore,
the origin is barriered by the potential with the height @xmath . For
the large- @xmath limit, this barrier prevents the eigenvalues from
dissipating outside the potential, and the system is kept finite. In [
61 ] , the following vacuum expectation value is computed analytically
in the large- @xmath limit for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the parameter @xmath gives the support of the eigenvalue
distribution. Namely, the eigenvalues are distributed only in the region
@xmath . More accurately, the eigenvalue distribution is also derived as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is normalized as @xmath . We delegate the detailed
derivation to [ 61 ] .

However, for the finite @xmath , the height of the potential barrier is
also finite, thus we see the divergence in the course of updating the
eigenvalues.

Namely, when the eigenvalues surpass the potential barrier, we see an
avalanche of the eigenvalues rolling off and off the potential. This is
what happens in the course of the divergence of the system. In order to
evade the divergence, we need some regularization. Here, we utilize the
same regularization trick as for the research of the Weingarten model [
64 ] . Namely, when any one of the eigenvalues surpasses the potential
barrier @xmath , we take back the whole system several @xmath steps.

In explicitly writing our code, we store the history of several previous
steps for the matrix elements of @xmath . When the eigenvalues happen to
cordon the potential barrier, we recall the record of the history, and
take back several steps (practically, around @xmath steps). In this way,
we evade the divergence for finite @xmath . Here, we plot the numerical
result based on the heat bath algorithm for the quantity @xmath for
@xmath .

### c.4 Simulation of the bosonic IIB matrix model with the Chern-Simons
term

We next introduce the algorithm for the IIB matrix model with the
Chern-Simons term. In this section, we define the action as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Namely, we take the @xmath in the action ( 2.111 ) to be @xmath . When
we set @xmath , this is of course identical to the bosonic IIB matrix
model, which has been scrutinized in [ 13 ] . There is not so big a
difference from the bosonic IIB matrix model, because the Chern-Simons
term is nothing but a linear term with respect to each @xmath .

We define this matrix model in the @xmath -dimensional Euclidean space,
and the indices @xmath run over @xmath . The following argument is
applicable to the bosonic IIB matrix model without the Chern-Simons term
(namely when @xmath ) for an arbitrary dimensions @xmath (the even
@xmath is also acceptable) ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 The path integral of the
two-dimensional bosonic IIB matrix model (without the Chern-Simons term)

@xmath

is easily shown to diverge [ 24 ] for any size of the matrices @xmath .
When we diagonalize @xmath as @xmath , the diagonal parts of @xmath
clearly do not contribute to the action. However, in the measure of the
path integral

@xmath

the integral for the diagonal parts of @xmath runs vacuously. This
causes the divergence of the path integral. . For the bosonic IIB matrix
model without the Chern-Simons term, the readers are to ignore the
Chern-Simons term in the following argument.

The action ( C.38 ) is also analyzed via the heat bath algorithm.
Firstly, we note that the quartic commutator in ( C.38 ) is rewritten as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (C.39)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , and these are hermitian matrices because these are
anti-commutators of @xmath . This leads us to introduce the auxiliary
fields @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath are hermitian matrices, and satisfy @xmath . @xmath is
defined only for @xmath . Of course, the action ( LABEL:IIBfspaux ) is
equivalent to ( C.38 ) after we integrate out @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the matrices @xmath are updated as

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.41)
  -- -- -- --------

We next update the matrices @xmath . To this end, we extract the
dependence of the action ( LABEL:IIBfspaux ) on each component of @xmath
. To this end, we rewrite the action ( LABEL:IIBfspaux ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The difference between the pure bosonic IIB matrix model and the model
with the Chern-Simons term only comes in the definition of @xmath .
Otherwise, both cases go totally in the same way.

Using the rewriting ( C.42 ), we first update the diagonal part @xmath .
( C.42 ) is further rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the diagonal parts @xmath are updated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next update the nondiagonal parts @xmath , whose dependence is now
extracted as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the nondiagonal part @xmath is updated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the algorithm for the heat bath algorithm for the bosonic
IIB matrix model with the Chern-Simons term. In order to corroborate the
legitimacy of the code, it is useful to exploit the following relation
coming from the Schwinger-Dyson equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the basis of the @xmath Lie algebra and satisfies the
following identities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrices @xmath are expanded in terms of @xmath as @xmath . This
leads to the following identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

At the last equality, we utilize the tracelessness of the @xmath Lie
algebra (namely, @xmath ).

Recalling the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we rewrite the Schwinger-Dyson equation ( C.48 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This implies that the vacuum expectation value of the following quantity
is analytically computed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

### c.5 Jackknife (binning) method

Finally, we introduce the jackknife method to estimate the errorbar of
the quantities obtained by the numerical simulation. Now, we have a
sample of independent measurements of a primary quantity @xmath . The
measured samples are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sample average is simply defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we define the jackknife average . We exclude one of the sets
@xmath in taking the average:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variance of the jackknife estimators can be obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the average @xmath is trivially equivalent to the average
@xmath . We can verify @xmath in the following way.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now, @xmath is an unbiased estimator of the variance :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we explain the jackknife binning. This method is utilized when
@xmath ’s have correlations. Especially, the configurations generated by
the Markov process are not statistically independent. This poses the
problem of the ”autocorrelation”. In coping with this problem, we use
the jackknife binning. We consider the following bins:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose one bin contains @xmath elements, and there are @xmath bins.
Then, we take the average for each bin as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath runs over @xmath . We take the variance for these @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath . This variance depends on the number of the elements
in one bin @xmath , and this variance increases with @xmath and we
finally see the plateau.

To illustrate this process, let us take one simple example. We have the
data

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.62)
  -- -- -- --------

and we construct the bin as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Namely, we define the average
for each bin as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The average is of course @xmath . The variance is computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The process in taking the plateau is too delicate to delegate to a
computer, and we usually judge the plateau by hand.