##### Acknowledgements. I have been fortunate to receive support from a
number of people during my years in Princeton. It is a pleasure to
acknowledge them here. My advisor, Phillip A. Griffiths, has been a
generous source of support and mathematical wisdom. I have benefited
greatly from his skilled guidance and superb insight. The many
discussions I had with Ivan Sterling during a visit to the University of
Toledo helped to place my project in a larger perspective, which was
important. Chuu-Lian Terng and Ian McIntosh also imparted to me
excellent advice and suggestions. I met regularly with my fellow student
Julianna Tymoczko for rigorous and detailed discussions, which proved
most helpful. My parents, sister Josie, grandmother and Uncle Roger did
not allow a detail as small as the Pacific Ocean to obstruct their love
and support, and by these my life has always been enriched. Last but not
least, I wish to thank Dargan Frierson and my friends at Princeton,
whose presence made my time here ever so much more enjoyable.
\dedication To Mum and Dad

## Chapter 1 Introduction

A map @xmath between Riemannian manifolds is harmonic if it is critical
for the energy functional @xmath , where @xmath is the norm on @xmath
induced from the Riemannian metrics on @xmath and @xmath . Examples of
harmonic maps include geodesics, harmonic functions and holomorphic and
antiholomorphic maps between Kähler manifolds. If @xmath is an isometric
immersion, then it is critical for the energy functional if and only if
it is critical for the area functional; hence the relevance of harmonic
maps to Plateau’s problem. When @xmath is a surface, the harmonic map
equations are invariant under conformal changes in the domain metric.
Thus a conformal map of @xmath is harmonic precisely when its image is a
minimal surface. The conformal invariance also means that one can
consider harmonic maps of a Riemann surface.

Harmonic maps from a Riemann surface to a compact Lie group or symmetric
space are of particular interest. One reason for this is their
relationship with the important Yang-Mills equations of mathematical
physics. The harmonic map equations are then locally the self-dual
Yang-Mills equations on @xmath with signature @xmath , invariant under
translation in the last two variables. Physicists study harmonic maps of
@xmath and @xmath in order to gain insight into the Yang-Mills
equations. Harmonic maps of surfaces also arise in the study of surfaces
of geometric interest. For example, the theorem of Ruh and Vilms [ 13 ]
asserts that a surface has constant mean curvature precisely when its
Gauss map is harmonic. Notice that the Gauss map is then a harmonic map
to @xmath , and hence to @xmath . Similar characterizations exist for
both Willmore surfaces and surfaces of constant negative Gauss curvature
[ 2 , 11 ] .

The last twenty-five years have seen an explosion of interest in this
area. A major theme of this research has been the “classification” of
harmonic maps. A series of papers (e.g. [ 6 , 7 , 15 , 16 , 14 , 5 ] )
gave descriptions of harmonic maps from @xmath to various symmetric
spaces in terms of an algebraic curve in an auxiliary complex manifold.
Hitchin [ 10 ] showed that harmonic maps from a 2-torus (with some
complex structure @xmath ) to the 3-sphere (with standard metric) also
enjoy an algebro-geometric description. Underlying this is the idea [ 12
, 17 , 18 , 14 ] that by the insertion of a parameter into the harmonic
map equations, they can be reformulated as a family of equations of a
particularly pleasant form, namely as equations of Lax type. These
equations linearise on the Jacobian of a hyperelliptic curve, called the
spectral curve [ 9 , 3 ] . Thus to a harmonic map @xmath there
corresponds a hyperelliptic curve. Hitchin also proved that if one
begins with a hyperelliptic curve with certain additional data, one can
construct a torus @xmath and a harmonic map @xmath . Hence in order to
find harmonic tori in the 3-sphere, one seeks hyperelliptic curves
supporting the requisite additional data. Not surprisingly, this is not
a trivial problem. Hitchin proved (case-by-case) that for each @xmath ,
there is a torus @xmath and a harmonic map @xmath whose spectral curve
has genus @xmath . I show that for each @xmath , there are conformal
harmonic maps of tori to @xmath whose spectral curves have genus @xmath
. The importance of conformality is that the conformal harmonic maps are
precisely those whose images are minimal surfaces. The precise
algebro-geometric statement is given below.

Given a curve @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , let

-   @xmath be the projection to the @xmath -plane,

-   @xmath be the hyperelliptic involution @xmath ,

-   @xmath be the antiholomorphic involution, @xmath , where we choose
    the square root so that @xmath fixes the points with @xmath ,

-   @xmath be a curve in @xmath joining the two points in @xmath , and

-   @xmath a curve in @xmath joining the two points in @xmath .

Then for each genus @xmath , there are countably many curves @xmath as
above possessing meromorphic differentials @xmath and @xmath that
satisfy the following conditions:

1.  @xmath and @xmath have double poles at @xmath , and are holomorphic
    elsewhere. The principal parts of @xmath and @xmath are linearly
    independent over @xmath . (The ratio of these gives the conformal
    type @xmath of the torus.)

2.  @xmath and @xmath satisfy the symmetry conditions @xmath , @xmath ,
    and the reality conditions @xmath , @xmath .

3.  The integrals of @xmath and @xmath over @xmath , @xmath , and over a
    basis for the homology of @xmath , are integers.

The last condition is by far the most difficult to satisfy; it demands
that transcendental objects (the integrals) be integers. This places a
severe restriction on the hyperelliptic curve.

My approach to this problem follows the work of Ercolani, Knörrer and
Trubowitz [ 8 ] , in which they prove that for each even @xmath , there
is a constant mean curvature torus in @xmath whose spectral curve has
genus @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Algebro-Geometric Description

In his paper [ 10 ] , Hitchin showed that specifying a conformal
structure @xmath on @xmath , and a harmonic map @xmath (other than a
branched conformal map to a totally geodesic @xmath ) is equivalent to
specifying certain algebro-geometric data, described in theorems 2.1 and
2.2 below. He in fact gave an algebro-geometric description of harmonic
sections of an @xmath principal bundle over @xmath , and then specified
the conditions the data must satisfy in order to correspond to the
special case of a harmonic mapping. The purpose of this section is to
give an expository account of Hitchin’s work, outlining the ideas, but
omitting most proofs.

Given Riemannian manifolds @xmath and @xmath , the energy @xmath of
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the metric on @xmath induced from @xmath and @xmath . We
say that @xmath is harmonic if whenever @xmath is a one-parameter family
of smooth maps with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a surface, then the harmonicity of @xmath depends only on
the conformal class of the metric @xmath , and so we can speak of
harmonic maps of Riemann surfaces. If in addition @xmath is conformal,
then it is harmonic if and only if @xmath is a minimal surface.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface, @xmath a compact Lie group with
bi-invariant metric, and @xmath a harmonic map. We denote the Lie
algebra @xmath of @xmath by @xmath . On @xmath we define the
Maurer-Cartan form @xmath to be the unique @xmath -valued 1-form on
@xmath that is left-invariant and acts as the identity on @xmath .
@xmath satisfies the Maurer-Cartan equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for a linear group @xmath is given by @xmath . Given any smooth map
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , we may pull back the Maurer-Cartan form
to obtain a @xmath -valued 1-form @xmath on @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Conversely, if @xmath is a simply-connected and connected open subset of
@xmath , then given a @xmath -valued 1-form @xmath on @xmath satisfying
the Maurer-Cartan equation, we may integrate it to obtain a smooth map
@xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is defined only up to left
translation. Since the metric on @xmath is left invariant, one expects
that there is a condition characterising those @xmath that correspond to
harmonic maps, and we calculate it below.

For a one-parameter family @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Writing @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so we see that @xmath is harmonic if and only if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equations ( 2.1 ) and ( 2.2 ) may be rewritten in terms of natural
connections on @xmath . @xmath has connections @xmath and @xmath
corresponding to its trivialisations by left and right translation,
respectively. These are related by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Levi-Civita connection @xmath is the average of the two:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will use the same notation for the pull-back of these connections to
@xmath , and we may rewrite ( 2.1 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Denoting the @xmath -component of @xmath by @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that ( 2.2 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 2.4 ) again, equations ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.5 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have also that @xmath is flat, and hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations may be considered as taking place in a trivial principal
@xmath -bundle over @xmath , as follows. The trivial principal @xmath
-bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with projection @xmath and action @xmath has the obvious trivial
connection, which we shall denote by @xmath , along with the trivial
connection @xmath . More explicitly, writing @xmath and @xmath for the
connection @xmath -forms of @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Pulling back under the map @xmath , we obtain a trivial principal bundle
@xmath , with connections @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath . Again
we may write @xmath , and can consider @xmath to be a section of @xmath
, where @xmath is the canonical bundle of holomorphic @xmath -forms on
@xmath .

Hitchin seeks solutions to the pair of equations

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

for a connection @xmath in a principal @xmath -bundle @xmath over @xmath
, and section @xmath of @xmath , called a Higgs field . If these data
come from a harmonic map @xmath , then one additionally has that the
connections

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are trivial. This is also a sufficient condition for the data @xmath to
come from a harmonic map as if @xmath , @xmath as defined above are
trivial then the difference between these trivialisations is a map
@xmath , and equations ( LABEL:eq: ) tell us that @xmath is harmonic. It
is however fruitful to first study general solutions to this pair of
equations, and then focus on those corresponding to harmonic maps. The
equations ( LABEL:eq: ) are locally the self-dual Yang-Mills equations
on @xmath with signature @xmath , invariant under translation in the
last two variables. The equations ( LABEL:eq: ) can be made more
conducive to analysis by the introduction of a parameter @xmath , termed
the spectral parameter . An easy check reveals that equations (
LABEL:eq: ) are equivalent to the statement that for every @xmath , the
connections

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

are flat.

We shall henceforth narrow our focus to the case where @xmath is a torus
with some conformal structure @xmath and @xmath . Then ( 2.7 ) defines a
family of flat @xmath connections. @xmath is a natural and simple case
of interest. Ultimately we will assign an algebraic curve to each
solution of equations ( LABEL:eq: ); the fact that @xmath is a rank one
symmetric space enables us to describe the solution using a single
curve, and the fact that the elements of @xmath are @xmath matrices
gives that this curve is hyperelliptic. We refer the reader to [ 4 ] for
a study of harmonic maps of complex @xmath -tori into symmetric spaces,
and note in particular their result that any non-conformal harmonic map
of a (real) 2-torus into a rank one symmetric space is of finite type.
The restriction to tori is however more essential; an integrable systems
approach to harmonic maps of higher genus Riemann surfaces has so far
proven elusive. In what follows we will make use of the fact that the
fundamental group @xmath is abelian.

Several geometrically interesting properties of a harmonic map can be
described in terms of the connection @xmath and Higgs field @xmath . In
particular, @xmath is branched conformal if and only if @xmath (with
branch points the zeros of @xmath ) and @xmath maps to a totally
geodesic @xmath if and only if @xmath is reducible to a @xmath
connection. This latter condition is also equivalent to the existence of
a gauge transformation @xmath leaving @xmath invariant and satisfying
@xmath , @xmath .

We have a holomorphic family of flat @xmath connections on @xmath , and
so we study the holonomy of these connections. We shall consider them as
connections in a vector bundle @xmath over @xmath with the @xmath
structure exhibited by a quaternionic structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a symplectic form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a holomorphic section of End @xmath with trace zero.

In the case where @xmath , @xmath , there are additional holomorphic
invariants that we may associate to the solution. We then have @xmath ,
and may define a holomorphic line bundle @xmath by @xmath . Thus @xmath
, so we may consider @xmath as a holomorphic section @xmath of @xmath .
It is natural to ask whether @xmath preserves the sub-bundle @xmath ;
the obstruction being the holomorphic section @xmath of @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any local holomorphic section of @xmath . If @xmath ,
then the extension of @xmath defining @xmath is non-trivial. The
quadratic differential @xmath is then a constant multiple of the second
fundamental form of @xmath .Assume additionally that @xmath is
irreducible. Then @xmath is not identically zero, so deg @xmath . If deg
@xmath , then @xmath vanishes identically, and hence so does @xmath .
But from @xmath we have then that @xmath is flat, so is given by a
representation of @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is abelian, we see
that @xmath reduces to a @xmath connection. Thus deg @xmath , and @xmath
is nowhere vanishing. Hence a branched conformal harmonic map @xmath
whose image does not lie in a totally geodesic @xmath is in fact a
conformal immersion.

Take @xmath and generators @xmath and @xmath for @xmath that are
conjugate to @xmath and @xmath respectively. For each @xmath , denote by
@xmath and @xmath the holonomy of @xmath around @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and write @xmath , @xmath . Note that the conjugacy
classes of @xmath and @xmath are independent of the choice of base point
@xmath . Denoting by @xmath and @xmath the eigenvalues of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This defines a 2-sheeted branched cover of @xmath , which we shall
compactify to a cover of @xmath . The resulting curve is algebraic:

###### Proposition 2.1

For each @xmath , let @xmath be the holonomy of @xmath around @xmath ,
and @xmath . The function @xmath has finitely many odd order zeros in
@xmath .

Unsurprisingly, the proof of this result employs the fact that an
elliptic operator on a compact domain has but a finite-dimensional
kernel. It is worth remarking that it also utilises the full
two-dimensional compactness of the torus, rather than the mere
one-dimensional compactness of the closed curve @xmath .

If the holonomy is identically trivial, @xmath (possibily after
tensoring with a flat @xmath -bundle), then this construction will not
yield a two-sheeted covering, and cannot be described using the methods
of [ 10 ] . However this occurs if and only if the data @xmath
correspond to a conformal map into a totally geodesic @xmath , and such
mappings can be described using divisors on @xmath . We shall assume
henceforth that we are not in this trivial case.

Importantly, the branched cover of @xmath defined by the holonomy @xmath
is the same as that defined by @xmath , this being is a consequence of
the fact that the fundamental group of the torus @xmath is abelian. The
next step is to study the behaviour of the holonomy of @xmath as @xmath
and @xmath , and thus determine the branching behaviour of the
compactified curve.

Now @xmath is an @xmath connection, and thus @xmath . Since @xmath ,
this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the behaviour of the holonomy as @xmath is determined by that as
@xmath . Moreover, one can show that the eigenspaces of the holonomy
matrices are determined simply by the holomorphic structure of @xmath ,
and then use the regularity of this structure to study the holonomy in
the limit @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.2

Let @xmath be a solution of ( LABEL:eq: ) with @xmath . For each @xmath
, we use @xmath and @xmath to denote the eigenvalues of the holonomy of
@xmath around @xmath and @xmath respectively. There is a punctured
neighbourhood of @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are even holomorphic functions.

###### Proposition 2.3

Let @xmath be a solution of ( LABEL:eq: ) with @xmath and @xmath
irreducible. There is a punctured neighbourhood of @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the quadratic invariant defined on page 2 .

With these propositions in mind, we define a smooth hyperelliptic curve
@xmath corresponding to each non-trivial solution @xmath of LABEL:eq: .
Let @xmath be the odd order zeros of @xmath .

1.  If @xmath , let @xmath be the curve

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  If @xmath , let @xmath be the curve

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the projection map @xmath .

By definition, @xmath and @xmath are well-defined functions on @xmath
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are meromorphic differentials whose only singularities are double poles
at @xmath , and which have no residues.

@xmath is the Riemann surface of the eigenvalues of the holonomy
matrices @xmath . It supports a natural line bundle for each @xmath ,
namely the bundle of eigenspaces of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the fundamental group @xmath is abelian, these eigenspaces are
independent of the choice of generator. This line bundle can be
naturally extended across @xmath to give a holomorphic line bundle
@xmath on @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.4

Let @xmath be the smooth hyperelliptic curve associated to a solution
@xmath of ( LABEL:eq: ). Then:

1.  @xmath has a real structure (i.e. an antiholomorphic involution)
    @xmath that commutes with @xmath and covers the real structure
    @xmath of @xmath .

2.   The hyperelliptic involution @xmath commutes with @xmath and has no
    real fixed points.

3.   The differentials @xmath and @xmath satisfy

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent over @xmath .

5.   For each @xmath , @xmath gives an isomorphism between @xmath and
    @xmath whose square is @xmath , so each @xmath is quaternionic with
    respect to the real structure @xmath .

6.   The periods of @xmath and @xmath are all integers.

The involution @xmath is the lift of @xmath that fixes the points in
@xmath . Using the fact that @xmath is unitary for @xmath on the unit
circle,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The most important condition in the Proposition above is the last one,
as the existence of meromorphic differentials with integral periods
places a stringent restriction on @xmath .

The algebraic curve that we shall associate to a harmonic map is a
possibly singular curve @xmath (called the spectral curve ) of which
@xmath is the normalisation. @xmath will reflect the geometry of the
eigenspaces of the holonomy rather than merely that of the eigenvalues.
We would like to be able to employ our algebro-geometric description to
study families of harmonic maps, and since the limit of a family of
smooth curves may be a singular one, it is sensible to allow spectral
curves to be singular. The spectral curve will also enable us to compute
the degree of the eigenspace bundle. Since @xmath has rank two, for
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath vanishes precisely at those points @xmath at which @xmath
and @xmath coincide as subspaces of @xmath . It necessarily vanishes at
the branch points of @xmath , though for those branch points other than
@xmath and @xmath , it may do so to some odd order @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath vanishes to order @xmath at @xmath and @xmath , and to order
@xmath at non-branch points @xmath , @xmath of @xmath .

Then @xmath is described by the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Our definition of @xmath uses a particular eigenspace bundle @xmath ,
but since for @xmath , the eigenspaces of the holonomy matrices @xmath
and @xmath are related by parallel translation of @xmath , @xmath is in
fact independent of the choice of base point @xmath . It follows from
the definition of @xmath that for each @xmath , @xmath is defined as a
bundle over @xmath . Furthermore, from the adjunction formula we may
deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may then define a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given the real structure @xmath , we say that a holomorphic line bundle
@xmath on @xmath is real if there is an isomorphism @xmath whose square
gives multiplication by a positive scalar on @xmath . @xmath is
quaternionic if there is an isomorphism @xmath whose square gives
multiplication by a negative scalar on @xmath . The line bundles @xmath
are all quaternionic, and so if we fix @xmath , then for each @xmath ,
@xmath is real. In fact the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is linear , and so is a linear map of @xmath to a real torus in @xmath .
If @xmath , then this map is injective. There is a natural isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which enables us to reconstruct @xmath from the eigenspace bundles. The
space of quaternionic line bundles of degree @xmath is connected, and
the line bundles @xmath are non-special. The following is essentially
Theorem 8.1 of [ 10 ] .

###### Theorem 2.1

Let @xmath be a hyperelliptic curve @xmath of arithmetic genus @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the projection @xmath . Suppose @xmath satisfies:

1.  @xmath is real with respect to the real structure @xmath on @xmath .

2.  @xmath has no real zeros (i.e. no zeros on the unit circle @xmath ).

3.  @xmath has at most simple zeros at @xmath and @xmath .

4.   There exist differentials @xmath and @xmath of the second kind on
    @xmath with periods in @xmath .

5.  @xmath and @xmath have double poles at @xmath and @xmath and satisfy

    @xmath

    where @xmath is the hyperelliptic involution @xmath and @xmath is
    the real structure induced from @xmath .

6.   The principal parts of @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent
    over @xmath .

Then, for each point @xmath in the Picard variety of line bundles of
degree @xmath on @xmath which are quaternionic with respect to the real
structure @xmath , there is a solution of ( LABEL:eq: ) for a torus,
such that @xmath is the spectral curve of the solution and @xmath ,
@xmath the corresponding differentials. The solution is, moreover,
unique modulo gauge transformations and the operation of tensoring
@xmath by a flat @xmath -bundle. (Note that (2) implies that @xmath has
no fixed points and so by [ 1 ] quaternionic bundles of degree @xmath
exist.)

Begining with the spectral data @xmath , one may construct a solution
@xmath to ( LABEL:eq: ) by carefully reversing the steps outlined above.
For details, the reader is referred to [ 10 ] .

Given such data, we may calculate the eigenvalues of the holonomy using
the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

on @xmath . The solutions are unique only up to multiplication by a
constant, but if we demand that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

they are defined up to sign. By choosing @xmath satisfying ( 2.8 ) and (
2.9 ), we determine a solution @xmath of ( LABEL:eq: ) up to gauge
equivalence, that is, up to a diffeomorphism of the principal bundle
@xmath that covers the identity on @xmath and commutes with the action
of @xmath . As mentioned earlier, this solution corresponds to a
harmonic map if and only if the flat connections @xmath and @xmath are
trivial . Since they are in any case unitary, this occurs precisely when
@xmath and @xmath take the value 1 at all points in @xmath . Given such
a solution @xmath , let @xmath , @xmath be constant covariant sections
of @xmath with respect to the connections @xmath and @xmath
respectively. We define @xmath by @xmath . Thus @xmath is unaffected by
gauge transformations, but if we choose different covariant constant
sections @xmath , @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the map @xmath is well-defined modulo right and left actions of
@xmath , or modulo the action of @xmath on @xmath .

The following is Theorem 8.20 of [ 10 ] .

###### Theorem 2.2

Let @xmath be spectral data satisfying the conditions of Theorem 2.1 ,
where @xmath is given by @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be functions on
@xmath satisfying
@xmath and @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath determines a harmonic map from a torus to @xmath if and only
    if

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   The map is conformal if and only if @xmath .

3.   The torus maps to a totally geodesic 2-sphere if and only if @xmath
    is odd, @xmath is an even polynomial, and the point @xmath and the
    functions @xmath and @xmath on @xmath are invariant under @xmath ,
    where @xmath is the involution of @xmath defined by @xmath .

4.   The harmonic map is uniquely determined by @xmath modulo the action
    of @xmath on @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Conformal Maps

We prove the following theorem:

###### Theorem 3.1

For each integer @xmath there are countably many conformal harmonic
immersions from rectangular tori to @xmath whose spectral curves have
genus @xmath .

We in fact demonstrate the existence of spectral curves possessing an
additional symmetry, namely @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath . This
symmetry induces two holomorphic involutions on @xmath , which we
utilise by quotienting out by them. The resulting quotient curves @xmath
are our basic object of study, and we obtain differentials on @xmath by
pulling back differentials from @xmath . We will use proof by induction,
in which at each induction step the genera of @xmath increase by one,
and hence the genus @xmath of @xmath increases by two. Thus we divide
our proof into the even and odd genus cases. Our proofs extend the
methods of Ercolani, Knörrer and Trubowitz [ 8 ] , who showed that for
each even genus @xmath there is a constant mean curvature torus in
@xmath whose spectral curve has genus @xmath . (There is also a spectral
curve construction for constant mean curvature tori.)

### 3.1 Odd Genera

Let @xmath be the curve given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath that given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we assume that @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Let @xmath , @xmath denote the respective projections to the Riemann
sphere. (We shall henceforth generally omit the word “respective”.)
Construct @xmath as the fibre product of @xmath and @xmath , that is,
let @xmath , with the induced algebraic structure and the obvious
projection @xmath to @xmath . Notice then that @xmath is given by the
equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These identifications occur via the maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has genus @xmath and possesses the holomorphic involutions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The curves @xmath are the quotients of @xmath by these involutions, with
quotient maps @xmath . @xmath each possesses a real structure @xmath ,
characterised by the properties that it covers the involution @xmath of
@xmath and fixes the points in @xmath . These real structures are given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The cases @xmath and @xmath are similar, but the sign difference carries
through to future computations. For simplicity of exposition we assume
henceforth that @xmath . Then the corresponding real structure on @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Whilst our primary interest lies with curves @xmath as described above,
we consider also curves @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively, where we assume that @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and that
the sets @xmath are mutually disjoint.

Take @xmath as described above. Let @xmath be simple closed curves in
@xmath , and @xmath simple closed curves in @xmath , such that

1.  @xmath has winding number one around @xmath and @xmath , and winding
    number zero around the other branch points of @xmath ,

2.  for @xmath , @xmath has winding number one around @xmath and @xmath
    , and winding number zero around the other branch points of @xmath ,

3.  @xmath begins and ends at @xmath , has winding number one around
    @xmath and zero around @xmath , @xmath ,

4.  @xmath begins and ends at @xmath , and has winding number one around
    @xmath and each @xmath @xmath .

Choose lifts of the curves @xmath to @xmath and also of @xmath to @xmath
. Let @xmath denote the homology classes of these lifts. Denote by
@xmath the completions to canonical bases of @xmath . Choose open curves
@xmath , @xmath in @xmath covering the loops @xmath and @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the space of @xmath -tuples @xmath as above together
with the choices we have described. Let @xmath denote the subset of
@xmath such that (see figure 3.1 ):

1.  @xmath for @xmath ,

2.  for @xmath , @xmath is invariant under conjugation and intersects
    the real axis exactly twice, both times in the interval @xmath ,

3.  the lifts of @xmath to @xmath are chosen so that the point where
    @xmath intersects the @xmath -axis with positive orientation is
    lifted to a point where @xmath is negative,

4.  the lifts of @xmath to @xmath are chosen so that the point where
    @xmath intersects the @xmath -axis with positive orientation is
    lifted to a point in @xmath where @xmath is positive,

5.  @xmath , @xmath begin at points with @xmath .

For each @xmath there is a unique canonical basis @xmath , @xmath for
the homology of @xmath such that @xmath cover the homotopy classes of
loops @xmath shown in Figure 3.2 and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are also unique curves @xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that
@xmath ; they project to @xmath and @xmath of Figure 3.2 . Note that
@xmath connects the two points of @xmath with @xmath whilst @xmath
connects the two points of @xmath with @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the subgroups of @xmath generated by the @xmath
classes. Then modulo @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , we will define differentials @xmath on @xmath , and
show that for each @xmath there exists @xmath such that appropriate
integer multiples of @xmath and @xmath satisfy the conditions of
Hitchin’s correspondence. It is easier to argue this way than to perform
a similar argument directly on @xmath , for reasons that will become
clear.

Let @xmath and define @xmath on @xmath by:

1.  @xmath are meromorphic differentials of the second kind: their only
    singularities are double poles at @xmath , and they have no
    residues.

2.  @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

3.  As @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

(We shall generally denote the paths of integration @xmath simply by
@xmath and @xmath , as the point @xmath in question is usually clear
from the differential being integrated.) In view of the defining
conditions above, we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real, since then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given @xmath , there are real numbers @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath are differentials on @xmath satisfying the conditions of
Hitchin’s correspondence if and only if @xmath and @xmath represent
rational elements of @xmath and @xmath respectively.

###### Theorem 3.2

For each non-negative integer @xmath , there exists @xmath such that

1.  @xmath are pairwise distinct, as are @xmath .

2.   The map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    has invertible differential at @xmath .

This gives that the restriction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath to @xmath also has invertible differential at @xmath . Since
rationality is a dense condition, the Inverse Function Theorem then
implies that for each positive odd integer @xmath , there are countably
many spectral curves @xmath of genus @xmath each giving rise to a torus
@xmath and a branched minimal immersion @xmath . The conformal type of
the torus is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the principal part of @xmath at @xmath . Thus each
torus @xmath is rectangular.

In fact we shall prove a slightly stronger result, the extra strength
residing in a statement that arises naturally from an attempt to prove
Theorem 3.2 by induction on @xmath , and enables one to complete the
induction step. This statement is somewhat lengthy to formulate, and
will appear unmotivated at this juncture. Our approach is thus to
present an attempt to prove Theorem 3.2 by induction, and derive the
necessary modifications. The reader who wishes to view the modified
statement at this point is referred to page 3.3 .

Proof of Theorem 3.2 : We use induction upon @xmath . We shall begin
with the induction step, in order to formulate the “extra conditions”
mentioned above. Suppose then that @xmath has invertible differential at
@xmath . For @xmath , @xmath , we shall denote by @xmath the point of
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the point in @xmath with branch points

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We wish to show that for a generic @xmath and @xmath sufficiently small,
@xmath has invertible differential at @xmath . (Here “generic” means
“outside the zero set of a real-analytic function”.) Once we have
incorporated our “additional condition”, we shall achieve our aim by
considering the boundary case @xmath . Notice that choosing @xmath to
each have an additional branch point of multiplicity two on the interval
@xmath corresponds to choosing @xmath to have an additional branch point
of multiplicity two on the unit circle. For brevity of notation, we
shall write @xmath for @xmath .

Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is a real-analytic function of @xmath and for each @xmath we may
use the above formula to define it as a real-analytic function @xmath of
@xmath on the curve @xmath shown in figure 3.3 .

We will show that @xmath as @xmath along @xmath , by computing
asymptotics for each of the vectors in @xmath . The advantage of passing
to the quotient curves @xmath is the availability of this limiting
argument. The interval @xmath possesses a natural extension to a line
whereas the unit circle does not. We will also prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for generic @xmath , we will have that @xmath , and utilising

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

this gives that for @xmath sufficiently small, @xmath is invertible.

One simplification provided by choosing @xmath is that @xmath are the
respective normalisations of @xmath , with normalisation maps

@xmath

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whilst

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For each point @xmath , let @xmath be local coordinates on @xmath near
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whilst

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for @xmath near @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assumed that the @xmath are pairwise distinct, @xmath . Thus the
differentials @xmath are a basis for the holomorphic differentials on
@xmath , and we may define @xmath by the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.1

As @xmath along @xmath , the following asymptotic expressions hold:

1.  @xmath
    @xmath

2.  @xmath
    @xmath

3.   For @xmath ,
    @xmath , and
    @xmath

4.  @xmath
    @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

    @xmath

    @xmath

    @xmath

Proof of Lemma 3.1 : All but the last components of ( 1 )–( 4 ) are
applications of equations 3.3 and 3.4 . The last components of ( 1 )–( 4
) involve integrals over the curves @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
circle @xmath , transversed clockwise. For @xmath sufficiently large,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and similarly for @xmath , which easily gives the remainder of ( 1 )–( 4
).

( 5 ): We employ the notation @xmath to indicate @xmath . We will work
only with @xmath , but similar arguments apply to @xmath . For @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath small, we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are analytic functions satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Due to this accordance, we write simply @xmath for @xmath or @xmath .)
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath coincides with one of the @xmath , @xmath , then we
immediately see that the lift of @xmath to the normalisation @xmath of
@xmath is holomorphic. If @xmath does not equal any of the @xmath , then
we may again conclude that @xmath lifts to a holomorphic differential by
employing the observation that ( 3.10 ) for @xmath states that @xmath
has zero residue at @xmath , and hence @xmath . Equation ( 3.10 ) tells
us that this lift has zero @xmath -periods, and so is itself zero. For
@xmath then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To compute @xmath we use reciprocity with the holomorphic differential
@xmath on @xmath defined by @xmath
To simplify our notation, we write @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath denote
the polygon formed by cutting @xmath open along representatives of the
homology elements @xmath , and choose @xmath . Define a holomorphic
function @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Reciprocity gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 3.11 ) gives that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath is holomorphic, this implies that @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so this gives @xmath , (and @xmath , @xmath ) and hence by ( 3.13 ), we
have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

( 6 ): Using the fact that @xmath , a calculation gives that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has zero residue at @xmath .

Writing @xmath , then from equation ( 3.14 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence using equations ( 3.5 ) and ( 3.6 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can represent the homology classes @xmath , @xmath by loops whose
projections to lie in a fixed compact region @xmath that is independent
of @xmath . Then for @xmath sufficiently large and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and substituting these, together with ( 3.15 ), into ( 3.14 ), we obtain
that in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will thus obtain an asymptotic expression for @xmath by calculating
one for @xmath . To do this, we note that both @xmath and @xmath have
trivial @xmath -periods, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling the definition of @xmath from equations ( 3.8 ) and ( 3.9 ),
notice that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 3.18 ), ( 3.8 ), ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.19 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

proving all but the last component of ( 6 ).

To compute @xmath , we again use reciprocity with @xmath .
Differentiating ( 3.12 ), and using @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking residues at @xmath , and utilising

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus in order to obtain an asymptotic expression for @xmath , we first
obtain expressions for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We make the
assumption throughout that @xmath . We shall abuse notation and write
@xmath for @xmath , where

@xmath

is the normalisation map. From ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.16 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is moreover a differential of the second kind on @xmath whose
only singularity is a double pole at @xmath , and it approaches @xmath
as @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that res @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and ( 3.23 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so using ( 3.6 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This, along with ( 3.22 ) gives that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath , ( 3.20 ), ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.17 ) yield, for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For each @xmath , @xmath is independent of @xmath and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

But by ( 3.23 ) and ( 3.24 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the matrix on the right is invertible and has no dependence on
@xmath . ( 3.25 ) hence implies that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now have the asymptotics for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that we
desired earlier, and substituting them into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which upon substitution into ( 3.13 ) completes the proof of ( 6 ) .

@xmath

We now have asymptotic expressions for each row of the @xmath matrix
@xmath in ( 3.1 ), which we wish to show is non-singular in the limit as
@xmath along @xmath of figure 3.3 . The inductive assumption and Lemma
3.1 tell us that columns @xmath of the the first @xmath rows of @xmath
are linearly independent, and that its @xmath row @xmath is

@xmath

@xmath

Note that the two non-zero entries in this row have leading terms
differing only by multiplication by @xmath . We find a linear
combination of the rows of @xmath that equals @xmath

@xmath

where @xmath are defined in ( 3.28 ).

Our matrix is non-singular if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the limits are taken along @xmath . This is the “extra condition”
referred to earlier, and we will modify the statement we prove by
induction to ensure that it is satisfied. First, we find the linear
combination yielding this condition.

From Lemma 3.1 we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath

@xmath

By the induction hypothesis, there are unique @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus by ( 3.26 ) and Lemma 3.1 there are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath such
that

@xmath
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and similarly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so adding the appropriate multiple of @xmath to ( 3.29 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We are led therefore, to modify the statement we prove by induction to
include the assumption that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the limits are taken along @xmath . Of course this modification
needs to be such that it is preserved under the induction step. With
this in mind, we define @xmath by the condition that
@xmath

@xmath

and calculate the relationship between @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2

As @xmath along @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Proof of Lemma 3.2 : For @xmath sufficiently large, we may assume that
@xmath ,
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath , @xmath are determined by the (non-singular) system of
equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath we quickly see that @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath , so,
not surprisingly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The argument for @xmath is similar, and together they prove all but the
last components of the lemma above. For these, we again let @xmath
denote the circle @xmath , traversed clockwise. For @xmath sufficiently
large,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and similarly for @xmath .

@xmath

From Lemma 3.1 ,

@xmath
@xmath
@xmath

@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 3.30 ), and by Lemma 3.2 , we have that
@xmath and @xmath are defined by the equations

@xmath

@xmath

so

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.31 ) then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (3.32)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Defining @xmath to be the linear fractional transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

( 3.32 ) is the statement that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, we know that @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The statement then, that we prove by induction, is:

###### Theorem 3.3

For each positive integer @xmath and integer @xmath with @xmath there
exists @xmath such that

1.  @xmath , @xmath are pairwise distinct, as are @xmath , @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is spanned by the vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
    , @xmath ,

3.  @xmath , for @xmath .

For the convenience of the reader, we reiterate here the definitions of
many of the objects appearing in Theorem 3.3 , so that it may be read
immediately after the statement of Theorem 3.2 , without recourse to the
above arguments. Assume that ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of Theorem 3.3 hold for
@xmath . Then the differentials @xmath are a basis for the holomorphic
differentials on @xmath . Thus we may define @xmath by the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the linear fractional transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of Theorem 3.3 : Fix @xmath , and for @xmath suppose @xmath
satisfies the conditions of Theorem 3.3 . By the above arguments, the
set of @xmath such that

1.  for all @xmath , @xmath ,

2.  for @xmath , @xmath and

3.  for @xmath , @xmath

is dense in @xmath .

Take such a @xmath . Then @xmath satisfies Theorem 3.3 , where in ( 2 )
we replace @xmath by @xmath . Then for @xmath small, utilising ( 3.2 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we conclude that @xmath satisfies Theorem 3.3 . It remains to show the
existence of @xmath verifying ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of Theorem 3.3 , and such
that for no @xmath do we have @xmath .

#### 3.1.1 Genus One (@xmath)

We consider pairs @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively, where @xmath . Writing @xmath for the projections to , the
fibre product of these is the genus one curve @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.3

There exists a @xmath such that

1.  @xmath is spanned by the vectors @xmath and @xmath ,

2.   for all @xmath , @xmath .

Proof: The natural limit to consider is @xmath , i.e. @xmath , which
suggests setting @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , choose @xmath and @xmath as shown in figure 3.5 .

We write @xmath , where @xmath is defined by the condition @xmath .
Using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath , where @xmath is a path in @xmath joining the two points
with @xmath , and @xmath is one joining the two points with @xmath ,
both beginning at points with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so we see that condition (1) of Lemma 3.3 is satisfied for all @xmath ,
in other words for all @xmath .

We proceed then to calculate @xmath and @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Recall that @xmath , where @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting these and ( 3.33 ) into ( 3.42 ), one obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this and ( 3.33 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From ( 3.36 ), ( 3.38 ), ( 3.44 ) and ( 3.41 ) then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Upon multiplication of its third row by @xmath , its first column by
@xmath and its second column by @xmath this matrix becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , then recalling that @xmath are defined by the condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The linear fractional transformation @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so letting @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This has a unique fixed point ( @xmath ) and so is conjugate to a
translation, in fact denoting the map @xmath by @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is clearly false for all integers @xmath . Thus for @xmath
sufficiently small, the Lemma holds.

@xmath

### 3.2 Even Genera

Let @xmath be the curves given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we assume that the sets @xmath are mutually disjoint and that
@xmath for @xmath . Denote by @xmath the respective projections @xmath
to the Riemann sphere, and define a real structure @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be closed curves in @xmath , such that

1.  @xmath has winding number one around @xmath and @xmath , winding
    number zero around the other branch points of @xmath , and does not
    pass through @xmath or @xmath ,

2.  @xmath begins and ends at @xmath , has winding number one around
    @xmath and each @xmath ,
    @xmath ,

3.  @xmath begins and ends at @xmath , has winding number one around
    @xmath and each @xmath ,
    @xmath ,

Choose lifts of the curves @xmath to @xmath and denote the homology
classes of these lifts by @xmath . Choose also an open curve @xmath in
@xmath covering @xmath and an open curve @xmath in @xmath covering
@xmath . We write @xmath for the space of @xmath -tuples @xmath as above
together with the choices described, and let @xmath denote the subset of
@xmath such that (see figure 3.6 ):

1.  @xmath for @xmath ,

2.  @xmath intersects the real axis exactly twice, both times in the
    interval @xmath ,

3.  the lifts of @xmath to @xmath are chosen so that the point where
    @xmath intersects the @xmath -axis with positive orientation is
    lifted to a point where @xmath is positive,

4.  the lifts of @xmath to @xmath are chosen so that the point where
    @xmath intersects the @xmath -axis with positive orientation is
    lifted to a point where @xmath is positive,

5.  @xmath begins at a point where @xmath is positive.

6.  @xmath begins at a point where @xmath is positive.

For @xmath , we may, as before, construct @xmath as the fibre product of
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath is given by the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These identifications occur via the maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has genus @xmath and possesses the holomorphic involutions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The curves @xmath are the quotients of @xmath by these involutions, with
quotient maps @xmath , and the real structures @xmath on @xmath induce
upon @xmath the real structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath there is a unique canonical basis @xmath , @xmath for
the homology of @xmath such that @xmath cover the homotopy classes of
loops @xmath shown in Figure 3.7 and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are also unique curves @xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that
@xmath ; they project to @xmath and @xmath of Figure 3.7 . For each
@xmath define differentials @xmath on @xmath by:

1.  @xmath are meromorphic differentials of the second kind: their only
    singularities are double poles at @xmath , and they have no
    residues.

2.  @xmath for @xmath .

3.  As @xmath , @xmath .

In view of these defining conditions, we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real, since, writing @xmath for the
subgroups of @xmath generated by the @xmath , we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 3.4

For each positive integer @xmath and integer @xmath with @xmath there
exists @xmath such that

1.  @xmath , @xmath are pairwise distinct, as are @xmath , @xmath

2.  @xmath is spanned by the vectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
    @xmath .

3.  @xmath , for @xmath ,
    where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined as follows:
    Assume that (1) and (2) of this theorem hold for @xmath . Then the
    differentials @xmath are a basis for the holomorphic differentials
    on @xmath . Thus we may define @xmath by the equations

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then we define @xmath by
    @xmath

    @xmath

    put

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and let @xmath be the linear fractional transformation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof: For each fixed @xmath , this theorem can be proven by induction.
The induction step is both similar to and simpler than that detailed in
the odd genus case, and is almost identical to the induction step
described in [ 8 ] . We thus omit it here, but demonstrate the existence
of @xmath satisfying (1) and (2) and such that, for all @xmath , @xmath
.

Consider the curves @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be an open curve on @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath
one on @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives rise to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath are defined by the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence the linear transformation @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The statement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

may be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but @xmath is a fixed point of @xmath , so this is false for all @xmath
.

@xmath