Harmonic mappings are a generalisation of geodesics, and are defined as
the solutions to a natural variational problem. Interest in them began
in 1873 with Plateauâ€™s problem of finding surfaces of minimal area
bounded by given closed space curves. The field has been studied by
mathematicians and physicists ever since, and is now both broad and
extremely active. In this dissertation I consider harmonic maps which
can be studied using integrable systems, and thus by algebro-geometric
means. In particular I focus upon a simple case of both geometric and
physical interest, namely harmonic maps @xmath from a 2-torus (with
conformal structure @xmath ) to the 3-sphere. In [ 10 ] Hitchin showed
that (except in the case of a conformal map to a totally geodesic @xmath
) the data @xmath is in one-to-one correspondence with certain
algebro-geometric data. This data consists of a hyperelliptic curve
@xmath (called the spectral curve) together with a projection map @xmath
, a pair of holomorphic functions on @xmath , and a line bundle on
@xmath , all satisfying certain conditions. He proved (case-by-case)
that for @xmath , there are curves of genus g that support the required
data, and hence describe harmonic maps @xmath . Once such a curve is
found, the line bundle may be chosen from a real @xmath -dimensional
family, and each choice yields a new harmonic map. Of especial interest
are conformal harmonic maps as their images are minimal surfaces. I show
that for each @xmath , there are countably many conformal harmonic maps
@xmath whose spectral curves have genus @xmath . All of these harmonic
tori have rectangular conformal type, and those with @xmath come in real
@xmath -dimensional families.
