##### Contents

-    Acknowledgements
-    Abstract
-    1 Introduction and Results
    -    1.1 Coalescing random walks and voter models
    -    1.2 Brownian web
    -    1.3 Convergence criteria and main result
-    2 Random Walk Estimates
-    3 Proof of the Main Result
    -    3.1 Almost sure pre-compactness of @xmath and @xmath
    -    3.2 Verification of @xmath
    -    3.3 Verification of @xmath
    -    3.4 Verification of @xmath
    -    3.5 Verification of @xmath
-    4 Further Results
    -    4.1 Convergence of @xmath and @xmath
    -    4.2 Voter model interface

## Chapter 1 Introduction and Results

The idea of the Brownian Web (BW) dates back to Arratia’s thesis [ 1 ]
in 1979, in which he constructed a process of coalescing one-dimensional
Brownian motions starting from every point in space @xmath at time zero.
In a later unpublished manuscript [ 2 ] , Arratia generalized this
construction to a process of coalescing Brownian motions starting from
every point in space and time @xmath , which is essentially what is now
often called the Brownian Web. He also defined a dual family of backward
coalescing Brownian motions equally distributed (after a time reversal)
with the BW which is now called the Dual Brownian Web. Unfortunately,
Arratia’s manuscript was incomplete and never published, and the BW was
not studied again until a paper by Tóth and Werner [ 23 ] , in which
they constructed and analyzed versions of the Brownian Web and Dual
Brownian Web in great detail and used them to construct a process they
call the True Self Repelling Motion .

In both Arratia’s and Tóth and Werner’s constructions of the BW, some
semicontinuity condition is imposed to guarantee a unique path starting
from every space-time point. (For example, in Arratia’s [ 1 ]
construction of coalescing Brownian motions starting from every point on
@xmath at time 0, when multiple paths start from the same point, a
unique path is chosen so that if we regard the collection of paths as a
mapping from @xmath to the space of continuous paths, then it is right
continuous with left limits.) More recently, Fontes, Isopi, Newman and
Ravishankar [ 12 , 13 ] gave a different formulation of the BW which
provides a more natural setting for weak convergence, and they coined
the term Brownian Web. Instead of imposing semicontinuity conditions,
multiple paths are allowed to start from the same space-time point.
Further, by choosing a suitable topology, the BW can be characterized as
a random variable taking values in a complete separable metric space
whose elements are compact sets of paths. In [ 13 ] , they gave general
convergence criteria allowing either crossing or noncrossing paths
(i.e., almost surely, paths in the random set may cross each other in
the crossing paths case, and can never cross each other in the
noncrossing paths case), and they verified the criteria for the
noncrossing paths case for coalescing simple random walks. Recently,
Ferrari, Fontes, and Wu [ 11 ] verified the same criteria for a two
dimensional Poisson tree also with noncrossing paths.

The main result of this thesis is the formulation of new convergence
criteria for the crossing paths case, and we verify these criteria for
both discrete time and continuous time one-dimensional coalescing
nonsimple random walks satisfying a finite fifth moment condition, which
are models with crossing paths. The main technical distinction between
the noncrossing paths case and the crossing paths case is that if paths
cannot cross, then they form a totally ordered set, and one expects
certain correlation inequalities to hold, which is not the case if paths
can cross. We will also present some corollaries for one-dimensional
coalescing nonsimple random walks and their dual non-nearest-neighbor
voter models.

In the remaining sections of this chapter, we will present some
background on coalescing random walks, their dual voter models, and the
Brownian web. We will also state the main results of this thesis.

### 1.1 Coalescing random walks and voter models

Let @xmath , a random variable with distribution @xmath , denote the
increment of an irreducible aperiodic random walk on @xmath . Throughout
this thesis, all random walk increments will be distributed as @xmath .
We will always assume @xmath and @xmath unless a weaker hypotheses is
explicitly stated. For our main result, we will also need to assume
@xmath . For continuous time random walks, we further assume that @xmath
, and the random walk increments occur at rate 1.

#### 1.1.1 Coalescing random walks

The process of discrete time coalescing random walks with one walker
starting from every space-time lattice site is defined as follows. One
walker starts at every site on the space-time lattice @xmath (first
coordinate space, second coordinate time), and makes jumps at integer
times (including the time when it is born). All walkers have i.i.d.
increments distributed as @xmath , and two walkers move independently
until they jump to the same site at the same time, then they coalesce.
The random walk paths are piecewise constant, right continuous with left
limits, and have discontinuities at integer times. A continuous version
of the random walk path is obtained by linearly interpolating between
the consecutive space-time lattice sites from where the random walk
makes its jumps. Note that for non-simple random walks, two interpolated
random walk paths can cross each other many times before they actually
coalesce. If @xmath was such that the random walks had period @xmath ,
as in the case of simple random walks where @xmath , then we would just
have @xmath different copies of coalescing random walks on different
space-time sublattices, none of which interacts with the other copies.
We will let @xmath (with distribution @xmath ) denote the random
realization of such a collection of interpolated coalescing random walk
paths on @xmath , and let @xmath (with distribution @xmath , @xmath ) be
@xmath rescaled with the usual diffusive scaling of @xmath in space,
@xmath in time. Sometimes we will also need the piecewise constant
version of @xmath , which we denote by @xmath , i.e., replace each path
in @xmath by its piecewise constant counterpart.

The continuous time analog of @xmath , @xmath is defined as follows. One
walker starts from every point on @xmath and undergoes rate 1 jumps with
increments distributed as @xmath . The jump times are given by
independent rate 1 Poisson clocks at each integer site @xmath . Two
walkers coalesce when they first occupy the same site at the same time.
Clearly all walkers starting at the same site between two consecutive
Poisson clock rings will have coalesced by the time of the second clock
ring. If we call the time and location at which a Poisson clock rings a
jump point , then the path of a random walk is piecewise constant with
discontinuites at the jump points. We can also define an interpolated
version of the random walk path, which consists of first a constant
position line segment connecting the point of the walker’s birth to its
first jump point, and then linearly interpolating between consecutive
jump points along its path. For random walks born at a jump point, we
will take two paths, one starting with a constant position line segment,
and one without. @xmath (with distribution @xmath ) is then defined to
be the random variable consisting of all the interpolated coalescing
random walk paths, and @xmath (with distribution @xmath ) is @xmath
diffusively rescaled. We will denote the piecewise constant version of
@xmath by @xmath .

For a system of d-dimensional ( @xmath ) discrete time coalescing random
walks starting from a space-time subset @xmath , we will denote the set
of occupied sites in @xmath at time @xmath by @xmath . (To be consistent
with our definition of @xmath , we also define the random walks so that
they jump at the time of birth. But the random walks’ positions at time
@xmath is now taken to be the positions of the interpolated random walk
paths at time @xmath .) In the special case when @xmath for some @xmath
, we will denote it by @xmath ; and when @xmath , we simply denote it by
@xmath . For most of this thesis, we will only deal with one-dimensional
coalescing random walks. To simplify the notation, we will use @xmath
also to denote the continuous time analogue of @xmath , where @xmath and
the random walks jump with rate 1 and increments distributed as @xmath .

The main result of this thesis (see Theorem 1.3.3 below) is that if
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath converge in distribution to the BW as
@xmath .

#### 1.1.2 Voter models

The voter model was first introduced in the probability literature by
Clifford and Sudbury [ 8 ] , and Holley and Liggett [ 16 ] . In
population genetics, a variant of the voter model, the stepping stone
model, was first introduced by Kimura [ 19 ] . A two type d-dimensional
discrete time voter model is defined as follows. The state space is
@xmath with product topology. A metric that generates the product
topology is @xmath . We will denote the state at time @xmath of the
voter model by @xmath (with distribution @xmath ). @xmath , the value of
@xmath at site @xmath , can be regarded as the opinion, or political
affiliation, of the voter at site @xmath at time @xmath , hence the name
voter model . The initial configuration is specified by @xmath . If we
also use @xmath to denote the increment of a d-dimensional random walk,
then at each time @xmath , we update @xmath by setting @xmath , where
@xmath are i.i.d. @xmath -valued random variables distributed as @xmath
. Given any realization of @xmath , if we trace backward in time the
geneaologies of the opinions of all sites at all times, then the
collection of all such geneaology trees is exactly a realization of
coalescing random walk paths running backward in time, with one walker
starting at every site in @xmath at every positive integer time. This
provides a natural coupling between coalescing random walks and voter
models, and leads to the duality relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a set of space-time lattice sites with positive time,
and @xmath is the set of occupied sites at time @xmath of a system of
coalescing random walks running backward in time, with one walker
starting at every site in @xmath . For more details on the voter model,
see, e.g., [ 16 , 20 ] .

The definition above easily generalizes to a multitype voter model with
state space @xmath , where @xmath can be any finite or countable set.
For continuous time, the opinion at each site is updated independently
according to a rate 1 Poisson clock. Whenever a clock rings at a site
@xmath , another site @xmath is picked with @xmath distributed as the
random walk increment @xmath , and the opinion at site @xmath changes to
that of site @xmath . The dual of this continuous time voter model is
the process of rate 1 continuous time coalescing random walks running
backward in time, with one walker starting at every site in @xmath . The
two models are coupled through the realization of the jump points and
the random walk increment associated with each jump point. We will
denote the continuous time voter model also by @xmath (with distribution
@xmath ). The duality relation @xmath also holds for continuous time.

### 1.2 Brownian web

One way of thinking about the Brownian web is to view it as the
diffusive scaling limit of the system of coalescing random walks @xmath
. Heuristically, we expect to obtain as the limit a set of coalescing
Brownian motions with one Brownian motion starting from every space-time
point. The main conceptual difficulty is that there are uncountable
number of space-time points, and in general we would like to deal only
with a countable number of Brownian motions because of the countable
additivity of measures. Fortunately, it turns out that the limiting
object (the Brownian web) is fully determined by a countable number of
coalescing Brownian motions starting from a countable dense subset
@xmath of @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.1 below). Coalescing Brownian motion
paths starting from space-time points off the dense set @xmath can be
constructed by taking limits of paths starting from @xmath using the
noncrossing property of coalescing Brownian motions. See Arratia [ 2 ]
and Tóth and Werner [ 23 ] for two such constructions. The Brownian web
intrinsically contains space-time points from which multiple paths start
out. In both Arratia’s and Tóth and Werner’s construction, only one path
is retained starting from every space-time point satisfying some
semicontinuity conditions. Here we follow a different approach by
Fontes, Isopi, Newman and Ravishankar [ 12 , 13 ] , who coined the term
Brownian Web. Their approach is to regard the Brownian web as a random
variable taking values in the space of sets of paths. Thus there is no
need to throw away paths when multiplicity arises. Another advantage is
that, by choosing the topology approriately for the space of sets of
paths, the Brownian web takes values in a complete separable metric
space, thus providing a natural setting for establishing weak
convergence results, which is the central theme of this thesis.

We now recall Fontes, Isopi, Newman and Ravishankar’s [ 12 , 13 ] choice
of the metric space in which the Brownian Web takes its values.

Let @xmath be the completion (or compactification) of @xmath under the
metric @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath can be thought of as the image of @xmath under the mapping

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can think of the mapping as first squeeze @xmath to the square @xmath
by the mapping @xmath , and then the @xmath coordinate is squeezed even
further depending on its time coordinate such that the top and bottom
edge of the square is squeezed to two points @xmath .

For @xmath , let @xmath denote the set of functions @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath such that @xmath is continuous. Then define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath represents a path in @xmath starting at @xmath . For @xmath
in @xmath , we denote by @xmath the function that extends @xmath to all
@xmath by setting it equal to @xmath for @xmath . Then we take

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e., after applying the mapping @xmath to @xmath and @xmath , the
distance between the two original paths is then taken to be the maximum
of (i) the supremum norm distance between the two image paths, and (2)
the absolute difference in the starting times of the two image paths.
Note that @xmath is a complete separable metric space.

Let now @xmath denote the set of compact subsets of @xmath , with @xmath
the induced Hausdorff metric, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is also a complete separable metric space. Let @xmath denote the
Borel @xmath -algebra generated by @xmath .

In [ 12 , 13 ] , the Brownian Web ( @xmath with measure @xmath ) is
constructed as a @xmath valued random variable, with the following
characterization theorem.

###### Theorem 1.2.1

There is an @xmath -valued random variable @xmath whose distribution is
uniquely determined by the following three properties.

-    from any deterministic point @xmath in @xmath , there is almost
    surely a unique path @xmath starting from @xmath .

-    for any deterministic @xmath , the joint distribution of @xmath ,
    @xmath is that of coalescing Brownian motions (with unit diffusion
    constant), and

-    for any deterministic, dense countable subset @xmath of @xmath ,
    almost surely, @xmath is the closure in @xmath of @xmath

The @xmath -valued random variable @xmath in Theorem is called the
standard Brownian Web.

The Brownian web @xmath uniquely determines a dual (backward) Brownian
web @xmath , which is equally distributed with the standard Brownian web
@xmath except for a time reversal. The pair @xmath forms what is called
the double Brownian web @xmath with the property that, almost surely,
paths in @xmath and @xmath reflect off each other and never cross. The
double Brownian web is most easily recognized as the limit of coalescing
simple random walks. For coalescing simple random walks, only walks
starting from lattice sites @xmath with @xmath having the same parity
(even or odd) interact with each other. Take the set of walks that start
from @xmath with @xmath even. Then any realization of such forward
coalescing random walk paths uniquely determines a set of backward (in
time) coalescing simple random walk paths with one path starting from
every site @xmath with @xmath odd, provided that we require the backward
paths never cross the forward paths. The resulting system of backward
coalescing simple random walks is equally distributed with the forward
coalescing system except for a time reversal. Under the diffusive
scaling limit, it is then seen that the joint distribution of the
forward and backward systems of coalescing simple random walks converge
in distribution to the double Brownian web. For more on the Brownian web
and the double Brownian web, see [ 1 , 2 , 23 , 22 , 12 , 13 ] .

### 1.3 Convergence criteria and main result

In [ 13 ] , a set of general convergence criteria were formulated for
measures supported on compact sets of paths which can cross each other.
However, one of the conditions @xmath turns out to be difficult to
verify for the coalescing nonsimple random walks @xmath and @xmath . In
our modified general convergence theorem 1.3.2 , we will replace
condition @xmath by an alternative condition @xmath , and we will verify
@xmath and the other convergence criteria for @xmath and @xmath under
the assumption that @xmath .

We first recall the convergence criteria formulated in [ 13 ] (for the
crossing paths case) for a family of @xmath -valued random variables
@xmath with distributions @xmath .

@xmath There exist single path valued random variables @xmath , for
@xmath , satisfying: for @xmath a deterministic countable dense subset
of @xmath , for any deterministic @xmath , @xmath converge jointly in
distribution as @xmath to coalescing Brownian motions (with unit
diffusion constant) starting at @xmath .

Let @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath , let @xmath denote the rectangle
@xmath in @xmath . Define @xmath to be the event (in @xmath ) that
@xmath (in @xmath ) contains a path touching both @xmath and (at a later
time) the left or right boundary of the bigger rectangle @xmath (the
number 17 is chosen to avoid fractions later). Then the following is a
tightness condition for @xmath : for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

As shown in [ 13 ] , if @xmath is satisfied, one can construct compact
sets @xmath for each @xmath , such that @xmath uniformly in @xmath .
@xmath consists of compact subsets of @xmath whose image under the map
@xmath are equicontinuous with a modulus of continuity dependent on
@xmath .

For @xmath a compact set of paths in @xmath , define the counting
variable @xmath for @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.3.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Let @xmath (resp., @xmath ) denote the leftmost (resp., rightmost) value
in @xmath with some path in @xmath touching @xmath (resp., @xmath ).
Also define @xmath (resp. @xmath ) to be the subset of @xmath due to
paths in @xmath that touch @xmath (resp., @xmath ). The last two
conditions for the convergence of @xmath to the Brownian Web are

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The general convergence theorem of [ 13 ] is the following,

###### Theorem 1.3.1

Let @xmath be a family of @xmath valued random variables satisfying
conditions @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath converges in distribution to
the standard Brownian Web @xmath .

Condition @xmath guarantees that for any subsequential limit @xmath of
@xmath (with distribution @xmath ), and for any deterministic point
@xmath , there is @xmath almost surely at most one path starting from
@xmath . Together with condition @xmath , this implies that for a
deterministic countable dense set @xmath , the distribution of paths in
@xmath starting from finite subsets of @xmath is that of coalescing
Brownian motions. This shows @xmath contains at least as many paths as
the Brownian web @xmath . Conditions @xmath and @xmath together imply
that for the family of counting random variables @xmath , we have @xmath
for all @xmath with @xmath . By Theorem @xmath in [ 13 ] and the remark
following it, this fact implies that @xmath contains no extra paths
besides the Brownian web @xmath , thus @xmath is equidistributed with
@xmath . For the systems of coalescing random walks @xmath and @xmath ,
we have not yet been able to verify condition @xmath , but an
examination of the proof of Theorem @xmath in [ 13 ] shows that we can
also use the dual family of counting random variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By a duality argument [ 23 ] (see also [ 1 , 2 , 13 ] ), @xmath and
@xmath are equally distributed for the Brownian Web @xmath . We can then
replace @xmath by @xmath If @xmath is any subsequential limit of @xmath
, then @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

With this change, we obtain our modified general convergence theorem,

###### Theorem 1.3.2

Let @xmath be a family of @xmath valued random variables satisfying
conditions @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath converges in distribution to
the standard Brownian Web @xmath .

The main result of this paper is

###### Theorem 1.3.3

If the random walk increment @xmath satisfies @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath satisfy the conditions of Theorem , and hence converge in
distribution to @xmath .

###### Remark 1.3.4

Condition @xmath in our general convergence theorem 1.3.2 may seem
strong, but as we will show in our proof of @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
in Section 3.5 , the key ingredients are the Markov property of the
random walks and an upper bound of the type @xmath for some finite
constant @xmath depending on @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Random Walk Estimates

In this chapter, we first introduce some notation, and then list some
basic facts about random walks that will be used throughout the rest of
the thesis. Once acquainted with the basic notation, the reader may skip
the rest of the chapter until the results in this chapter are referred
to.

Given macroscopic space and time coordinates @xmath , define their
microscopic counterparts before diffusive scaling by @xmath and @xmath .
Quantities such as @xmath are defined from @xmath similarly depending on
whether they are space or time units. Since @xmath (resp., @xmath ) and
@xmath (resp., @xmath ) are related by diffusive scaling, we will do
most of our analysis using @xmath (resp., @xmath ), with @xmath for
@xmath (resp., @xmath ) replaced by @xmath for @xmath (resp., @xmath ).

For both discrete time and continuous time, we will denote the piecewise
constant version of the path of a random walk (which by definition is
right continuous with left limits in time) starting at position @xmath
at time @xmath by @xmath . We will denote the linearly interpolated
version of the random walk path by @xmath . Denote the event that the
path of a random walk @xmath (either discrete or continuous time)
starting at @xmath stays inside the interval @xmath containing @xmath up
to time @xmath by @xmath .

Given any @xmath , we also define the following stopping times
associated with either a discrete or a continuous time random walk
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.1)
     @xmath      (2.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When the time coordinate in the superscripts of @xmath is 0, we will
suppress it. We will use @xmath and @xmath to denote probability and
expectation for a random walk process starting from @xmath at time 0.
@xmath and @xmath will correspond to two independent random walks
starting at @xmath and @xmath at time 0.

The following lemmas are stated for random walk paths @xmath and @xmath
, which can be interpreted for both discrete and continuous time. The
random walk increment @xmath is always assumed to be that of an
irreducible and aperiodic random walk with @xmath and @xmath , unless a
different moment condition is explicitly stated. For continuous time
random walks, we always assume it jumps with rate 1 unless otherwise
explicitly stated.

###### Lemma 2.0.1

Let @xmath be two independent random walks with increment @xmath
starting at @xmath at time 0. Let @xmath , which is a stopping time, and
let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are almost surely finite.

Proof. Let @xmath . Then @xmath is an irreducible aperiodic symmetric
random walk starting at @xmath . For discrete time, @xmath has increment
distributed as @xmath ; for continuous time, @xmath is a rate 2 random
walk with increment distributed as @xmath . The lemma is simply a
consequence of the recurrence of @xmath , which requires less than
finite second moment of @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.0.2

Let @xmath , @xmath be as in Lemma . Then @xmath for some constant
@xmath independent of @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath as in the proof of Lemma . Let @xmath denote
probability for this random walk, and let @xmath denote the stopping
time when the random walk @xmath first lands at the site 0. Then @xmath
. When @xmath , it is a standard fact (see, e.g., Proposition 32.4 in [
21 ] ) that this probability is bounded by @xmath . When @xmath , we can
without loss of generality assume @xmath and regard @xmath as a subset
of the system of coalescing random walks @xmath up to time @xmath . Then

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

which establishes the lemma.

###### Lemma 2.0.3

Let @xmath and @xmath be fixed, and let @xmath be a random walk starting
from the origin at time 0. Let @xmath and the event @xmath be defined as
at the beginning of this chapter (note that they depend on @xmath ), and
let @xmath be the complement of @xmath . If @xmath is a standard
Brownian motion starting from 0, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. The limit follows from Donsker’s invariance principle for random
walks. The first inequality is trivial, and the second inequality
follows from a well-known computation for Brownian motion using the
reflection principle.

###### Lemma 2.0.4

Let @xmath be as before. Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Lemmas @xmath
with @xmath . Let @xmath . If @xmath , and @xmath is sufficiently small,
then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath depending only on @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath . Note that @xmath are fixed while @xmath as @xmath .
For the difference of the two walks @xmath , we denote the first time
when @xmath by @xmath , and the first time when @xmath by @xmath . We
are using the bar @xmath to emphasize the fact that we are studying the
symmetrized random walks. The inequality then becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For simplicity, we will only prove @xmath for the discrete time case.
For the continuous time case, only the notations will be different. We
will first prove that, for @xmath sufficiently small,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the strong Markov property,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

If @xmath is sufficiently small, the last inequality is valid by Lemma .
Also by Lemma ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together they give @xmath .

To show @xmath , we condition at the first time when @xmath , which we
denote by @xmath . Then by the strong Markov property and @xmath ,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The last inequality follows from our assumption @xmath and the following
two lemmas.

###### Lemma 2.0.5

Let @xmath be a random walk with increment @xmath starting from @xmath
at time 0. If @xmath , then the overshoot @xmath has a limiting
distribution as @xmath . In terms of the ladder variable @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. This is a standard fact from renewal theory, see e.g. Proposition
24.7 in [ 21 ] .

###### Lemma 2.0.6

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in the previous lemma. If @xmath
for some @xmath , then @xmath is uniformly integrable in @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. We may assume @xmath is a discrete time random walk, since the
continuous time random walk is just a random time change of the discrete
time walk, which does not change the overshoot distribution. Note that
if we let @xmath denote the discrete time random walk starting from
@xmath at time 0 with increment distributed as @xmath , then @xmath
simply records the successive maxima of the random walk @xmath , so the
overshoots @xmath and @xmath are equally distributed. By a last passage
decomposition for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the probability @xmath will ever visit @xmath . Since
@xmath implies @xmath (see e.g. problem 6 in Chapter IV of [ 21 ] ), we
have @xmath , giving uniform integrability. The rest then follows from
Lemma and dominated convergence.

###### Lemma 2.0.7

Let @xmath be a system of coalescing random walks (either discrete or
continuous time) starting from every site of @xmath at time 0, whose
random walk increments are distributed as @xmath with @xmath . Then
@xmath for some constant @xmath independent of the time @xmath .

###### Remark 2.0.1

We present two proofs, the first of which works for both discrete and
continuous time, and is an adaptation of the argument used by Bramson
and Griffeath [ 5 ] to establish similar upper bounds for continuous
time coalescing simple random walks in @xmath . The second proof is
special to continuous time walks, and can also be found in the paper of
Bramson and Griffeath [ 5 ] . In Corollary 4.1.1 below, we will prove
that in fact @xmath as @xmath under the stronger assumption that @xmath
.

First Proof. Let @xmath , and let @xmath . By translation invariance,
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is at least as large as the number of nearest neighbor
pairs in @xmath that have coalesced by time @xmath , we may take
expectation and apply Lemma 2.0.2 to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath . Since @xmath can be arbitrarily large for any fixed
@xmath , we obtain @xmath .

Second Proof for continuous time. Let @xmath denote the continuous time
one-dimensional voter model dual to @xmath with initial configuration
@xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . Let @xmath . The process @xmath is then
a continuous time Markov chain on the space of finite subsets of @xmath
. @xmath undergoes jumps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The rate at which @xmath increases by 1 is @xmath ; the rate at which
@xmath decreases by 1 is @xmath . By translation invariance, it is not
difficult to see that these two rates are the same, and by our
assumption @xmath for continuous time random walks, the sum of the two
rates is at least 2. Therefore, @xmath is a continuous time simple
symmetric random walk with a random rate bounded below by 2, and @xmath
is absorbed at 0. @xmath is then bounded from above by the probability
that a rate 2 simple symmetric random walk starting from 1 does not hit
0 by time @xmath , which by Lemma 2.0.2 is bounded above by @xmath . By
the duality relation @xmath , @xmath , the lemma then follows. Note that
this proof only works for continuous time.

###### Lemma 2.0.8

For any @xmath , let @xmath be a system of discrete time coalescing
random walks on @xmath starting at time 0 with one walker at every site
in @xmath , where all the random walks have increments distributed as
some arbitrary @xmath -valued random variable @xmath . Then for any pair
of disjoint sets @xmath , and for any time @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, if @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are any two distinct
sites in @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Proof. The continuous time version of this lemma is due to Arratia (see
Lemma 1 in [ 3 ] ). Arratia’s proof uses a theorem of Harris [ 15 ] ,
which breaks down for discrete time because there are transitions
between states that not comparable to each other with respect to some
partial order. However, this can be easily remedied by using an
induction argument, which we present below.

We can assume @xmath are all finite sets, since otherwise we can
approximate by finite sets, and the relevant probabilities will all
converge. The main tool in the proof is again the duality between
coalescing random walks and voter models. For any pair of finite
disjoint sets @xmath , let @xmath (with distribution @xmath ) be a
discrete time three-type voter model on @xmath with state space @xmath
and initial condition @xmath if @xmath ; @xmath if @xmath ; @xmath if
@xmath . (See Section 1.1.2 for the dynamics of the voter model.) Note
that under the metric @xmath , @xmath is compact.

Let @xmath (resp., @xmath ) be the event that some site in @xmath is
assigned the value @xmath (resp., @xmath ). Then by the duality relation
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The correlation inequality
@xmath then becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.0.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can define a partial order on the state space @xmath by setting
@xmath whenever @xmath for all @xmath .A function @xmath is called
increasing (resp., decreasing) if for any @xmath , @xmath (resp., @xmath
). An event @xmath is called increasing (resp., decreasing) if @xmath is
an increasing (resp., decreasing) function. Clearly, for finite @xmath ,
@xmath is a continuous increasing function and @xmath is a continuous
decreasing function. Inequality @xmath will follow if we show that
@xmath has the FKG property (see, e.g, [ 14 , 20 ] ), i.e., for any two
continuous increasing functions @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

We prove this by induction. For any pair of finite disjoint sets @xmath
, @xmath has the FKG property because the measure is concentrated at a
single configuration. Observe that @xmath is a product measure and
therefore also has the FKG property (this is a simple special case of
the main result of [ 14 ] ). We proceed to the induction step, which is
a fairly standard argument [ 17 ] . Assume that for all disjoint finite
sets @xmath and @xmath , and for all @xmath , @xmath has the FKG
property. Let us denote the collection of sites in @xmath where @xmath
by @xmath , and where @xmath by @xmath . Then for any two continuous
increasing functions @xmath and @xmath , conditioning on @xmath , we
have by the Markov property,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where we have used the FKG property for both @xmath and for @xmath , and
the observation that the conditional expectations @xmath conditioned on
@xmath are still continuous increasing functions. Therefore @xmath also
has the FKG property. This concludes the induction proof, and
establishes the lemma.

Recall that @xmath and @xmath denote the piecewise constant version of
@xmath and @xmath . We can extend the definition of @xmath (resp.,
@xmath ) to path (resp., sets of paths) that are right continuous with
left limits. Then we have

###### Lemma 2.0.9

Assume @xmath , then for any @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be fixed. Recall @xmath . Choose @xmath sufficiently
large, such that @xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath for all @xmath .
Then the event @xmath occurs because either the random walk increment
associated with some lattice point in @xmath exceeds @xmath (note that
the random walks are on the rescaled lattice), the probability of which
is of the order @xmath and tends to 0 as @xmath by the assumption @xmath
; or a random walk starting from some lattice site in @xmath lands
inside or across the spatial interval @xmath in one step, the
probability of which is bounded by @xmath , which also tends to 0 as
@xmath by Markov inequality and the assumption @xmath . This establishes
the lemma for the discrete time case. We defer the proof of the lemma
for the continuous time case to Section 3.1 , where we need to carry out
similar estimates.

## Chapter 3 Proof of the Main Result

In this chapter, we first establish the almost sure pre-compactness of
@xmath and @xmath , so that the almost sure closures of @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath -valued random variables. We will then proceed to
verify conditions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath , thus establishing the main result of this thesis, Theorem 1.3.3
.

### 3.1 Almost sure pre-compactness of @xmath and @xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.1

Assume @xmath , then for any @xmath , the closure of @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath , which we will also denote by @xmath and @xmath , are almost
surely compact subsets of @xmath .

Proof. We prove the lemma only for @xmath and @xmath , since the proof
for @xmath and @xmath is identical. We will show that under the mapping
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are almost surely equicontinuous. Note that
by the properties of @xmath , this reduces to showing the almost sure
equicontinuity of @xmath and @xmath restricted to any square @xmath .
For @xmath , this further reduces to showing that @xmath restricted to
@xmath is equicontinuous for any @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath
restricted to @xmath contains either line segments connecting sites in
@xmath at time @xmath to sites in @xmath at time @xmath , for which
there are only @xmath of these; or it contains line segments connecting
sites outside @xmath at time @xmath to some other sites in or across
@xmath at time @xmath . The expected number of the second type of line
segments is easily seen to be finite by our assumption @xmath .
Therefore almost surely, @xmath restricted to @xmath contains only a
finite number of line segments, hence it is equicontinuous. This proves
the almost sure precompactness of @xmath in @xmath .

The proof for @xmath is more messy. Observe that paths in @xmath consist
of either constant position line segments or line segments connecting
consecutive jump points of a random walk, and we are only interested in
line segments that intersect @xmath . We will show that almost surely,
we can choose @xmath sufficiently large such that line segments in
@xmath starting from points outside @xmath do not intersect @xmath .
Since almost surely there are only a finite number of jump points inside
@xmath , and hence only a finite number of non-constant-position line
segments intersecting @xmath (note that almost surely none of the line
segments is constant in time), @xmath restricted to @xmath must be
equicontinuous.

Let @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath ( @xmath ) denote the event that some
line segment in @xmath starting from some point outside @xmath
intersects @xmath . Since @xmath is a descreasing family of events as
@xmath increases, it suffices to show that @xmath as @xmath .

We divide the complement of @xmath into six regions as illustrated in
Figure 3.1 . Let @xmath @xmath denote the event that some line segment
in @xmath starting from some point in region @xmath intersects @xmath .
Clearly @xmath . The event @xmath only occurs when the random walk
increment associated with some jump point @xmath in Region 1 exceeds
@xmath . Since the expected number of jump points at any site @xmath in
the time interval @xmath is @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the assumption @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . Similarly @xmath as @xmath
.

The event @xmath only occurs when the random walk increment associated
with some jump point @xmath in Region 2 exceeds @xmath , and at the
landing site there is no Poisson clock ring during the time interval
@xmath . Since the intensity of the Poisson process at each site is 1,
we can estimate @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the assumption @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . Similarly @xmath as @xmath
. An analogous calculation shows that @xmath , which also tends to 0 as
@xmath . Since @xmath , the lemma then follows.

###### Remark 3.1.1

Note that the closure of @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath in @xmath is
obtained from @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath by adding all paths of the
form @xmath with @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath and @xmath or @xmath .

We now complete the proof of Lemma 2.0.9 .

Proof of Lemma 2.0.9 for continuous time. In Figure 3.1 , let @xmath be
the underlying space time lattice, and let @xmath and @xmath be
macroscopic units of space and time. Let @xmath be sufficiently large
such that @xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath
. Keep in mind that all space and time units are macroscopic, the event
@xmath only occurs when: either for some jump point inside @xmath , the
random walk increment exceeds @xmath in magnitude ( @xmath in unscaled
units), the probability of which is of the order @xmath and tends to 0
as @xmath ; or for some jump point in Regions 1 and 5, the random walk
penetrates the spatial interval @xmath in one jump; or for some jump
point in Regions 2 and 4, the random walk penetrates the spatial
interval @xmath , and does not encounter another jump point until after
time @xmath ; or for some jump point in Region 3, the random walk jumps
and does not encounter another jump point until after time @xmath . The
probabilities of all these events can be estimated exactly as in the
proof of Lemma 3.1.1 for @xmath , and they all tend to 0 as @xmath .
Lemma 2.0.9 then follows.

### 3.2 Verification of @xmath

Verification of @xmath We first treat the discrete time case. The
continuous time case will be similar. Fix @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Also fix a @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be defined from
@xmath and @xmath by diffusive scaling. Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then the contribution to @xmath is all due to walkers
starting from @xmath at time @xmath . Thus we have

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.2.1)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The first inequality follows from the observation that if the collection
of walkers starting from @xmath at @xmath has not coalesced into a
single walker by @xmath , then there is at least one adjacent pair of
such walkers which has not coalesced by @xmath . The next inequality
follows from Lemma .

Now suppose @xmath for some @xmath . Note that a walker’s path can only
cross @xmath due to the increment at time @xmath . After the increment,
at time @xmath , it will either land in @xmath , or else outside that
interval. In the first case, the contribution of the walker’s path to
@xmath is included in @xmath , the probability of which by our previous
argument is bounded by @xmath times a prefactor which approaches 1 as
@xmath . In the second case, either a walker in @xmath jumps to the
right of @xmath , or a walker in @xmath jumps to the left of @xmath ,
the probability of which is bounded by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
                             (3.2.2)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The next to last inequality in @xmath is valid if we take @xmath to be
sufficiently small. The bounds in @xmath and @xmath are independent of
@xmath and @xmath . Taking the supremum over @xmath and @xmath , and
letting @xmath , we establish @xmath for @xmath .

The continuous time case is similar to the discrete time case. We first
scale @xmath back to the @xmath lattice, and note that the contribution
to @xmath is only due to interpolated random walk paths intersecting
@xmath at time @xmath . Therefore @xmath can be estimated by the union
of three events: (i) event @xmath , for some site @xmath , there is no
Poisson clock ring during the time interval @xmath ; (ii) event @xmath ,
the set of coalescing random walks starting from @xmath at time @xmath
has not coalesced into a single walker by time @xmath ; (iii) event
@xmath , some interpolated random walk paths intersects @xmath at time
@xmath , and after the intersection does not land at a site in @xmath .
The event @xmath is contained in the union of the events @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . @xmath is bounded by @xmath and tends to 0 as @xmath .
@xmath can be estimated exactly as the computation in @xmath , and we
obtain the desired factor of @xmath in the limit as @xmath . The event
@xmath plays the same role as the event whose probability was estimated
in @xmath , and @xmath as @xmath , but we will defer its proof to the
next section on tightness, where we need to estimate a similar, but more
general quantity (see the paragraph above Remark 3.3.1 ).

###### Corollary 3.2.1

Assume @xmath (with distribution @xmath ) is a subsequential limit of
@xmath (or @xmath ), then for any deterministic point @xmath , @xmath
has almost surely at most one path starting from @xmath .

Proof. It was shown in the proof of Theorem 5.3 in [ 13 ] that @xmath
implies

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

the corollary then follows.

###### Remark 3.2.1

Note that if @xmath is the process of coalescing random walks (either
discrete or continuous time) starting from a subset @xmath of the
rescaled lattice, and @xmath converges in distribution to a limit @xmath
, then by the same argument as above, for any deterministic point @xmath
, @xmath has almost surely at most one path starting from @xmath .

### 3.3 Verification of @xmath

In this section, we verify condition @xmath for the measures @xmath and
@xmath under the assumption @xmath . At the end of this section, we will
also show that for @xmath and @xmath , the set of interpolated
coalescing random walk paths starting with one walker at every site in
the rescaled lattice at time 0, @xmath will be sufficient to guarantee
tightness.

Define @xmath to be the event that @xmath contains a path touching both
@xmath and (at a later time) the right boundary of the bigger rectangle
@xmath , and similarly define the event @xmath corresponding to the left
boundary of the bigger rectangle. Then @xmath , and writing @xmath in
terms of @xmath , we argue that it is sufficient to prove

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The sup over @xmath has been safely omitted because @xmath is invariant
under translation by integer units of space and time. When @xmath , we
can bound the probability from above by using larger rectangles with
vertices in @xmath and base centered at @xmath . Since the argument
establishing the analogous tightness condition @xmath for the event
@xmath is identical to that for @xmath , @xmath for the measures @xmath
follows from @xmath . Simlarly, @xmath for the measures @xmath follows
from @xmath with @xmath replaced by @xmath .

Before we prove @xmath , and hence @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , we
introduce some simplifying notation. We will abbreviate @xmath by @xmath
, or just @xmath , and abbreviate @xmath by @xmath . Denote the random
walks (either discrete or continuous time) starting at time 0 from
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath by @xmath (with their paths taken to be the
piecewise constant version). Denote the event that @xmath , @xmath stays
within a distance @xmath of @xmath up to time @xmath by @xmath (see
Figure 3.2 ). For a random walk starting from @xmath , denote the
stopping times when the walker’s path @xmath first exceeds @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath and @xmath . We also define @xmath , and @xmath .
Denote the event that @xmath does not coalesce with @xmath before time
@xmath by @xmath . As we shall see, the reason for choosing four paths
@xmath is because each path contributes a factor of @xmath to our
estimate of the @xmath (resp., @xmath ) probability in @xmath , and an
overall factor of @xmath is needed to outweigh the @xmath number of
lattice points (resp., jump points) in the rectangle @xmath from where a
random walk can start. We are now ready to prove @xmath for the discrete
time case @xmath . The proof of @xmath for the continuous time case
@xmath is similar and will be discussed afterwards.

Verification of @xmath for @xmath . First we can assume @xmath , since
we can always replace @xmath by @xmath which only enlarges the event
@xmath . The contribution to the event @xmath is either due to random
walk paths that originate from within @xmath , or paths that cross
@xmath without landing inside it after the crossing. Denote the latter
event by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

By Lemma , the first term on the right hand side of @xmath is of order
@xmath after taking the limit @xmath . For the second event in @xmath to
occur, either a walker at a site in @xmath jumps to a site in @xmath in
one step, or a walker in @xmath jumps to a site in @xmath in one step
for some @xmath . Denote the event just described by @xmath , then
@xmath . From this we see that repeating the calculations in @xmath for
@xmath under the assumption @xmath will guarantee that @xmath as @xmath
.

To estimate the third term in @xmath (see Figure 3.2 for an illustration
of the event), we first treat the case of a fixed @xmath . Suppressing
@xmath from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.3.2)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The first part is bounded by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath as @xmath . The last inequality is due to the uniform
integrability of the third moment of the overshoot distribution, which
follows from our assumption @xmath and Lemma .

For the second @xmath probability in @xmath , denote the event that none
of the conditions listed are violated by time @xmath by @xmath . If
@xmath , we interpret an inequality like @xmath as not having been
violated by time @xmath . @xmath is then a nested family of events, and
the second probability in @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote the history of the random walks @xmath and @xmath up to time
@xmath by @xmath , and denote expectation with respect to the
conditional distribution of @xmath conditioned on the event @xmath by
@xmath . Then for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath probability on the right hand side is conditioned on a
given realization of @xmath , which is a positive probability event. For
any @xmath , we have by the strong Markov property that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the inequality follows from Lemma for @xmath sufficiently small.
Thus @xmath , and @xmath . We then have

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.3.5)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath and hence @xmath as @xmath . Thus the last two terms in
@xmath go to 0 as @xmath , and the first term is of order @xmath after
taking the limit @xmath . Together they give @xmath for the measure
@xmath .

Verification of @xmath for @xmath . Analogous to @xmath , the event
@xmath is contained in the union of three events: (i) @xmath , i.e., one
of the four walks @xmath fails to stay within a distance @xmath of its
starting point @xmath before time @xmath ; (ii) the event @xmath , some
interpolated random walk path first intersects @xmath , and then lands
at a jump point outside @xmath ; (iii) or the event that @xmath all stay
within a distance @xmath of its starting point @xmath before time @xmath
, and some random walk path @xmath starting from one of the jump points
@xmath (by definition, there are two random walk paths starting from any
jump point, here we take the random walk path that jumps immediately)
exits from the right boundary of @xmath without first coalescing with
any of the @xmath .

Using the continuous time version of Lemma 2.0.3 , the probability of
the first event @xmath is of order @xmath after taking the limit @xmath
. For the third event, note that conditioned on the existence of a jump
point at @xmath , by the Markov property of Poisson process, we can
apply the computations in @xmath – @xmath to find that the probability
of a random walk starting from @xmath , jumpping immediately, and
exiting the right boundary of @xmath while the events @xmath all hold is
of order @xmath . Since the expected number of jump points in @xmath is
of order @xmath , the probability of the third event is of the order
@xmath , which tends to 0 as @xmath . To conclude the proof of @xmath
for @xmath , it then only remains to show that the probability of the
second event, @xmath as @xmath .

The computations to bound @xmath is essentially the same as that for
@xmath in our earlier proof of the almost sure precompactness of @xmath
in Lemma 3.1.1 . In Figure 3.1 , we replace the inner square @xmath by
@xmath , and the outer square @xmath by @xmath . We can assume that for
all @xmath , there is at least one poisson clock ring during the time
interval @xmath , since the probability of the complentary event tends
to 0 as @xmath . Then no constant-position line segment in @xmath can
intersect @xmath without landing at a jump point in @xmath . For
non-constant-position line segments in @xmath that originate from jump
points inside @xmath and intersect @xmath without landing at jump points
in @xmath , the probability is bounded by the expected number of jump
points in @xmath , which is of order @xmath , times the probability that
the random walk increment @xmath has @xmath . Since @xmath , this
product tends to 0 as @xmath . To estimate the probability of having
line segments in @xmath that originate outside @xmath and intersect
@xmath , the computation is exactly the same as that for @xmath in our
earlier proof of the almost sure precompactness of @xmath . Assuming
@xmath , we find that the probability of such events also tend to 0 as
@xmath .

After translation in space and time, the event @xmath defined in Section
3.2 at the end of the verification of @xmath for the continuous time
case is then easily seen to be a subset of the event @xmath . Therefore
@xmath as @xmath .

###### Remark 3.3.1

The only place in this thesis where we need the assumption @xmath is in
@xmath . We only need @xmath to estimate @xmath in @xmath and to apply
Lemma in @xmath . A finite third moment is the minimal moment condition
for the convergence of @xmath and @xmath . For any @xmath , there are
choices of @xmath satisfying @xmath , but with @xmath @xmath resp.,
@xmath as @xmath for all @xmath , which implies @xmath @xmath resp.,
@xmath is not tight.

Let @xmath with distribution @xmath (resp., @xmath and @xmath ) denote
the @xmath -valued random variable consisting of interpolated discrete
time (resp., continuous time) coalescing random walk paths on the
rescaled lattice starting with one walker at every site in @xmath at
time 0. We expect tightness for @xmath and @xmath to hold under much
weaker moment assumptions on the random walk increment @xmath . Indeed,

###### Lemma 3.3.1

If @xmath , then @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath form a tight family of
@xmath valued random variables.

Proof. We only prove the lemma for @xmath , the proof for @xmath is
analogous. Let @xmath . Let @xmath denote the event (in @xmath ) that
@xmath (in @xmath ) contains a path @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for
some @xmath . Recalling the arguments leading to the formulation of the
tightness condition @xmath in [ 13 ] , a sufficient condition for the
family of measures @xmath on @xmath to be tight is that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath contains a path @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath
, then @xmath for some nonnegative integer @xmath . By examining the
locations of the path @xmath at time @xmath and @xmath , we see that
there exists a nonnegative integer @xmath (either @xmath or @xmath ) and
a time @xmath (either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath ), such that either (1)
@xmath and @xmath ; or (2) @xmath and @xmath . We will call the events
that @xmath and @xmath contains a path @xmath satisfying either
condition (1) or condition (2) respectively event (1) and event (2).
Then the event @xmath is a subset of the union of events (1) and (2).

Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath denote the event (in @xmath ) that
@xmath (in @xmath ) contains a path touching the bottom of @xmath and
the left or right boundary of @xmath . Then event (1) is a subset of
@xmath . By the same argument as in the verification of @xmath for
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which also holds under the assumption @xmath . This is because in the
verification of @xmath , @xmath is used in @xmath to guarantee the
random walk overshoot has finite third moment, which is then used in a
Markov inequality to outweigh the @xmath number of rescaled lattice
points in @xmath . For the event @xmath , we are only concerned with
random walks starting at the bottom of @xmath , which contains @xmath
number of rescaled lattice points. Therefore we only need finite first
moment for the random walk overshoot, which translates into finite third
moment for @xmath .

By @xmath ,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

which tends to 0 as @xmath . On the other hand, recall the notation
@xmath for a system of coalescing random walks on @xmath starting with
one walker at every site in @xmath at time 0, we have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is some positive constant depending only on the random walk
increment @xmath . Observe that a nondegenerate random walk with mean
zero and finite variance starting at 0 will at any later time have a
minimal probability @xmath (independent of time) of being on the
negative axis. If we condition on the time and location when some walker
in @xmath first reaches @xmath , then the second inequality is
immediate. By the duality and the natural coupling between coalescing
random walks and voter models (see Section 1.1.2 ), the event @xmath is
equivalent to the event @xmath for the dual voter model @xmath with
initial condition @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath ; which is also
equivalent to the event that the right boundary of the corresponding
voter model interface @xmath satisfies @xmath at time @xmath (see
Section 4.2 for more details on the voter model interface). A result of
Cox and Durrett [ 7 ] states that if the random walk increment @xmath
has finite third moment, then @xmath converges in distribution to a
standard Gaussian variable as @xmath . Therefore

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath . Together with our previous estimate for the event
(1), this establishes @xmath , and hence the lemma.

### 3.4 Verification of @xmath

Our verification of @xmath follows a similar line of argument as in the
paper of Ferrari, Fontes and Wu [ 11 ] . We define three sets of random
walks: @xmath , a family of @xmath independent random walks on the
rescaled lattice @xmath ( @xmath for continuous time); @xmath , the
family of @xmath coalescing random walks constructed from @xmath by
applying a mapping @xmath to @xmath such that two walks coalesce as soon
as their paths coincide (recall that @xmath denote the piecewise
constant version of the random walk path); and @xmath , an auxiliary
family of @xmath coalescing walks constructed by applying a mapping
@xmath to @xmath such that two walks coalesce as soon as their paths
cross (i.e., coincide or interchange relative order; note that random
walks in @xmath coalesce earlier than they do in @xmath ). Here @xmath
and @xmath all denote the piecewise constant version of the random walk
paths. We will denote their linearly interpolated counterpart by @xmath
and @xmath . If we pretend for the moment that weak convergence makes
sense for piecewise constant paths without resorting to Skorohod
topology, then by Donsker’s invariance principle, @xmath “converge
weakly” to a family of independent Brownian motions @xmath . As we will
see, the mapping @xmath is almost surely continuous with respect to
@xmath , and @xmath is distributed as coalescing Brownian motions.
Therefore by the Continuous Mapping Theorem for weak convergence, @xmath
“converge weakly” to the coalescing Brownian motions @xmath . Finally to
show that @xmath also converges weakly to @xmath , we will prove that
the distance between the two versions of coalescing walks @xmath and
@xmath converges to 0 in probability, and the distance between the
linearly interpolated version @xmath and the piecewise constant version
@xmath also converges to 0 in probability.

We introduce more notation. Let @xmath be any deterministic countable
dense subset of @xmath . Let @xmath be fixed, and let @xmath be
independent Brownian motions starting from @xmath . For a fixed @xmath ,
denote @xmath (resp., @xmath for the continuous time case), where @xmath
and @xmath as defined in Chapter 2 , and let @xmath denote @xmath ’s
space-time position after diffusive scaling on the rescaled lattice
@xmath (resp., @xmath ). Let @xmath ( @xmath ) be independent random
walks in the @xmath (resp., @xmath ) lattice starting from @xmath . We
regard @xmath , and @xmath as random variables in the product metric
space @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is defined in @xmath ; thus @xmath gives the product topology
on @xmath . We will also need the metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is defined in a similar way as @xmath . If we denote the
space of paths that are right continuous with left limits by @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the product space, then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are still well defined metric on @xmath and @xmath .

We now define a mapping @xmath from @xmath to @xmath that constructs
coalescing paths from independent paths. The construction is such that
when two paths first cross (i.e., coincide or interchange relative
order), the path with the higher index will be replaced by the path with
the lower index after the time of intersection or order exchange. This
procedure is then iterated until no more intersections take place. To be
explicit, we give the following algorithmic construction.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath denote the time when the two paths @xmath
and @xmath first intersect or interchange relative order. We start with
equivalence relations on the set @xmath by setting @xmath . We then
define the one step iteration @xmath on @xmath and the equivalence
relations by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and update equivalence relations by assigning @xmath . Iterate the
mapping @xmath , and label the successive intersection times @xmath by
@xmath . Then the iteration stops when @xmath for some @xmath , i.e.,
either there is no more crossing among the different equivalence classes
of paths, or all the paths have coalesced and formed a single
equivalence class. Denote the final collection of paths by @xmath . Then
it’s clear by the strong Markov property, that @xmath has the
distribution of coalescing Brownian motions. However @xmath is not
distributed as coalescing random walks, because for nonsimple random
walks, paths can cross before the random walks actually coalesce (by
being at the same space-time lattice site).

To construct coalescing random walk paths from independent random walks,
we define another mapping @xmath from @xmath to @xmath in a similar way
as we defined @xmath , except in ( 3.4.3 )–( 3.4.5 ) we replace the time
of first crossing @xmath by the time of first coincidence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the first time when the two paths @xmath and @xmath
coincide. We will label the successive coincidence times by @xmath .
Also denote @xmath by @xmath . It is then clear that @xmath is
distributed as coalescing random walks starting from @xmath in the
unscaled lattice @xmath (or @xmath ). We shall denote the diffusively
rescaled versions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We need the following lemma to prove @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.4.1

@xmath , @xmath as @xmath .

Proof. From the definition of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and @xmath ,
it is clear that @xmath for any @xmath . Therefore it is sufficient to
prove the lemma with @xmath replaced by @xmath . In terms of random
walks in the unscaled lattice, the lemma can be stated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We first prove @xmath for @xmath . Note that for @xmath , @xmath , hence
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the first time when @xmath and @xmath cross,
and let @xmath denote the first time when the two walks coincide. Also
let @xmath denote the maximum distance over all time between two
coalescing random walk paths @xmath and @xmath starting at 0 and @xmath
at time 0. Then by the strong Markov property, and conditioning at time
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first probability in the summand converges to a limiting probability
distribution as @xmath by applying Lemma to @xmath . The second
probability converges to 0 for every fixed @xmath by Lemma . This proves
@xmath for @xmath .

For @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath denote respectively the first time
when the two independent walks @xmath and @xmath coincide or interchange
relative order. As usual, let @xmath and @xmath . By Donsker’s
invariance principle, the interpolated paths @xmath converge in
distribution to @xmath as @xmath valued random variables. By Skorohod’s
representation theorem [ 4 , 10 ] , we may assume this convergence is
almost sure, i.e., @xmath almost surely. Then by the properties of
standard Brownian motions, we also have @xmath almost surely. Note that
the crossing times @xmath as functions from @xmath to @xmath are almost
surely continuous with respect to @xmath . Therefore almost surely,
@xmath as @xmath , where @xmath is the time of first crossing between
@xmath and @xmath ; and @xmath converge jointly in distribution to
@xmath . By the standard properties of Brownian motion, @xmath are
almost surely all distinct. By an argument similar to @xmath , we also
have @xmath in probability. Note that in our definition of the mapping
@xmath that constructs @xmath from @xmath , the successive times of
crossing @xmath , are all times of first crossing between independent
paths, i.e., @xmath . The event in @xmath can only occur due to: either
(1) for some @xmath in the definition of @xmath , with @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath ; or else, (2) whenever a coalescing takes
place between two paths @xmath in the mapping @xmath , the same two
paths will coalesce in the mapping @xmath before another coalescing
takes place in the mapping @xmath , and the event in @xmath occurs
because for some @xmath with @xmath , the distance between the two paths
@xmath and @xmath during the time interval @xmath exceeds @xmath . The
probability of the event (1) tends to 0 as @xmath by our observations
that @xmath converges jointly in distribution to @xmath , which are
almost surely all distinct, and the fact that @xmath in probability. The
probability of the event (2) tends to 0 by our proof of @xmath for
@xmath . This proves @xmath and Lemma 3.4.1 .

Verification of @xmath . It is sufficient to show that for any sequence
of @xmath , we can find a subsequence @xmath , such that @xmath converge
in distribution to @xmath . As in the proof of Lemma 3.4.1 , Donsker’s
invariance principle implies @xmath converge in distribution to @xmath ,
and by Skorohod’s representation theorem, we may assum this convergence
is almost sure. Then almost surely, we also have @xmath . Note that the
mapping @xmath as a function from @xmath to @xmath is almost surely
continuous with respect to @xmath , therefore almost surely, @xmath as
@xmath . By Lemma 3.4.1 , we can choose a subsequence @xmath such that,
almost surely as @xmath , @xmath , which implies that almost surely,
@xmath . By the properties of Brownian motion, it then follows that the
linearly interpolated coalescing random walk paths @xmath also converge
in the metric @xmath to @xmath almost surely, thus completing the proof
of @xmath .

### 3.5 Verification of @xmath

As usual, we start with some notation. For an @xmath -valued random
variable @xmath , define @xmath to be the subset of paths in @xmath
which start before or at time @xmath , and for @xmath define @xmath to
be the set of paths in @xmath truncated before time @xmath , i.e.,
replacing each path in @xmath by its restriction to time greater than or
equal to @xmath . When @xmath , we denote @xmath simply by @xmath . Also
let @xmath denote the set of values at time @xmath of all paths in
@xmath . Note that @xmath . We may sometimes abuse the notation and use
@xmath also to denote the set of points @xmath .

We recall here the definition of stochastic domination as given in [ 13
] . For two measures @xmath and @xmath on @xmath , @xmath is
stochastically dominated by @xmath ( @xmath ) if for any bounded
increasing function @xmath on @xmath , (i.e. @xmath if @xmath ), @xmath
. When @xmath are the distributions of two @xmath -valued random
variables @xmath and @xmath , we will also denote the stochastic
domination by @xmath . The first step of our proof is to reduce @xmath
to the following condition: @xmath If @xmath is any subsequential limit
of @xmath for any @xmath , then @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.1

Assuming @xmath is a tight family of @xmath -valued random variables,
then @xmath implies @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be fixed, and let @xmath be the weak limit of any
subsequence @xmath with @xmath . To prove the Lemma, it is sufficient to
show that for any @xmath , there is a further subsequence @xmath such
that @xmath converges weakly to a limit @xmath , and @xmath . Because
then we have @xmath by @xmath , and letting @xmath establishes @xmath .

To prove the existence of @xmath , @xmath , and the stochastic
domination, we use a coupling argument. Define @xmath -valued random
variables @xmath , where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . @xmath is a complete separable metric space. Since @xmath
is tight, and @xmath is almost surely a compact subset of @xmath for all
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are also tight. Therefore we can choose a
subsequence @xmath such that @xmath converges weakly to a limit @xmath ,
where @xmath is equally distributed with @xmath and @xmath is the weak
limit of @xmath . By Skorohod’s representation theorem (see, e.g., [ 4 ,
10 ] ), we may assume the convergence is almost sure. Then almost
surely, any path @xmath with @xmath is the limit of a sequence of paths
@xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath is eventually in @xmath , we also have
@xmath . Therefore @xmath almost surely, and @xmath . Since @xmath is
equally distributed with @xmath , the Lemma then follows.

We now cast the condition @xmath in terms of our random variables @xmath
and @xmath . Let @xmath be any subsequential limit of @xmath (or @xmath
). Then the validity of @xmath for @xmath and @xmath is a consequence of
the following two lemmas, which are also what one needs to establish to
verify @xmath for general models other than coalescing random walks
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.5.2

Let @xmath be the intersections of paths in @xmath with the line @xmath
. Then for any @xmath , @xmath is almost surely locally finite.

###### Lemma 3.5.3

For any @xmath , @xmath , the set of paths in @xmath (which all start at
time @xmath ) truncated before time @xmath , is distributed as @xmath ,
i.e., coalescing Brownian motions starting from the random set @xmath .

Verification of @xmath . Assume Lemmas 3.5.2 and 3.5.3 for the moment.
Since @xmath , we have for @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath is arbitrary, letting @xmath establishes @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath .

Recall that @xmath and @xmath denote the piecewise constant version of
@xmath and @xmath . Lemma 3.5.2 is a consequence of the following:

###### Lemma 3.5.4

@xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath independent of @xmath and @xmath . The same is true for
@xmath .

Proof. This follows directly from Lemma 2.0.7 .

Before proving Lemma 3.5.2 , we introduce one more notation. Denote the
space of compact subsets of @xmath by @xmath , with @xmath the induced
Hausdorff metric, i.e., for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that @xmath is a complete separable metric space.

Proof of Lemma 3.5.2 . We prove the lemma only for the discrete time
case, the continuous time case being exactly the same. Let @xmath be the
weak limit of a sequence @xmath . Then @xmath converges weakly to @xmath
as @xmath valued random variables. By Lemma 2.0.9 , @xmath in
probability. Therefore @xmath also converges weakly to @xmath . For any
finite interval @xmath , @xmath is an open set in @xmath for any @xmath
. Therefore by the weak convergence of @xmath to @xmath and Lemma 3.5.4
,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Lemma 3.5.2 then follows.

It only remains to prove Lemma 3.5.3 . We need one more lemma.

###### Lemma 3.5.5

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -valued random variables, where @xmath
is almost surely a locally finite set, @xmath is almost surely a subset
of @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath , and @xmath converges in distribution to
@xmath as @xmath . Conditioned on @xmath , let @xmath @xmath resp.,
@xmath be the process of discrete time @xmath resp., continuous time
@xmath coalescing random walks on @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath starting
from the point set @xmath . Then as @xmath , @xmath @xmath resp., @xmath
converges in distribution to @xmath , the process of coalescing Brownian
motions starting from a random point set distributed as @xmath .

Proof. We only prove the lemma for the discrete time case, the
continuous time case being exactly the same. We first treat the case
where @xmath and @xmath are deterministic and @xmath as @xmath . Note
that @xmath is tight since @xmath is almost surely a subset of @xmath
and @xmath is tight. If @xmath is a subsequential limit of @xmath , then
by @xmath and the remark following Corollary , there is @xmath almost
surely exactly one path starting from every @xmath , and the finite
dimensional distributions of @xmath are those of coalescing Brownian
motions. Therefore @xmath is equidistributed with @xmath , which proves
the deterministic case.

For the nondeterministic case, it suffices to show @xmath as @xmath for
any bounded continuous function @xmath on @xmath . If we denote @xmath ,
and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath converges in
distribution to @xmath , by Skorohod’s representation theorem [ 4 , 10 ]
, we can construct random variables @xmath and @xmath which are
equidistributed with @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath in @xmath
almost surely. Then for almost every @xmath in the probability space
where @xmath and @xmath are defined, by the part of the proof already
done (for deterministic @xmath and @xmath ), @xmath converges in
distribution to @xmath . Thus @xmath @xmath @xmath for almost every
@xmath . By the bounded convergence theorem, @xmath as @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath are equidistributed with @xmath and @xmath , the lemma
follows.

Proof of Lemma 3.5.3 . Let @xmath be the weak limit of @xmath (resp.,
@xmath ) for a sequence of @xmath . We first treat the discrete time
case. By Skorohod’s representation theorem, we can assume the
convergence is almost sure. Then almost surely, @xmath , and @xmath .
Let @xmath , the first time on the rescaled lattice greater than or
equal to @xmath . Using the fact that the image of @xmath under @xmath
is almost surely equicontinuous, it is not difficult to see that @xmath
and @xmath almost surely. On the other hand, @xmath is almost surely
locally finite by Lemma 3.5.2 , and @xmath is distributed as coalescing
random walks on the rescaled lattice starting from @xmath . Therefore by
Lemma 3.5.5 , @xmath converges weakly to @xmath , and @xmath is equally
distributed with @xmath .

We now treat the continuous time case. By Lemma 2.0.9 , as @xmath ,
@xmath @xmath in probability. Let @xmath denote the interpolated version
of @xmath . Then by Lemma 2.0.9 , @xmath also in probability. Therefore
@xmath in probability, and @xmath in distribution. On the other hand,
@xmath is the paths of continuous time coalescing random walks starting
from a random initial configuration at time @xmath , and @xmath
converges weakly to @xmath , which is almost surely locally finite by
Lemma 3.5.2 . Therefore, by Lemma 3.5.5 , @xmath converges in
distribution to @xmath . Thus @xmath is equally distributed with @xmath
, and the lemma is established.

###### Remark 3.5.1

The key to the proof of Lemma 3.5.3 is to approximate @xmath @xmath
resp., @xmath by the paths of a Markov process starting from a random
space-time point set such that Lemma 3.5.5 can be applied. For discrete
time coalescing random walks, the natural choice is @xmath , while for
continuous time, the natural choice is @xmath .

## Chapter 4 Further Results

### 4.1 Convergence of @xmath and @xmath

Let @xmath (resp., @xmath ) denote the @xmath -valued random variable
consisting of the set of interpolated coalescing random walk paths on
the rescaled lattice starting with one walker at every site in @xmath at
time 0. In [ 1 ] , Arratia proved that, for coalescing simple random
walks, @xmath as a point process on @xmath converges in distribution to
@xmath , the point process on @xmath generated at time 1 by coalescing
Brownian motions starting from every point on @xmath at time 0, which is
a stationary simple point process with intensity @xmath . In [ 2 ] ,
Arratia stated the analogous result for nonsimple walks with zero mean
and finite second moment for its increment, but a proof was not given.
In this section, we give a proof for random walks whose increments have
mean zero and finite third moment.

We first recall the space and topology on which point processes are
defined. Let @xmath be the space of locally finite counting measures on
@xmath , where @xmath is the Borel @xmath -algebra generated by the
vague topology on @xmath , i.e., for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath converges
vaguely to @xmath if for any bounded continuous function @xmath with
bounded support, @xmath . (For more background on random measures and
the vague topology, see [ 9 , 18 ] ). The vague topology on @xmath can
be metrized so that @xmath is a complete separable metric space. Recall
that @xmath denotes the piecewise constant version of @xmath , our
result on the convergence of point processes is then the following.

###### Theorem 4.1.1

If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as @xmath -valued
random variables converge weakly to @xmath as @xmath .

Before we prove Theorem 4.1.1 , we need the following lemma.

###### Lemma 4.1.1

If the random walk increment satisfies @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath
converge in distribution to @xmath , the subset of paths in @xmath
starting at time 0.

Proof. Note that for any countable dense subset @xmath , @xmath , the
closure in @xmath of coalescing Brownian motion paths starting from
@xmath is equidistributed with @xmath by properties of the Brownian Web
[ 13 ] . As in the case of the convergence of @xmath and @xmath to
@xmath , we need to establish tightness, and verify conditions @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , where in @xmath , the countable dense set @xmath is
now replaced by @xmath , and in @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is set to 0.
Tightness follows from Lemma 3.3.1 . The other conditions follow
directly from their verification for @xmath and @xmath , which all
require at most finite third moment of @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 4.1.1 . We only prove the theorem for @xmath , the
proof for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is analogous. Since @xmath is a
simple point process, to prove weak convergence of @xmath to @xmath , it
is sufficient to show: (i) tightness; (ii) any subsequential limit of
@xmath is a simple point process; (iii) convergence of the avoidance
(zero) functions, i.e., for any disjoint union of a finite number of
finite intervals @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . (See, e.g., Sections 7.3
and 9.1 in [ 9 ] ).

To prove that @xmath is tight, it is sufficient to show that for any
finite closed interval @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the measure of
@xmath with respect to an element @xmath , and @xmath is a constant
depending on @xmath . Since @xmath , tightness follows from Lemma 3.5.4
.

Let @xmath be a weak limit of @xmath in @xmath with distribution @xmath
. For any @xmath , let @xmath denote @xmath restricted to @xmath . Also
let @xmath . Then for all @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

To prove @xmath is a simple point process, it is then sufficient to show
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since this implies that @xmath is @xmath almost surely a simple counting
measure by taking @xmath in @xmath . Letting @xmath and @xmath then
implies that @xmath is almost surely a simple counting measure.

Note that @xmath , and @xmath is an open set in @xmath . By the weak
convergence of @xmath to @xmath , we have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.3)
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where in @xmath , we applied Lemma 2.0.8 , and in @xmath , we applied
Lemma 2.0.7 . To apply Lemma 2.0.8 , we have implicitly assumed @xmath .
If @xmath , then we need to approximate and use an argument similar to
the one leading to the computation in @xmath . This establishes @xmath ,
thus proving any subsequential limit of @xmath must be a simple point
process.

We now show the convergence of the avoidance functions. Let @xmath be
the disjoint union of a finite number of finite intervals. By Lemma
4.1.1 , @xmath converges weakly to @xmath as @xmath -valued random
variables, so by Skorohod’s representation theorem, we may assume this
convergence is almost sure. In particular, @xmath converges almost
surely to @xmath in @xmath as defined in @xmath . Since @xmath is a
stationary simple point process with intensity @xmath , @xmath . It is
then easy to see that @xmath almost surely. By the bounded convergence
theorem, @xmath , thus proving the the convergence of avoidance
functions and the theorem.

As a corollary of Theorem 4.1.1 , we have

###### Corollary 4.1.1

If the random walk increment @xmath satisfies @xmath , then @xmath as
@xmath .

Proof. We prove the corollary for the discrete time case, the continuous
time case being exactly the same. Let @xmath , and let @xmath , for
@xmath , be a continuous function with support on @xmath , with @xmath ,
and @xmath on @xmath . By Theorem , @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is arbitrary, letting @xmath establishes the corollary.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional voter model (either discrete or
continuous time) with state space @xmath and initial configuration
@xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . The dynamics of the model is defined in
Section 1.1.2 . Then by the duality relation ( 1.1.1 ), @xmath .
Corollary is then equivalent to

###### Corollary 4.1.2

Let @xmath be the voter model defined above. If @xmath , then @xmath as
@xmath .

###### Remark 4.1.2

Corollaries and partially extend a result of Bramson and Griffeath [ 5 ]
. They proved that, for continuous time coalescing simple random walks
in @xmath , @xmath , and the dual voter model @xmath with initial
configuration all @xmath s except for a 1 at the origin, @xmath decays
asymptotically as @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for
@xmath . For @xmath , their proof also works for discrete time random
walks, and as pointed out in the remark before Lemma 2 in [ 6 ] , can be
easily extended to much more general random walks (see [ 6 ] for more
details).

###### Remark 4.1.3

The following correlation inequality is valid for the point process
@xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath be two disjoint open sets in @xmath , and
let @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This negative correlation inequality for @xmath is implicit in the work
of Arratia [ 3 ] ; it is also a direct consequence of Lemma 2.0.8 and
Theorem 4.1.1 . By similar arguments, the same correlation inequality
holds for point processes generated at time 1 by coalescing Brownian
motion paths starting from any closed space-time region strictly below
time 1.

### 4.2 Voter model interface

Voter Model Interface: Let @xmath be a one-dimensional voter model
(either discrete or continuous time) with state space @xmath and initial
configuration @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . At any time @xmath
, @xmath will contain a leftmost 0 and a rightmost 1, whose positions we
denote by @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath
, and the configuration of @xmath between @xmath and @xmath defines what
is called the interface process, @xmath with @xmath , which is a random
variable taking values in @xmath . Cox and Durrett proved in [ 7 ] that,
for the continuous time model @xmath with the associated random walk
increment @xmath satisfying @xmath , the interface process @xmath is an
irreducible positive recurrent Markov chain. Hence the size of the
interface @xmath is of @xmath as @xmath . They also proved that @xmath
and @xmath converge in distribution to standard Gaussian variables as
@xmath . Their result should also be valid for the discrete time model
@xmath .

The weak convergence of @xmath and @xmath to the Brownian Web @xmath
recovers Cox and Durrett’s result under the stronger assumption that
@xmath , but it also establishes that the time evolutions of @xmath and
@xmath converge weakly to the same Brownian motion. In the following
discussion, we will let @xmath , for @xmath , denote the continuous
paths constructed from @xmath by linear interpolation the same way we
construct the interpolated path of a random walk.

###### Theorem 4.2.1

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as defined above. Let @xmath be @xmath
diffusively rescaled, i.e., @xmath , and define @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath similary. If @xmath , then @xmath as @xmath valued random
variables converge in distribution to @xmath , a standard Brownian
motion starting at the origin at time 0.

Proof. We first prove the theorem for the discrete time case. Let @xmath
, i.e. the coalescing random walks running backward in time on the
rescaled lattice. By the duality relation ( 1.1.1 ) and the natural
coupling between voter models and coalescing random walks, we have for
all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath almost surely, where @xmath is the
location at time 0 of the backward random walk path in @xmath starting
at @xmath at time @xmath .

By Theorem 1.3.3 , @xmath converges weakly to @xmath (the backward
Brownian Web) as @xmath ; and by Skorohod’s representation theorem, we
may assume this convergence is almost sure. @xmath uniquely determines a
dual (forward) Brownian web @xmath , which is equally distributed with
the standard Brownian web. The pair @xmath forms what is called the
double Brownian web @xmath with the property that, almost surely, paths
in @xmath and @xmath reflect off each other and never cross [ 13 , 23 ,
22 , 2 ] .

Let @xmath be the diffusively rescaled voter model dual to @xmath with
the natural coupling between the two models. We will overload the
notation and let @xmath and @xmath also denote the piecewise constant
interface boundary lines of @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath denote
their linearly interpolated counterparts. To prove the theorem, it is
then sufficient to show that almost surely, @xmath and @xmath converge
in @xmath to @xmath , the unique path in the forward Brownian web
starting at 0 at time 0, which is distributed as a standard Brownian
motion.

For a fixed point @xmath in the probability space of @xmath , if @xmath
as @xmath , then there exists @xmath and a sequence @xmath , such that
@xmath . In particular, for @xmath sufficiently small, there exists
@xmath with @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is the
position of the leftmost zero at time @xmath for the rescaled voter
model @xmath , by duality, the backward random walk paths in @xmath
starting at @xmath and @xmath at time @xmath satisfy @xmath and @xmath
at time 0. But by the almost sure convergence of @xmath to @xmath ,
there exists a subsequence @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath converge
respectively to @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath , two paths in @xmath
both starting at @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . (Note
that @xmath , because for @xmath and @xmath , the only path that can
start from @xmath is @xmath with @xmath .) By the non-crossing property
of the double Brownian web, @xmath and @xmath cannot cross @xmath ,
hence either @xmath or @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second event in this inclusion has probability zero for the double
Brownian web; therefore almost surely, @xmath as @xmath . The same is
true for @xmath , and this proves the theorem for discrete time.

For continuous time, the proof is similar. After applying Skorohod’s
representation, to prove @xmath almost surely, note that it is
sufficient to prove @xmath almost surely instead. The rest of the proof
is then the same.

###### Remark 4.2.2

The conclusions of Theorem 4.2.1 can potentially be used to establish
@xmath , the tightness condition, for @xmath and @xmath . In particular,
if Cox and Durrett’s result in [ 7 ] can be extended to establish the
conclusions of Theorem 4.2.1 under the assumption @xmath , then @xmath
and @xmath will be tight, and @xmath and @xmath will both converge
weakly to the Brownian Web under the finite third moment assumption.