# Chapter 1 Introduction

One of the inexhaustible studies in physics is the study of hadron
structure \nnfootnote The style specifications used in this thesis
follow those of Physical Review D . It is believed that hadrons and
nuclei are built from quarks and gluons, but it is still under
investigation how those building blocks reveal themselves in nuclear
reactions and how we could get information about those blocks from
modern experiments.

Theory offers Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) as the gauge theory of strong
interactions describing the dynamics between colored quarks and gluons.
According to QCD, the interaction between the quarks becomes weak at
very short distances. This phenomenon, known as asymptotic freedom,
allows us to use perturbation theory to describe high energy strong
interaction processes. At low energy, quarks and gluons are confined
into colorless mesons and baryons which are the real world particles.
The QCD coupling constant grows at these energies plus the chiral
symmetry of QCD is spontaneously broken by almost massless quarks. It
brings us to the necessity of using non-perturbative methods at this
regime.

In search of ways describing the complexity of hadrons and hadronic
systems one should perform precise low-energy experiments to gain
information about the dynamics inside the hadron. However, one should
also look at the specific high energy kinematical regimes where the
factorization theorems have been proven. Those experiments could reveal
some new non-perturbative hadron structure information with the help of
an accurate perturbative QCD description of the reaction dynamics [ 6 ,
7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] .

The experiments performed with electromagnetic probes (Compton
scattering) are the best ones. In Compton scattering, a real or virtual
photon, emitted by a lepton, interacts with the nucleon with initial
momentum @xmath and as a result a real photon is emitted. Due to the new
generation of electron accelerators and high precision, large acceptance
detectors, very high precision Compton scattering experiments have
become a reality. Despite the small cross sections of the process, it
serves as a clean probe of hadron structure.

It is convenient to examine this process in a parton model [ 13 ] . In
this model, the nucleon consists of (a) three valence quarks, (b)
quark-antiquark sea, and (c) gluons, the carriers of quark interactions.
The sea and gluons is created and dissipated through time and is
expected to have almost no influence on the process’ outcome. The
leading role in the nucleon belongs to the valence quarks. The typical
time between interactions should be @xmath because @xmath MeV is the
only genuine scale in light quark QCD. The virtual photon, emitted by a
lepton and carrying the momentum @xmath ( @xmath ), has a lifetime
@xmath , which varies inversely with the momentum transferred by the
photon. The momentum @xmath defines the virtuality of the photon. The
higher virtuality, the shorter is a photon’s life. At some point one may
view the photon as being absorbed instantaneously by one of the quarks
in the hadron.

Suppose the quark that absorbs the photon has longitudinal momentum
@xmath . Upon absorbing the virtual photon, the struck quark becomes
highly virtual with a lifetime @xmath . Since this time is much shorter
than the normal interaction time between quarks in the proton, the
struck quark must reemit the photon before any interactions with the
other quarks and gluons in the proton take place.

Finally, since the transverse momentum of the absorbed photon is @xmath
the photon must be absorbed and re-emitted over a transverse coordinate
region having @xmath . The quark which absorbs the virtual photon is
point-like (bare) down to a transverse size @xmath .

Thus, the scattering by the virtual photon takes place essentially
instantaneously and over a very small, almost point-like, spatial
region. Since the photon interacts only with a single quark and the
transverse momenta @xmath of partons inside, the moving proton is
assumed to be independent of photon virtuality @xmath . It is expected
that the amplitude of the process should be given in terms of the number
density of quarks in the proton multiplied by the scattering amplitude
of an individual quark. Charge and energy conservation brings us to the
following sum rules for the parton distributions @xmath inside the
proton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the cross-section @xmath for the longitudinally polarized virtual
photon is zero

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the cross-section @xmath for the transversely polarized photon is
expressed in the impulse approximation as a sum of photon-quark
cross-sections averaged over the distributions of quarks @xmath and
anti-quarks @xmath in the proton:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -quark charge measured in the units of the
electron charge @xmath and @xmath .

Most of the internal structure of the nucleon has been revealed during
the last few decades through Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS). DIS is a
type of inclusive scattering of high energy leptons on the nucleon in
the Bjorken regime, which means that the photon virtuality @xmath is
very large, @xmath is finite, and the total center-mass energy of the
photon-nucleon system @xmath (one of the Mandelstam variables) is above
the resonance region.

The range of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is given by the fact that the invariant mass of the unobserved final
hadronic state is larger than the nucleon mass @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for the elastic scattering @xmath .

In the process of deep inelastic scattering, the photon emitted by the
lepton and absorbed by the proton creates an infinite number of possible
final states. Summing up all those possible outcomes gives the
intermediate state of elastic lepton-hadron scattering. This means that
deep inelastic scattering could be described using the optical theorem
by the imaginary part of forward Compton scattering.

Elastic scattering has the same initial and final momentum for both of
the participating particles. The amplitude of this process would be
dominated by short distance interactions in the Bjorken regime defined
above.

The leading contribution comes from so-called handbag diagram. The
factorization theorem states that in the large- @xmath limit the
perturbatively calculable hard quark propagators completely factorize
from parton distribution functions @xmath ( @xmath ), which describe
non-perturbative long-distance information about hadronic structure.

It was this particular process to which the perturbative quantum
chromodynamics (QCD) was traditionally and successfully applied and
where the approximate scaling behavior of the structure functions
(independence of hadronic structure functions from the virtuality of the
photon) was discovered. Unpolarized DIS experiments have mapped out the
quark and gluon distributions in the nucleon, while polarized DIS
experiments have shown that quarks carry only a small fraction of the
nucleon spin. As a result, new investigations to understand the nucleon
spin, both experimental and theoretical, became necessary.

Yet, even more complex and intriguing information could be extracted
from Deeply Virtual Compton Scattering (DVCS) [ 1 , 3 ] . As well as in
DIS, the virtual photon carries large negative momentum @xmath , but now
the final momentum of the particles differs from its initial values. One
should make sure that the momentum transfer @xmath is as small as
possible [ 1 , 2 ] . Again, the hard short-distance part factorizes from
the non-perturbative long-distance part, general parton distributions
(GPD), which now would be much more complex.

In addition to usual variable @xmath , the fraction of the nucleon
momentum carried by the photon absorbing quark, which runs from 0 to 1
for the quark and from -1 to 0 for antiquark, depends on two other
variables. One of them is the momentum transfer @xmath which is an
independent Mandelstam variable, that should be small and negative. The
other one is the so-called skewedness @xmath , defined as a fraction of
the average nucleon momentum carried by the overall momentum transfer in
the process. These two extra degrees of freedom, @xmath and @xmath ,
make the dynamics of deeply virtual Compton scattering rich and diverse
[ 14 , 15 , 16 ] .

Let us look at the handbag diagram of deeply virtual Compton scattering.
From this figure it is easy to see that, depending on values of @xmath
and @xmath , the non-forward parton distribution functions can represent
either the correlation between two quarks (when @xmath ), two antiquarks
( @xmath ), or between a quark and antiquark ( @xmath ). In the last
case, GPDs behave like a meson distribution and uncover completely new
information about nucleon structure which is inaccessible in DIS (which
corresponds to the limit @xmath ). That is why DVCS is so compelling and
intriguing for physicists nowadays.

There is only one disadvantage of measuring the virtual Compton
scattering amplitude, namely that the final photon can be emitted not
only by the proton, the process we are most interested in, but also by
an electron, which is referred to as the Bethe-Heitler (BH) process.
This process is well known and it can be calculated exactly in quantum
electrodynamics. The only thing which must be known is the elastic form
factors of the nucleon. Unfortunately, light particles such as electrons
radiate much more than the heavy proton. Therefore the BH process
generally dominates the DVCS amplitude, especially at small @xmath .

One way to minimize this problem is to find the kinematical regions
where the BH process is suppressed (or at least is comparable with the
DVCS amplitude). One of those cases will be discussed in Chapter 2.

Another way is to exploit the interference between the DVCS and the
calculable Bethe-Heitler process, by independently measuring both the
real and imaginary parts of the amplitude. This approach requires the
theoretical models which will allow one to calculate the interference
term with high precision and better understanding. In Chapter 3, the
leading (twist-2) approximation for the DVCS process will be discussed
as well as the influence of the next to leading (twist-3) approximation
on the final result.

There are other promising non-forward hard exclusive processes such as
longitudinal electroproduction of vector and pseudoscalar mesons at
large @xmath , but they are not discussed here.

## Chapter 2 DVCS at small-@xmath

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter, the specific kinematical regime for the DVCS is
considered when the energy of an incoming virtual photon @xmath is very
large @xmath in comparison to its virtuality @xmath , while the Bjorken
variable @xmath is finite and small. It is the so called small- @xmath
region. To be specific, we calculate the DVCS amplitude in the region

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Mandelstam variable corresponding to the
center-of-mass energy squared of the photon-hadron system, @xmath is the
nucleon mass, @xmath is another independent Mandelstam variable equal to
the momentum transfer. The mass of the lepton is neglected.

The first study of the small- @xmath DVCS was undertaken in Ref. [ 5 ] .
The DVCS in this region is a semihard process in which quark ladders are
dominated by gluon ladders well-known as the
Balitsky-Fadin-Kuraev-Lipatov (BFKL) pomeron. It turns out that at large
momentum transfer the coupling of the BFKL pomeron to the nucleon is
essentially equal to the Dirac form factor of the nucleon @xmath . Thus,
the DVCS amplitude in this region ( 2.1 ) can be calculated without any
model assumptions. Since there are only model predictions for the small-
@xmath DVCS in the current literature [ 19 ] , even the approximate
calculations of the cross section in QCD are very timely. The results
obtained in this region can be used for the estimates of the amplitude
at experimentally accessible energies where one or more conditions in
Eq. ( 2.1 ) are relaxed.

To proceed further, at high energies it is convenient to use the Sudakov
variables. Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the light-cone basis of the final particles momenta
plane

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

One advantage of these coordinates is their simple scaling properties
when one takes the high energy limit.

All the other momenta are introduced in this basis as @xmath with @xmath
by definition. For example:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From @xmath and @xmath one can estimate @xmath and @xmath to be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.2 Amplitude factorization

The amplitude of deeply virtual Compton scattering is determined by
contracting the nucleon matrix element [ 20 ] of the T-product of two
electromagnetic currents with the photon polarization vectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is known (see for example the review [ 22 ] ) that in the leading
order in perturbation theory the amplitude at high energy is purely
imaginary up to the @xmath corrections. At high orders in perturbation
theory the amplitude will be purely imaginary in the leading logarithmic
approximation (LLA) and one will restore the real part using the
dispersion relations.

Hence, we will first calculate the imaginary part @xmath of the
amplitude @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The typical diagram for the DVCS amplitude in the lowest order in
perturbation theory is shown in Fig. 2.1 (recall that the diagrams with
gluon exchanges dominate at high energies). We are primarily looking for
the imaginary part of the amplitude.

At high energy the amplitude for the colorless particle scattering is
described by the Feynman diagrams containing only two intermediate
gluons with momenta @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath -channel (Fig. 2.2
). Simple estimations show that with good accuracy we can neglect the
longitudinal momenta in their propagators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us consider the integral over gluon momentum @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the upper and the lower blocks of the
diagram with two gluon exchanges in Fig. 2.2 ( @xmath and @xmath are the
color and Lorentz indices, respectively) corresponding to the
impact-factor representation.

Due to our definition of the light-cone basis, all of the @xmath -s in
the upper block could be neglected as well as all of the @xmath -s in
the lower block. At high energies, the metric tensor in the numerator of
the Feynman-gauge gluon propagator reduces to @xmath so the integral (
2.6 ) for the imaginary part factorizes into a product of two “impact
factors” integrated with two-dimensional propagators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the sum of squared charges of active flavors ( @xmath ,
and possibly @xmath ).

### 2.3 Photon impact factor

The photon impact factor is given by the two one-loop diagrams shown in
Fig. 2.3 .

The first diagram yields:

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (2.10)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

The second diagram differs only by trace and quark propagator:

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (2.11)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

In these formulae, the following notation was used: @xmath , @xmath is a
Dirac delta-function and @xmath is a Heaviside step function. The
singularities in the physical region were replaced using the Cutkosky
rule [ 23 ] .

In a physical region the singularity is related to external 4-momenta.
It is true for the normal thresholds. Anomalous thresholds do not show
up as main singularities in the physical region if the external
particles are stable, which means that the 4-momenta squared for each
vertex is less than the smallest value of the normal threshold in the
given channel.

S. Coleman and R.E. Norton [ 24 ] found the following simple
interpretation. In the physical region the main singularity of the
diagram occurs only if all the vertices could be considered as some
space-time points while the internal lines could be regarded as the
trajectories of the real relativistic particles on mass shell.

Due to the @xmath -function all the particles are on the mass shell

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and their energy is positive ( @xmath and @xmath ). Here we introduced
the notation @xmath .

The trace in the integral ( 2.11 ) contains @xmath -dependence:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.12)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

hidden in the definition of @xmath : @xmath .

This formula is rather long, but its beauty is in its generality. Here
one has no restrictions on photon polarizations or virtualities. It
simplifies a lot for every specific case. For example, when both photons
are transverse @xmath , this integral reduces to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral for the first diagram differs only in overall sign and the
definition of @xmath . By introducing the Feynman parameter @xmath (with
simultaneous shifting to @xmath ) and using formulae of Feynman
parametrization, one is able to get the photon impact factor for the
case of arbitrary photon polarization as the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can see from Eq. ( 2.3 ), that even in the most general case, the
difference between the two diagrams of Fig. 2.3 is in the presence of
@xmath in one and the absence ( @xmath ) in the other. It means one can
write [ 25 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the particular case of two transverse photons one gets (cf. [ 26 ]
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and for the longitudinal polarization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the incoming photon the formula is also simple:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the (positive) scalar product of transverse
components of vectors @xmath and @xmath . At large transverse momenta
@xmath , the impact factor ( 2.16 ) reduces to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The impact factor for the proton, which describes the pomeron-nucleon
coupling, cannot be calculated in perturbation theory. However, in the
next section it is demonstrated that at high momenta @xmath this impact
factor reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sum of the proton and neutron Dirac form factors.

### 2.4 Nucleon impact factor

In the lowest order in perturbation theory there is no difference
between the diagrams for the nucleon impact factor shown in Fig. 2.4

and similar diagrams with two gluons replaced by two photons. One has to
add the trivial numerical factor @xmath and to replace @xmath . In this
case the lower part of the diagram can be formally written as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The @xmath means that we take into account only the
T-product of the diagrams with pure gluon exchanges in the @xmath
-channel excluded. By definition, such diagrams contribute to subsequent
ranks of the BFKL ladder rather than to the impact factor. This is also
the reason why we have not included strange quarks in the definition of
electromagnetic current @xmath . Since @xmath in our case is large and
negative (- @xmath ) we can expand the T-product of two currents near
the light cone (see e.g. [ 27 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where again @xmath stands for the matrix element with pure gluon
exchanges excluded. Here @xmath denotes the gauge link connecting the
points @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). The matrix element ( 2.23 ) can be
parametrized in terms of skewed parton distributions [ 28 ] as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the non-flip and spin-flip skewed parton
distributions for the valence @xmath quark (recall that one must take
into account only valence quarks since diagrams with pure gluon
exchanges are forbidden). Similarly, @xmath and @xmath refer to the
valence @xmath -quark distributions. At large energies @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

After integration over @xmath the lower block ( 2.22 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The nucleon impact factor ( 2.9 ) is the integral of the imaginary part
of right hand side of Eq. ( 2.4 ) over energy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

And finally,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Since valence quark distributions decrease at @xmath one can extend the
lower limit of integration in the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 2.27 ) to 0 and
obtain:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (2.29)
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Let us recall the sum rules [ 1 , 28 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the total (valence @xmath sea) non-flip and
spin-flip skewed quark distributions while @xmath and @xmath are the
antiquark ones. In these equations, @xmath and @xmath stand for the
@xmath -quark components of the Dirac and Pauli form factors of the
proton. Since the contribution of sea quarks drops from the difference
@xmath one can rewrite Eqs. ( 2.30 ) as the sum rules for valence quark
distributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this estimate to Eq. ( 2.29 ) and using the isospin
invariance, one can get the final result for the nucleon impact factor
at large transverse momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . As usual, @xmath and @xmath are the Dirac and
Pauli form factors of the proton (neutron), respectively. With our
accuracy they can be approximated by the dipole formulas:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the notation @xmath GeV @xmath is introduced. In further
calculations we will use the estimate ( 2.4 ). It is obvious that the
spin-flip term turned out to be negligible for our values of @xmath .
Besides, it vanishes at @xmath , which suggests that it is numerically
small at all @xmath .

Our final estimate of the nucleon impact factor is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by the dipole formula ( 2.4 ).

The dipole formula for the neutron form factor does not seem to work as
well as the dipole formula for the proton form factor. As a measure of
the uncertainty one can compare the results obtained from Eq. ( 2.4 ) to
those obtained using the model from Ref. [ 29 ] (which was fit only to
the proton form factor):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The results for the DVCS cross section in this model are about @xmath
times bigger than the results obtained from the dipole formula ( 2.4 ).

In what follows the factor @xmath is omitted (as it was done in Eq. (
2.21 )) since all the amplitudes are diagonal in the proton’s spin.

### 2.5 The BFKL ladder

As we shall see below, the characteristic transverse momenta in our
gluon loop are large, so the estimate ( 2.21 ) is sufficient for our
purposes. Substituting the nucleon impact factor ( 2.21 ) into Eq. ( 2.7
) one obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final integration over @xmath reveals the logarithmic dependence of
the photon impact factor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 2.15 ).

For the case of transverse photon polarizations one gets

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and when the incoming photon has longitudinal polarization we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The longitudinal amplitude ( 2.44 ) is twist-suppressed as @xmath in
comparison to the transverse amplitude ( 2.5 ) (as it should, due to the
fact that @xmath corresponds to a real incoming photon).

Since the integral over @xmath ( 2.36 ) converges at @xmath , the region
@xmath , where we do not know the nucleon impact factor, contributes to
the terms @xmath which we neglect.

In the next-to-leading order (NLO) in perturbation theory the most
important diagrams are those of the type shown in Fig. 2.5 . Actually,
this diagram gives the total contribution in LLA if one replaces the
three-gluon vertex in Fig. 2.5 by the effective Lipatov’s vertex [ 22 ]
.

Calculation of this diagrams in the leading log approximation yields:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.45)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where @xmath is the BFKL kernel [ 30 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we shall see below, the integral over @xmath converges at @xmath so
we can again use the approximation ( 2.21 ) for the nucleon impact
factor. One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore the amplitude ( 2.45 ) takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.48)
  -- -- -- --------

Finally, the integration over @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where the accuracy is @xmath and @xmath is a Riemann zeta function.

In the next order in the BFKL approximation (see Fig. 2.6 ) it is still
possible to obtain the DVCS amplitude ( 2.4 ) in the explicit form.

It is possible to write down the result of the summation of the BFKL
ladder in the form of a Mellin integral over complex momenta using the
Lipatov’s conformal eigenfunctions of the BFKL equation in the
coordinate space. Unfortunately, we were not able to perform explicitly
the integration of the Lipatov’s eigenfunctions with impact factors and
without it the Mellin representation of the DVCS amplitude is useless
for practical applications.

The amplitude in the next-to-next-to-leading order is:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

Once again, if we use the fact that the integral over @xmath converges
at @xmath we can approximate the nucleon impact factor by Eq. ( 2.34 ),
and obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting integration over @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.52)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

As it was mentioned, we are unable yet to obtain the explicit
expressions for the amplitude in higher orders in perturbation theory.
It turns out, however, that for HERA energies the achieved accuracy is
reasonably good. The estimation of the next term gives @xmath 30% of the
answer at not too low @xmath (see the discussion in next section).

In the leading logarithmic approximation it is impossible to distinguish
between @xmath and @xmath – to this end one needs to use the NLO BFKL
approximation [ 31 ] (see also [ 32 ] ) which is beyond the scope of
this paper.

The final result for the DVCS amplitude with transversely polarized
photons is:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.54)
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the spin-dependent part @xmath does not contain any @xmath and
is, hence, much smaller than the spin-independent part @xmath . For the
longitudinal polarization ( 2.18 ) the amplitude is twist-suppressed as
@xmath so we have not calculated any terms beyond Eq. ( 2.44 ). In the
numerical analysis carried out in the next sections only the
spin-independent part of the amplitude is kept:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expressions above give us the imaginary part of the DVCS amplitude.
For the calculation of the DVCS cross section one needs to know also the
real part @xmath of this amplitude, which can be estimated via the
dispersion relation. For the positive-signature amplitude @xmath (
@xmath ) we get [ 33 ] (see also [ 19 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

which amounts to the substitution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

in our amplitude ( 2.56 ). Thus, the real part is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.6 DVCS cross section

It is instructive to compare the DVCS amplitude @xmath given by Eq. (
2.4 ) with the corresponding amplitude for the forward @xmath scattering

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The imaginary part of this amplitude is the total cross section for deep
inelastic scattering (DIS)

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath                  (2.62)
                             
                 @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

For example, @xmath averaged over the transverse polarizations of the
photons is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

(at the leading twist level we have the Callan-Gross relation @xmath ).
We will compare the imaginary part of the DVCS amplitude @xmath given by
Eq. ( 2.56 ) to the result for @xmath calculated with the same accuracy.
(The notation @xmath is used rather than @xmath in order to avoid
confusion with @xmath ).

Similarly to the DVCS case, the DIS amplitude has the form (cf. Eqs. (
2.36 ),( 2.45 ), and ( 2.5 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.64)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the virtual photon impact factor averaged over the
transverse polarizations [ 34 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nucleon impact factor @xmath cannot be calculated in perturbation
theory since it is determined by the large-scale nucleon dynamics.
However, we know the asymptotics at large @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, at @xmath at @xmath due to the gauge invariance. It seems
reasonable to model this impact factor by the simple formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the correct behavior both at large and small @xmath . With
this model, the DIS amplitude ( 2.64 ) takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the coefficients in front of leading logs of @xmath ,
determined by the anomalous dimensions of twist-2 operators, coincide up
to the factor @xmath . The graph of the model ( 2.68 ) versus the
experimental data is presented in Fig. 2.7 for @xmath GeV @xmath and
@xmath GeV @xmath (we take @xmath ).

For DIS it is possible to write down the total BFKL sum as a Mellin
integral and unlike DVCS, the integrals of impact factors with the BFKL
eigenfunctions @xmath can be calculated explicitly. Eqs. ( 2.68 ) and (
2.69 ) correspond to the expansion of this explicit expression in powers
of @xmath .

For example, the next term in BFKL series ( 2.68 ) has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The ratio of this @xmath term to the sum of the first three ones ( 2.68
) is presented in Fig. 2.8 for @xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath GeV @xmath .
From these graphs we see that the sum of the first three terms gives the
reliable estimate of the DIS amplitude at not too low @xmath . It is
expected that the same will also be true for the DVCS amplitude.

At very small @xmath the full BFKL result for @xmath in our model is
growing more rapidly than Fig. 2.7 . On the other hand if one takes into
account the NLO BFKL corrections [ 31 , 32 ] the result for @xmath at
very small @xmath goes well under the experimental points. This
indicates, that at such @xmath we need to unitarize the BFKL pomeron,
which is currently an unsolved problem. (The best hope is to find the
effective action for the BFKL pomeron (see e.g. [ 35 , 36 ] )). On the
contrary, at “intermediate” @xmath , we see from Fig. 2.7 that, since
the corrections almost cancel each other, it makes sense to take into
account only a few first terms in BFKL series.

It is instructive to compare the t-dependence of our DVCS amplitude (
2.54 ) with the model used in the paper [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.70)
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for our energies. (Literally, the model used in ref. [ 19 ]
corresponds to @xmath but it is more natural to approximate the @xmath -
dependence by the dipole formula [ 37 ] ).

The comparison is shown in Fig. 2.9 for @xmath GeV @xmath , @xmath GeV
@xmath and @xmath =0.01, @xmath =0.001.

In order to estimate the cross section for DVCS at HERA kinematics (
@xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath ) we will use formulae from Ref. [ 19 ]
(see also Ref. [ 38 ] ) with the trivial substitution @xmath . The
expressions for the DVCS cross section, the quantum electrodynamics
(QED) Compton (Bethe-Heitler) cross section, and the interference term
have the form ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.72)
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The expression for the interference term from ref. [ 19 ] is corrected
by factor 2 [ 37 ] , [ 39 ] . Here @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath are the
incident and scattered electron energies, respectively, as defined in
the proton rest frame) and @xmath where @xmath is the azimuthal angle
between the plane defined by @xmath and the final state proton and the
@xmath plane and @xmath is the azimuthal angle between the plane defined
by the initial and final state electron and @xmath plane (see Ref. [ 19
] ). As mentioned above, we approximate the Dirac and Pauli form factors
of the proton by the dipole formulas ( 2.4 ).

At first let us discuss the relative weight of the above cross sections.
We start with the asymmetry defined in ref. [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The asymmetry shows the relative importance of the interference term,
which is proportional to the real part of the DVCS amplitude. In our
approximation the asymmetry is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The plots of asymmetry versus @xmath and @xmath are given by Fig. 2.10 .

Second, we define the ratio of the DVCS and Bethe-Heitler cross sections
[ 19 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ratio is presented on Fig. 2.11 .

We see that there is a sharp dependence on @xmath ; at @xmath the DVCS
part is negligible in comparison to Bethe-Heitler background whereas at
@xmath the QEDC background is small in comparison to DVCS.

Finally let us estimate the relative weight of the DVCS signal (starting
from @xmath GeV @xmath ) as compared to the DIS background. We define
(cf. ref. [ 19 ] )

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath                  (2.79)
                             
                 @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

At @xmath GeV @xmath we find @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
while for @xmath GeV @xmath we find @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath .

The expressions ( 2.72 )-( 2.74 ) are correct if @xmath up to @xmath
accuracy with the notable exception of the correction @xmath coming from
the expansion of electron propagator in the u-channel of the
Bethe-Heitler amplitude. As suggested in ref. [ 39 ] , at intermediate
@xmath one can keep the propagator in unexpanded form (and expand the
rest of the amplitude, as we have done above). This amounts to the
replacement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the numerator in Eqs. ( 2.73 ) and ( 2.74 ) (see ref. [ 38 ] ).

The resulting asymmetry ( 2.75 ) is presented in Fig. 2.12 . We see that
the correction factor ( 2.80 ) crucially changes the behavior of the
asymmetry due to the fact that it restores the azimuthal dependence of
the QEDC amplitude which was not taken into account in Eqs. ( 2.72 -
2.74 ). In order to find asymmetry at these @xmath and @xmath with
greater accuracy one should take into account other twist-4
contributions as well. On the contrary, the ratio @xmath does not change
much (see Fig. 2.13 ) so we hope that our leading-twist results for the
ratio presented in Fig. 2.11 are reliable.

### 2.7 Conclusion

The DVCS in the kinematical region ( 2.1 ) is probably the best place to
test the momentum transfer dependence of the BFKL pomeron. Without this
dependence, the model ( 2.71 ) would be exact, hence the upper curves in
Fig. 2.9 indicate how important is the @xmath -dynamics of the pomeron.
We see that the @xmath -dependence of the BFKL pomeron changes the cross
section at @xmath GeV @xmath by orders of magnitude and therefore it
should be possible to detect it [ 41 ] .

The pQCD calculation of the DVCS amplitude in the region ( 2.1 ) is in a
sense even more reliable than the calculation of usual DIS amplitudes
since it does not rely on the models for nucleon parton distribution.
Indeed, all the non-perturbative nucleon input is contained in the Dirac
form factor of the nucleon, which is known to a reasonable accuracy.
There are, of course, the non-perturbative corrections to the BFKL
pomeron itself. It is not clear how to take them into account at this
moment. Of course, any reasonable models of nucleon parton distributions
such as ( 2.27 ) should reproduce the form factor after integration over
@xmath .

Finally, let us discuss uncertainties in our approximation and possible
ways to improve it. One obvious improvement would be to calculate (at
least numerically) the next @xmath term in the BFKL series for the DVCS
amplitude. Hopefully, it will be as small as the corresponding
calculation of the DIS amplitude suggests. Besides, there are
non-perturbative corrections to the BFKL pomeron which are mentioned
above. These non-perturbative corrections correspond to the situation
like the “aligned jet model” when one of the two gluons in Fig. 2.1 is
soft and all the momentum transfers through the other gluon. It is not
clear how to take these corrections into account, but one should expect
them to be smaller than the corresponding corrections to @xmath which
come from two non-perturbative gluons in Fig. 2.1 (in other words, from
the “soft pomeron” contribution to @xmath ).

The biggest uncertainty in our calculation is the argument of coupling
constant @xmath which we take to be @xmath . As mentioned above, it is
not possible to fix the argument of @xmath in the LLA, so one could have
used @xmath instead. We hope to overcome this difficulty by using the
results of NLO BFKL in our future work.

## Chapter 3 Generalized parton distributions

### 3.1 Introduction

Let me start with the historical overview of the problem. The first
information about quark distributions inside the nucleon was received
from the experiments on deep inelastic scattering:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are possible final hadronic states with the 4-momentum
@xmath .

The scattering amplitude for the @xmath -channel is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is electron’s charge, @xmath ( @xmath ) is the
initial(final) momentum of the electron, @xmath ( @xmath ) is electron’s
initial(final) polarization, @xmath is the momentum of the virtual
photon, that hits the nucleon ( @xmath , @xmath ), @xmath is electron’s
scattering angle and @xmath is hadronic electromagnetic current.

The differential cross section for this scattering for unpolarized
particles has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

If we sum over all possible final hadronic states, we will get the
inclusive cross section

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath - fine structure constant. Lepton tensor @xmath has the
following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the hadronic one @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the current conservation @xmath one gets the following equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which brings us to the requirements that hadronic tensor @xmath should
satisfy: it should be a Lorentz invariant tensor of rank two and it
should depend on momenta @xmath and @xmath (the only momenta we have in
this case), which brings us to the following representation of the
hadronic tensor:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the first Lorentz invariant structure functions of the
nucleon target that had ever been introduced. Those structure functions
depend on two variables @xmath and @xmath .

In the case, when the final hadronic state @xmath is also a nucleon (the
case of the elastic electron-nucleon scattering), the matrix element for
the electromagnetic current has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . For the proton @xmath is equal to the electric charge and
@xmath is equal to the anomalous magnetic moment. For the neutron those
number are @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

Therefore, the differential cross section measurements for the elastic
electron-nucleon scattering give us information about electrical and
magnetic form factors. If the nucleon had no internal structure, those
form factors were independent on @xmath . The experimental fact that
they have momentum transfer dependence opened a new era in nucleon
structure investigations.

The new parton model was created by Feynman, which described a nucleon
as a particle consisting of three partons (quarks) interacting by gluon
exchange. Lepton-nucleon scattering has been transformed to the
scattering of virtual photon off one of the partons. Accordingly, the
structure functions @xmath describing the response of the nucleon with
momentum @xmath to the momentum transfer @xmath were replaced by
structure functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the probability to find the parton (quark)
inside the nucleon carrying the fraction @xmath of initial longitudinal
nucleon momenta @xmath within the range from @xmath to @xmath . The
corresponding function for the antiquark is denoted as @xmath .

Thus, through the experiments on deep inelastic lepton-hadron scattering
one can extract information on forward quark distribution functions
(Fig. 3.1 ).

In the following, we introduce the kinematical variables entering the
DVCS process. We then discuss the DVCS amplitude in the leading power in
@xmath (twist-2 accuracy), and show its dependence upon the general
parton distribution (GPD) functions.

### 3.2 DVCS in twist-2 approximation

As was already mentioned in the first chapter, the deeply virtual
Compton scattering process

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit of vanishing momentum transfer @xmath and large virtuality
@xmath offers us much more complex insight on parton dynamics in the
nucleon. In the lowest approximation (twist-2) the structure functions
@xmath , called double distributions [ 1 , 2 ] , carry information on
the quark distributions with different fraction @xmath of the initial
nucleon momentum and different fraction @xmath of the momentum transfer
@xmath carried by the quark. This nucleon structure information can be
parametrized in terms of four structure functions. Those functions look
like usual distribution functions with respect to @xmath and like
distribution amplitudes with respect to @xmath .

#### 3.2.1 Kinematical variables and distribution functions

Since @xmath ( @xmath - is the final real photon four-momenta), it is
natural to use it as one of the basic Sudakov light-cone 4-vectors.
Another basic light-cone vector we use is @xmath , which is also
understandable, since @xmath can be neglected compared to the virtuality
@xmath of the initial photon and the energy invariant @xmath . In this
limit ( @xmath and @xmath ), the simple equation @xmath requires @xmath
which can be satisfied in the light-cone basis only if they are
proportional to each other @xmath .

Despite the proportionality between @xmath and @xmath , they specify the
momentum flow in two different channels, @xmath and @xmath respectively.
The coefficient of their proportionality @xmath is the parameter
characterizing the “asymmetry” or the “skewedness” of the matrix
elements.

The total momentum fraction of the quark can either be positive or
negative. Since positive momentum fraction corresponds to quark and the
negative one - to antiquark, there are three major regions that could be
found. Two of them, namely when we have two active quarks or antiquarks,
are the regions accessible in inclusive processes like DIS and giving us
the usual forward parton distributions. The third region represents the
one-quark-one-antiquark case, which cannot be measured through DIS,
since it vanishes in the forward limit @xmath . In the limit @xmath we
come up with the following reduction formulas for the double
distributions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Positive- @xmath and negative- @xmath components of the double
distributions can be treated as non-forward generalizations of quark and
antiquark densities, respectively: @xmath ( @xmath ).

The reduction formulas and interpretation of the @xmath -variable
suggests, that the profile of @xmath in @xmath -direction is basically
determined by the shape of @xmath .

The profile in the @xmath -direction at the same time characterizes the
spread of the parton momentum induced by the momentum transfer @xmath .
This brings us to the following relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an even function of @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating each particular double distribution over @xmath gives the
non-forward parton distributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total momentum fraction and the notation @xmath is
used.

#### 3.2.2 Twist-2 DVCS amplitude

The leading [ 1 , 3 , 42 ] handbag contribution (Fig. 3.3 ) to the DVCS
amplitude can be represented as [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The invariant amplitudes @xmath can be calculated using model [ 43 ] for
the non-forward quark parton distributions with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note, that because the non-forward distributions are real, the imaginary
part of @xmath comes only from the singularities of the expression in
the square brackets. Since all non-forward distributions vanish at
@xmath , only the first term in the square brackets generates the
imaginary part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The real part of the invariant amplitudes @xmath (Fig. 3.4 ) is given by
the “principle value integration” in Eq.( 3.19 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-forward distributions @xmath are expressed through the double
distributions by Eq.( 3.2.1 ).

In our calculations we use the model [ 43 ] for the double distribution
given by the factorized ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the forward quark – parton distribution and @xmath is
the profile function. The realistic profile for the double quark
distributions, both valence and sea, is close to the “asymptotic” form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting curves for the real and imaginary parts of the invariant
amplitude @xmath are shown in Fig. 3.5 .

#### 3.2.3 Twist-2 DVCS cross section

The DVCS amplitude, as was mentioned before, may be observed in the
exclusive lepton-nucleon scattering. In the @xmath reaction, the final
photon can be emitted either by the proton or by the lepton. The three
relevant diagrams are shown in Fig. 3.6 . The blob with two photon legs
in diagram Fig. 3.6 @xmath stands for the DVCS nucleon amplitude (i.e.
the amplitude @xmath (in Eq. ( 3.24 )) of scattering of the virtual
photon on the nucleon, with the real photon in the final state, whereas
the one-photon blob in diagrams Fig. 3.6 @xmath represents the nucleon
electromagnetic form factor.

We will refer to diagram Fig. 3.6 @xmath as the DVCS part of the
amplitude of the electron-nucleon scattering. Figs. 3.6 @xmath give
together the Bethe-Heitler part.

The invariant cross section of the @xmath reaction differential with
respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and out-of-plane angle @xmath (
@xmath corresponds to the situation where the real photon is emitted in
the same half plane as the leptons) is given by :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the nucleon mass, @xmath , and @xmath is the initial
lepton four-momentum.

The process where the photon is emitted from the initial or final lepton
is referred to as the Bethe-Heitler (BH) process (amplitude @xmath in
Eq. ( 3.24 )), and can be calculated exactly:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the dimensionless variables @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . The @xmath -dependence is hidden in @xmath and it alone
determines the @xmath -dependence of the Bethe-Heitler amplitude @xmath
.

Light particles such as electrons radiate much more than the heavy
proton. Therefore the BH process generally dominates the DVCS amplitude,
especially at small @xmath . The best way to extract the information on
general parton distribution functions and still be in an accessible
region for the experimentalists is to measure the interference term. We
could benefit from the situation if we consider the difference in cross
section for electrons with opposite helicities. This way, in the
difference of cross sections @xmath , the BH (whose amplitude is purely
real) drops out. The DVCS contribution is strongly suppressed and the
term dominating the cross section would be the BH-DVCS interference [ 44
] term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Bethe-Heitler process will project out the imaginary part of
DVCS amplitude magnifying it with its own full magnitude.

The imaginary part of the DVCS amplitudes is directly proportional to
the GPDs, evaluated along the line @xmath , and measures in this way the
‘envelope functions’ @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (Eq. ( 3.20
)).

Figures 3.7 through 3.15 show the results of our calculations for the
energies and kinematics accessible at Jefferson Lab. The values of
transferred momentum squared run from @xmath to @xmath limited by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each of kinematical sets.

One can see, that the interference term is larger at lower momentum
transfer @xmath even though it is responsible for a smaller percentage
of the total cross section. As the initial energy of the electron @xmath
goes up, the interference cross section value drops down by one order.
The ratio of the interference term to the total cross section,
nevertheless, stays the same: about 40 to 60 percents.

### 3.3 Twist-3 corrections for the DVCS process

The twist-2 DVCS amplitude ( 3.18 ) is independent of @xmath . This
means it has a scaling behavior. However, this amplitude is not complete
beyond the leading order in @xmath . Although it is exactly gauge
invariant @xmath with respect to the virtual photon, the electromagnetic
gauge invariance is violated by the real photon except in the forward
direction @xmath . This violation of gauge invariance is a higher twist
(twist-3) effect compared to the leading order term @xmath . Since the
product of final photon 4-momentum and the DVCS amplitude at twist-2
accuracy is proportional to the transverse component of the transferred
momentum @xmath , an improved DVCS amplitude has been used [ 45 , 46 ]
to restore the gauge invariance in the nonforward direction:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

It creates a correction term of higher order in @xmath to the twist-2
DVCS amplitude @xmath .

It is necessary to have an estimate of the effect of power suppressed
(higher twist) contributions to those observables in order to be able to
extract the twist-2 GPDs from DVCS observables at accessible values of
the hard scale @xmath .

The first power correction to the DVCS amplitude of order @xmath is
called twist-3.

The twist-3 corrections to the DVCS amplitude, which have been derived
and calculated recently by several groups [ 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52
, 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 ] using different approaches. In our study we used
the notations and definitions from [ 57 ] . The following section is a
short overview of these definitions.

#### 3.3.1 Kinematical variables of the DVCS process

Let us start with the comparison of the kinematical variables used for
the description of twist-3 amplitude with the set of variables we used
in the previous section. There is only a slight difference, but it is
worth mentioning.

There are four generalized structure functions used for the description
of DVCS amplitude. They are denoted by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath and depend on three variables. The light-cone momentum fraction
@xmath is defined by @xmath , where @xmath is the quark loop momentum
and @xmath is the average nucleon momentum ( @xmath , where @xmath (
@xmath ) are the initial (final) nucleon four-momenta respectively). In
the previous chapter we have used the initial momentum of the hadron
@xmath as one of the basic light-cone momenta and up to twist-3 accuracy
those momentum coincide as will be shown later. The skewedness variable
@xmath is defined by @xmath , where @xmath is the same as @xmath in the
previous chapter, the overall momentum transfer in the process, and
where @xmath in the Bjorken limit. The third variable entering the GPDs
is given by the Mandelstam invariant @xmath , exactly as it was before.

Using momenta @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath and @xmath we can
define the active quark momentum as @xmath before the virtual photon
impact and @xmath afterwards. The light-cone basis is chosen along the
positive and negative @xmath -direction (both @xmath and @xmath are
collinear along the @xmath -axis and have opposite direction): @xmath
and @xmath , satisfying @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and using the notation
@xmath .

In this frame, the physical momenta entering the DVCS process ( 3.12 )
have the following decomposition [ 45 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the perpendicular component of the momentum transfer
@xmath ( i.e. @xmath ), and where the variables @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

To twist-3 accuracy, Eqs. ( 3.29 - 3.32 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the final (real) photon 4-momentum squared @xmath suggests the
twist-3 accuracy @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Twist-3 DVCS amplitude

As a starting point we use the DVCS amplitude on the nucleon to the
order @xmath derived explicitly in a parton model approach [ 48 ] and in
a light-cone expansion framework [ 49 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (3.37)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where the functions @xmath and @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.38)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following notations are used :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath are called [ 58 ] Wandzura-Wilczek kernels. They
were introduced in Ref. [ 49 , 51 ] and are defined as :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.42)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We also introduce the metric and totally antisymmetric tensors in the
two dimensional transverse plane ( @xmath ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the coefficient functions @xmath are defined as :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the expression Eq. ( 3.37 ) for the DVCS amplitude to the twist-3
accuracy, the first two terms correspond to the scattering of
transversely polarized virtual photons. Applying all the definitions to
the first two terms of the expression Eq. ( 3.37 ) brings us to the
twist-2 DVCS amplitude like we had in the previous chapter. The vector
part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the axial-vector part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This part of the amplitude, containing @xmath and @xmath , depends only
on the twist-2 GPDs @xmath and @xmath and was elaborated in Refs. [ 45 ,
46 ] . Comparison with structure blocks of Eq. ( 3.18 ) gives us the
idea of how the structure functions @xmath are related to the structure
functions parametrizing the tensor @xmath , vector @xmath , pseudoscalar
@xmath , and axial-vector @xmath transitions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The generalized parton distributions coincide with the quark
distributions at vanishing momentum transfer and the first moments of
the GPDs are related to the elastic form factors of the nucleon through
model independent sum rules [ 1 , 2 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while the second Mellin moment is closely related to the quark orbital
momentum contribution to the proton spin [ 48 ] .

The third term in Eq. ( 3.37 ) corresponds to the contribution of the
longitudinal polarization of the virtual photon. Defining the
polarization vector of the virtual photon as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can easily calculate the DVCS amplitude for longitudinal polarization
of the virtual photon ( @xmath transition), which is purely of twist-3 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is therefore seen that this term depends only on new ‘transverse’
GPDs @xmath and @xmath , which can be related to the twist-2 GPDs @xmath
and @xmath with help of Wandzura-Wilczek relations given by Eqs. ( 3.38
- 3.3.2 ). Twist-3 part of the amplitude could be divided into three
separate terms. Two of them

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are similar to @xmath and @xmath and give no output to the cross section
correction at twist-3 accuracy. The third one

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is the only one that needs to be calculated for the estimate of twist-3
corrections.

#### 3.3.3 Twist-3 DVCS cross section

In the leading twist-2 approximation, the amplitude squared falls off as
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.66)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Next to the leading, twist-3, approximation is suppressed by @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.67)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

Here we used the notation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Coefficient functions @xmath and @xmath defined by Eqs. ( 3.3.2 ) and (
3.3.2 ) are affected by the Wandzura-Wilczek transformation. To better
understand the properties of the WW transformations let us consider two
limiting cases of the WW transformation: the forward limit @xmath and
the ‘meson’ limit @xmath . In the forward limit we easily obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.69)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From the second expression it follows that the @xmath kernel is a
‘genuine non-forward’ object as it disappears in the forward limit.

In the limit @xmath the generalized parton distributions have properties
of meson distribution amplitudes [ 64 , 65 ] . In this limit the WW
transformations have the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In Refs. [ 50 , 53 , 54 ] it was demonstrated that the twist-3 skewed
parton distributions in the WW approximation exhibit discontinuities at
the points @xmath . Using general properties of the WW transformation (
3.3.3 ) and Eqs. ( 3.38 , 3.39 ) one obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath means an integral in the sense of principal value . We see
that for a very wide class of functions @xmath , the discontinuity of
the corresponding WW transforms is nonzero. This feature of the WW
transformation may lead to the violation of the factorization for the
twist-3 DVCS amplitude.

Fortunately, some combinations of the distributions @xmath and @xmath
are free of discontinuities due to a certain symmetry of the Eqs. ( 3.38
) and ( 3.39 ). For example:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

is free of the discontinuity at @xmath while its ‘dual’ combination:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

has no discontinuity at @xmath . The cancellation of discontinuities in
these particular combinations of the GPDs ensures the factorization of
the twist-3 DVCS amplitude on the nucleon.

One of the non-trivial properties of the generalized parton
distributions is the polynomiality of their Mellin moments which follows
from the Lorentz invariance of nucleon matrix elements [ 1 , 2 , 59 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The time reversal invariance requirement [ 60 , 61 ] leaves only even
powers of the skewedness parameter @xmath . This fact implies that the
highest power of @xmath is @xmath for odd @xmath (singlet GPDs ) and
@xmath for even @xmath (nonsinglet GPDs). Furthermore, there is a
relation between the highest power of @xmath for the singlet functions
@xmath and @xmath due to the fact that the nucleon has spin @xmath [ 1 ,
2 , 61 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The polynomiality conditions ( 3.74 ) strongly restrict the class of
functions of two variables @xmath and @xmath . In the previous section
the polynomiality conditions was implemented by using the double
distributions [ 3 , 14 , 42 ] . In this case the generalized
distributions are obtained as a one-dimensional section (Eq. 3.2.1 ) of
the two-variable double distributions @xmath (Eq. 3.15 ) [ 62 ] .

It is easy to check that the GPDs obtained by reduction from the double
distributions satisfy the polynomiality conditions ( 3.74 ) but always
lead to @xmath , i.e. the highest power of @xmath for the singlet GPDs
is absent. In other words the parametrization of the singlet GPDs in
terms of double distributions is not complete. It can be completed by
adding the so-called D-term to Eq. ( 3.2.1 ) [ 63 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for both tensor @xmath and vector @xmath GPDs the absolute
value of the D-term is the same and has an opposite sign.

For the quark helicity dependent GPDs @xmath and @xmath the D-term is
absent.

### 3.4 Conclusion

In this chapter, we give the predictions for the DVCS cross section for
the kinematics reachable by CEBAF at Jefferson Lab. The DVCS amplitude
was estimated using the model for the non-forward parton distributions
from [ 43 ] .

The results for the DVCS part of the total cross section are close to
those obtained in [ 57 ] .

As was pointed out, the contribution of the interference term to the
differential cross section is small compared to that of the
Bethe-Heitler part alone. This gives the idea of how difficult it could
be to get the information on real and imaginary parts of the DVCS
amplitude from the experiment. However, it is a well known fact that the
interference term for the cross section of DVCS with the electrons of
opposite helicity will give us an estimate of the imaginary part of the
DVCS amplitude, while the asymmetry of electron-positron cross sections
will reveal the real part of the amplitude.

Moreover, at sufficiently large @xmath angles the DVCS part of the total
cross section dominates, but those angles correspond to the large values
of @xmath . That is why it is also necessary to create a “non-zero-
@xmath ” model of the non-forward distributions to better estimate the
DVCS input from the generalized parton distributions.

## Chapter 4 Conclusion

In this dissertation two aspects of deeply virtual Compton scattering
were studied.

One aspect considers the small- @xmath DVCS where the energy of the
incoming virtual photon is very large in comparison to its virtuality.
The DVCS in this region can be described by the BFKL pomeron. At the
same time these kinematics @xmath GeV @xmath , and @xmath GeV @xmath
could be accessed at HERA [ 18 ] .

It is shown that at large momentum transfer the coupling of the BFKL
pomeron to the nucleon is equal to the Dirac form factor of the nucleon.
It allows us to calculate the DVCS cross section and to investigate
@xmath -dependence of the amplitude in a model-independent way. These
approximate calculations of the DVCS cross section in the Regge regime
in QCD are very timely because all the other predictions for the small-
@xmath DVCS rely on some model assumptions.

The algorithm for the calculation of the photon impact factor was
elaborated. It allows also to estimate the meson production processes
amplitude.

The study showed that the @xmath -dependence of the BFKL pomeron is very
important and it should be possible to detect at @xmath GeV @xmath .

Unfortunately, this approximation contains some uncertainties. There is
no evidence that the next @xmath term in the BFKL series is as small as
we assume. Also, we are unable to fix the @xmath in the leading
logarithmic approximation.

Thus, the first part of this study is devoted to the exploration of the
deeply virtual Compton scattering process in the Regge regime. It gives
an estimation for the cross section in soon to be accessible kinematics
without any model assumptions. On the other hand, it does not reveal any
information about the structure of the targeted nucleon.

To study the internal structure of the nucleon, we used the concept of
Generalized Parton Distributions within the quantum chromodynamics
framework. Those distribution functions are accessible through deeply
virtual exclusive reactions and mainly through the deeply virtual
Compton scattering at the kinematical region of high virtuality @xmath
and low momentum transfer @xmath .

In our study we analyzed the leading twist-2 approximation of DVCS
amplitude and prepared the algorithm for the estimation of the
next-to-leading order, twist-3 term of the amplitude. In our analysis we
neglected the @xmath (twist-3 approximation) which is natural for the
parton model.

DVCS is regarded as the cleanest tool to access the underlying GPDs.
Unfortunately, virtual Compton scattering is always in competition with
the dominating BH process.

In our study we created a computer program for precise calculation of
the Bethe-Heitler process in the required kinematics.

To exclude the unnecessary input from BH process, the study of asymmetry
with two electrons of opposite helicities was invoked. It was shown that
the main input in this case comes from the interference DVCS-BH term,
which simultaneously filters DVCS observables and magnifies them by the
Bethe-Heitler magnitude.

Numerical algorithms for calculating the DVCS amplitude in twist-2 and
twist-3 approximations were developed. The results for the DVCS cross
section at different kinematical regions accessible on CEBAF at
Jefferson Lab in twist-2 approximation were presented.

The first measurements of the beam spin asymmetry in the DVCS regime
were performed at CEBAF at Jefferson Lab [ 66 , 71 ] . As was expected,
the interference of the DVCS and Bethe-Heitler processes provide a clear
asymmetry (Eq. ( 3.26 )). The results of our study based on models from
[ 43 ] agree in sign, and in magnitude to predictions made before [ 46 ,
57 ] and to the experimental results represented on Figs. 4.1 and 4.2 .

It proves that DVCS could be a good tool to access GPDs at relatively
low energies and momentum transfers.

With the upcoming CEBAF upgrade to 12 GeV [ 70 ] at Jefferson Lab
further measurements at higher beam energy are expected. Construction of
new detectors, increase in beam energy, and an improvement of
polarization, luminosity, acceptance, and precision will broaden the
range of the @xmath and @xmath . This will make possible a better
understanding of nucleon structure.

From the theoretical side of the study, higher order perturbative QCD
corrections as well as new models of @xmath -dependence of GPDs are
expected.