In this thesis, I study the phase diagram of dense, locally neutral
three-flavor quark matter as a function of the strange quark mass, the
quark chemical potential, and the temperature, employing a general
nine-parameter ansatz for the gap matrix. At zero temperature and small
values of the strange quark mass, the ground state of quark matter
corresponds to the color–flavor-locked (CFL) phase. At some critical
value of the strange quark mass, this is replaced by the recently
proposed gapless CFL (gCFL) phase. I also find several other phases, for
instance, a metallic CFL (mCFL) phase, a so-called uSC phase where all
colors of up quarks are paired, as well as the standard two-flavor
color-superconducting (2SC) phase and the gapless 2SC (g2SC) phase.

I also study the phase diagram of dense, locally neutral three-flavor
quark matter within the framework of a Nambu–Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model.
In the analysis, dynamically generated quark masses are taken into
account self-consistently. The phase diagram in the plane of temperature
and quark chemical potential is presented. The results for two
qualitatively different regimes, intermediate and strong diquark
coupling strength, are presented. It is shown that the role of gapless
phases diminishes with increasing diquark coupling strength.

In addition, I study the effect of neutrino trapping on the phase
diagram of dense, locally neutral three-flavor quark matter within the
same NJL model. The phase diagrams in the plane of temperature and quark
chemical potential, as well as in the plane of temperature and
lepton-number chemical potential are presented. I show that neutrino
trapping favors two-flavor color superconductivity and disfavors the
color–flavor-locked phase at intermediate densities of matter. At the
same time, the location of the critical line separating the two-flavor
color-superconducting phase and the normal phase of quark matter is
little affected by the presence of neutrinos. The implications of these
results for the evolution of protoneutron stars are briefly discussed.
