##### Contents

-    1 Motivations
    -    1.1 Metastable H Collisions
    -    1.2 Spectroscopy of Metastable H
    -    1.3 Quantum Atom Optics
-    2 Hyperfine States and Magnetic Trapping
-    3 Two-Photon @xmath - @xmath Excitation
-    4 Overview of the Thesis
-    5 A Typical Trap Cycle
-    6 Enhancements to the Cryogenic Apparatus
-    7 The Bolometer
    -    7.1 Construction
    -    7.2 Operation
    -    7.3 Density Measurements
-    8 Loading the Magnetic Trap
    -    8.1 Pulsed Discharge
    -    8.2 The Accumulating Sample
    -    8.3 Phenomenological Model
    -    8.4 Thermal Disconnect
    -    8.5 Trap Loading: Conclusion
-    9 UV Laser System
    -    9.1 System Overview
    -    9.2 UV Beam Transport and Alignment
-    10 Data Acquisition
    -    10.1 Lyman- @xmath Detection
    -    10.2 Microchannel Plate Detector
    -    10.3 Data Acquisition Electronics
    -    10.4 Metastable Decay Measurements
    -    10.5 Stray Field Compensation
-    11 Collisions between Metastables
    -    11.1 Summary of @xmath - @xmath Collision Processes
    -    11.2 Theoretical Rate Constants
-    12 Collisions between Metastable and Ground State Atoms
    -    12.1 Elastic @xmath - @xmath Collisions
    -    12.2 Inelastic @xmath - @xmath Collisions
-    13 Photoionization
-    14 Dynamics of the Metastable Cloud
    -    14.1 Diffusion Constant
    -    14.2 Monte Carlo Diffusion Simulation
-    15 Fluorescence in a Quenching Field
-    16 Radiation Trapping
    -    16.1 Cross Sections for Lyman- @xmath Absorption
    -    16.2 Monte Carlo Simulation of Radiation Trapping
-    17 Summary of Traps
-    18 Density-Dependent Decay Rates
-    19 One-Plus-Two Model
-    20 Two-Body Loss Constant in the Static Approximation
-    21 Spatial Distribution of Metastables
    -    21.1 Monte Carlo Calculation of @xmath Distribution
    -    21.2 Results of Spatial Distribution Calculations
-    22 Measurement of Detection Efficiency
-    23 Two-Body Loss: Experimental Results
    -    23.1 @xmath in the Static Approximation
    -    23.2 Uncertainties: Static Approximation
    -    23.3 Effects of the Changing Metastable Cloud Shape
    -    23.4 Summary of Two-Body Loss Results
-    24 One-Body Loss and Inelastic @xmath - @xmath Collisions
-    25 Further Experiments with the Current Apparatus
    -    25.1 Optical Refinements
    -    25.2 Excitation Studies
    -    25.3 Balmer- @xmath Spectroscopy
    -    25.4 Precision Spectroscopy and Frequency Metrology
-    26 A Cryogenic Trap Optimized for Optical Studies

###### Acknowledgements. This thesis is joyfully dedicated to my
parents, Jesse and Kim Landhuis. From an early age, they instilled in me
a curiosity about the natural world and a yearning for truth. They spent
much time with me as a child and opened every door they could for my
intellectual growth. I am grateful for the many good things which I have
inherited from my parents, including the desire to pursue excellence in
whatever task is at hand, great or small. My hope is that they can be
proud of the work represented in these pages. I am deeply grateful to my
research advisors, the MIT professors Dan Kleppner and Tom Greytak.
Because they welcomed me, a Harvard student, into the MIT Ultracold
Hydrogen Group more than six years ago, I have been able to experience
the best of both the MIT and Harvard physics worlds. In their research
group, I have come of age as an experimental scientist. I learned a
tremendous amount in these years, not only about atomic and
low-temperature physics but also about tenacity, perseverance, and
thinking for oneself. I very much appreciated Dan’s and Tom’s generosity
and hospitality as well, including the regular invitations to their
homes both in Boston and among the lakes and mountains to the north. The
experimental results described here would not have been possible without
Stephen Moss and Lorenz Willmann, my two closest colleagues over the
last few years. I have appreciated their friendship, camaraderie, and
tremendous work ethic. Stephen was tireless in ensuring that the
cryogenic apparatus was working well, improving our computer systems,
and writing essential code to run the experiments for this thesis. His
stamina, commitment, and sense of humor through grueling weeks of
debugging and taking data did much for my morale. At the same time, I
was lucky to share an office with Lorenz, an excellent experimentalist.
He was the source of many good ideas, and I learned a lot from our
spirited discussions at the whiteboard. The numerical simulation of
@xmath - @xmath excitation developed by Lorenz was crucial for the
analysis of metastable H decay. It was also good fortune for me that
Julia Steinberger, Kendra Vant, and Lia Matos joined our research group.
In addition to the talents they brought, I am grateful for the positive
attitudes they maintained while confronting numerous onerous tasks. Each
of them stayed late on many nights to help take data and also performed
many of the regular chores necessary to keep the experiment running.
With these able graduate students in charge, the prospects for
groundbreaking new measurements are bright. I also thank Walter
Joffrain, a visting graduate student in our group during the metastable
H studies. He cheerfully helped with data acquisition and sometimes
dispelled the late-night monotony by breaking spontaneously into song. A
major reason I joined the hydrogen experiment was the outstanding
students who preceded me and were to become my mentors. These are Dale
Fried and Tom Killian, who are not only excellent scientists but also
highly personable. It was a pleasure to learn from them. Several
theoretical atomic physicists were my educators in the relevant theory
for metastable H collisions. In particular, I thank Alex Dalgarno, Piotr
Froelich, and Bob Forrey for extensive and helpful conversations.
Several years ago, they and their collaborators began calculating the
collision cross-sections for metastables. Their work provides a basis
for interpretation of experimental results in this thesis. A number of
administrative staff at both MIT and Harvard helped smooth my path
through graduate school. I only name two here, for whom I am
particularly grateful: Sheila Ferguson of the Harvard Physics
Department, and Carol Costa of the Center for Ultracold Atoms. I am
fortunate to have a cadre of solid friends outside the lab, both in
Boston and far away, who have sharpened me and shared in the trials and
joys of my Harvard years. In this respect, I especially want to thank
Stefan Haney, David Nancekivell, Paul Ashby, Lou Soiles, and Timothy
Landhuis. Graduate school has been a tremendous time of learning and of
developing friendships with remarkable people. The best thing that
happened to me during this era, though, is that I married Esther, my
wonderful wife. Her generous acts of love, sympathetic ear, and
optimistic outlook have carried me through these last intense years of
studenthood. I hope I will be as supportive and encouraging for her as
she finishes her own thesis research. Finally, I want to express my
gratitude to the Creator, whom I believe is also Jesus Christ: Thank you
for the opportunity to live, work, and learn alongside outstanding
colleagues and among caring friends. Your physical universe is intricate
and beautiful, and I am grateful to have been able to study a small
corner of it.

\dedication

  \hsp

  To my mom and dad

\startarabicpagination

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

The @xmath state of hydrogen is metastable because it decays by
two-photon spontaneous emission. It has a natural lifetime of 122 ms.
This is not the only sense in which this species is long-lived, however.
It has enjoyed a long and fruitful life in atomic physics research. From
the explanation of the Balmer series of spectral lines, to the
groundbreaking first calculation of a two-photon decay rate, on through
numerous rf and optical measurements of the Lamb shift, metastable
hydrogen has played a key role. The studies described in this thesis are
part of a new chapter in this unfolding history, one which will likely
lead to further insight into fundamental physics.

Traditionally, metastable H has been studied in discharge cells or in
atomic H beams which have been excited by a laser or by electron
bombardment. In the MIT Ultracold Hydrogen Group, the application of a
high-power, narrow-linewidth UV laser system to magnetically trapped
@xmath -state hydrogen has produced clouds of metastables at
temperatures ranging from 300 mK down to 20 @xmath K. Recent
improvements to the apparatus at MIT have allowed generation of clouds
of more than @xmath @xmath atoms at densities greater than @xmath cm
@xmath and lifetimes of nearly 100 ms. These trapped metastable clouds
are promising new samples for collisional physics and precision
spectroscopy.

In the first section of this introduction, the impetus for studying
cold, trapped metastable H is futher discussed. This is followed by a
brief overview of concepts relevant to magnetic trapping and @xmath -
@xmath excitation.

### 1 Motivations

#### 1.1 Metastable H Collisions

A cold gas of metastable H is an interesting laboratory for collisional
physics. One reason for this is that a @xmath atom carries more than
10 eV of internal energy, enough to cause ionization in many targets and
to drive chemical reactions. When metastables collide with one another,
the possible outcomes include Penning ionization, the formation of
molecular ions, excitation transfer to short-lived @xmath states, and
transitions between hyperfine states. If the @xmath atoms are excited
from a background @xmath gas, then several @xmath - @xmath collision
processes can occur as well. Various aspects of cold, elastic @xmath -
@xmath interactions have already been investigated by our group [ 1 , 2
] and by several theory collaborations [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] .

Collisions between metastables have previously been studied at high
effective temperatures ( @xmath K) [ 6 ] , where the total inelastic
rate constant is several orders of magnitude larger than at @xmath [ 7 ,
8 ] . At high temperatures, the rate constant for excitation transfer or
“collisional quenching” has been predicted to limit the lifetime of a
metastable gas to about 40 @xmath s at a density of 10 @xmath cm @xmath
[ 9 ] . With cold, magnetically trapped clouds of @xmath atoms, the
lifetime at this density is found to be tens of milliseconds. By
observing the decay behavior of a metastable cloud, we can learn about
@xmath - @xmath and @xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions. This thesis
presents the first measurements of the total @xmath - @xmath inelastic
collision rate at low temperatures. These measurements extend into the
theoretically predicted “ultracold” regime, where both elastic and
inelastic collisions are parametrized by a single constant, the complex
scattering length [ 7 , 10 ] .

#### 1.2 Spectroscopy of Metastable H

Although the collisional physics of metastables is worth studying for
its own sake, a deeper understanding of these interactions also helps
set the stage for ultraprecise spectroscopy of metastable H. The
absolute frequencies of transitions from the @xmath to higher-lying
states of H can be combined with the @xmath - @xmath interval, currently
the most accurately known of all optical transition frequencies, to
simultaneously determine the @xmath Lamb shift and the Rydberg constant
[ 11 , 12 ] . The former quantity is predominantly comprised of quantum
electrodynamics (QED) corrections to the Dirac solution for the hydrogen
atom, and it has been called the most sensitive test of QED in an atom.
The Rydberg constant, @xmath , is already the most accurately known of
all fundamental constants. It provides a link between the electron mass,
the speed of light, the fine structure constant, and Planck’s constant.
Thus, spectroscopy of metastable H provides a way to not only test the
state-of-the-art of QED theory but also improve the accuracy of
fundamental constants [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] .

Several @xmath - @xmath frequency intervals, where @xmath , have been
measured with impressive accuracy by F. Biraben and collaborators using
Doppler-free two-photon spectroscopy [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 12 ] . Currently,
the best experimental values for both the Lamb shift and Rydberg
constant are limited by uncertainty in @xmath - @xmath frequencies [ 12
] . The Biraben experiments were conducted with atomic beams in which
the interaction time of metastables with a laser was limited to a few
hundred microseconds. To achieve an efficient excitation rate required
laser intensities of several kilowatts per square centimeter. The
resulting AC Stark shifts were the primary source of uncertainty in the
measurement. With a cold, trapped sample of metastable H, the
interaction times between the excitation laser and the atoms can be much
larger, and laser intensities can be much lower. Another source of
systematic error in the beam experiments was the quadratic DC Stark
shift of higher-lying @xmath states. Since excitation rates can be much
higher in a trapped sample, one can afford to concentrate on weaker
@xmath - @xmath transitions, which are less sensitive to stray electric
fields.

Once an excitation laser is tuned to a two-photon @xmath - @xmath
resonance, its absolute frequency can be calibrated directly against the
primary cesium standard or against the @xmath - @xmath frequency, which
is now a de facto optical frequency standard [ 13 ] . The frequency
metrology can be accomplished with a mode-locked femtosecond laser which
produces a broad, coherent frequency comb [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] . Frequency
measurements made in this way using ultracold hydrogen will potentially
allow an order of magnitude improvement in both the Lamb shift and
Rydberg constant [ 21 ] .

Since many transitions originating in the @xmath state are accessible
with diodes and other readily available lasers, trapped metastable H as
a spectroscopic sample opens the door to other interesting studies as
well. These include photoassociation experiments and measurements of
cold collision parameters involving higher-lying states of H.

#### 1.3 Quantum Atom Optics

Due to its large internal energy, cold metastable H is interesting for
“quantum atom optics” experiments involving single-atom detection. The
possibilities include measurements to probe atom-atom correlations [ 22
] , atom interferometry, and atom holography [ 23 ] . A metastable H
atom is readily detected in an ionizing collision on an
electron-multiplying detector. Alternatively, one can detect the Lyman-
@xmath photon emitted after quenching at a surface or by a localized
electric field. To detect individual metastables generated from
ultracold hydrogen, they must be coupled out of the magnetic trap. This
can be accomplished by inducing an appropriate rf or optical transition
to an untrapped atomic state or by simply turning off the magnetic trap.
Several single-atom detection experiments involving cold, metastable
noble gases have already been demonstrated [ 22 , 23 ] or are in
progress [ 24 ] . It may also be possible to generate a highly
directional metastable H beam from an ultracold sample using photon
recoil in a Raman transition [ 25 ] or in the initial @xmath - @xmath
excitation (see Sec. 3 ). A bright beam of cold metastables may be ideal
for atom lithography [ 26 , 27 ] .

### 2 Hyperfine States and Magnetic Trapping

The hyperfine state energies for both the @xmath and @xmath levels of H
are plotted as a function of magnetic field in Fig. 1 . The hyperfine
interaction energy, which scales as @xmath for @xmath states, is only
@xmath as large for metastable hydrogen as for the ground state. Except
for this hyperfine energy scaling, the @xmath manifold is basically
identical to the @xmath manifold.

In both levels, the hyperfine states are conventionally labeled @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , in order of increasing energy. At low
magnetic field, these states correspond to the total angular momentum
states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively. In an
inhomogeneous magnetic field, the “low-field seeking” @xmath and @xmath
states can be trapped around a minimum of the magnetic field [ 28 , 29 ]
. Since @xmath -state atoms rapidly undergo spin-exchange collisions and
transition to other hyperfine states, the sample which collects in a
magnetic trap ultimately contains only @xmath -state atoms. The trap
loading process for @xmath atoms will be discussed extensively in Sec. 8
.

Trapped metastable hydrogen is produced by two-photon excitation of
trapped @xmath atoms [ 30 ] . The two-photon selection rules are @xmath
and @xmath ; thus, only trapped @xmath atoms are excited. Furthermore,
since the magnetic potential energy of both @xmath and @xmath atoms is
to an excellent approximation ¹ ¹ 1 The magnetic moments of @xmath and
@xmath electrons differ by less than 5 parts in @xmath due to a
relativistic correction [ 31 ] . Also, the nuclear Zeeman contribution
is more than three orders of magnitude smaller than the electron
contribution responsible for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the Bohr magneton and @xmath the local magnetic field
strength, the trapping potentials experienced by both species is the
same.

The trap in our apparatus is of the Ioffe-Pritchard variety [ 32 ] . To
a good approximation, the magnetic field has cylindrical symmetry about
an axis known as the “trap axis.” With an aspect ratio typically between
150:1 and 400:1, the axial dimension of the trap is much longer than the
radial dimension. A typical field geometry is depicted in Fig. 2 . The
depth of the trap is determined by a saddlepoint in the magnetic field
located on the axis at one end of the trap. Our methods for
evaporatively cooling the atoms are described in Ch. Studies with
Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen .

### 3 Two-Photon @xmath-@xmath Excitation

Excitation of the @xmath - @xmath transition is accomplished using two
243 nm photons from a UV laser. The hydrogen @xmath - @xmath spectrum
has both Doppler-free and Doppler-sensitive resonances, separated by a
recoil shift (see Fig. 3 ). Although the natural linewidth of the @xmath
- @xmath transition is only 0.65 Hz at 243 nm, the experimental
Doppler-free linewidth is at least a few kilohertz due to a combination
of transit-time broadening [ 30 ] , finite laser linewidth, and the
cold-collision frequency shift [ 2 ] . By comparison, the
Doppler-sensitive line has a width of @xmath MHz at the coldest
experimental temperatures, and the width grows with increasing
temperature. To excite large numbers of metastables, the laser is tuned
to the narrow, intense Doppler-free spectral feature.

The hallmark of the Doppler-free resonance is the cusp-like lineshape
which arises in a thermal gas due to transit-time broadening. For the
case of a perfectly collimated, Gaussian laser beam and a homogeneous
gas density, it can be shown [ 33 ] that the Doppler-free line of the
gas has a spectrum proportional to @xmath where @xmath is the laser
detuning from resonance and @xmath is the @xmath half-width of the line.
This lineshape is called “double-exponential” because it consists of two
exponential functions meeting at a cusp. For temperatures at which the
above criteria for gas density and laser collimation are approximately
satisfied, the relative width of the Doppler line is a useful measure of
relative sample temperature (Fig. 4 ) [ 30 , 1 ] . Low sample densities
must be employed to resolve these double-exponential lineshapes. At high
@xmath densities ( @xmath cm @xmath ), the @xmath - @xmath
cold-collision shift flattens the cusp and significantly broadens the
line [ 2 ] .

The Doppler-sensitive spectrum (Fig. 5 ) is proportional to the momentum
distribution of the sample along the direction of the excitation laser [
34 ] . As long as the sample is not close to quantum degeneracy, the
distribution is Maxwell-Boltzmann, and the lineshape is Gaussian; this
is always the case for samples in this thesis. Like the Doppler-free
double-exponential, the Doppler-sensitive width scales as @xmath .
Unlike the Doppler-free case, the width is simply related to the
absolute temperature and is independent of the laser and trap geometry.
A Gaussian fit to the Doppler-sensitive spectrum provides the most
direct way of calibrating the temperature of a trapped hydrogen sample.
Unfortunately, at temperatures above @xmath @xmath K the line is so
broad and weak that, in our current apparatus, many trap cycles are
required to accumulate enough statistics for a temperature measurement.

For more thorough and formal descriptions of @xmath - @xmath excitation
in hydrogen, see Refs. [ 35 , 36 , 37 , 1 ] .

### 4 Overview of the Thesis

The next chapter will begin by describing the experimental sequence
applied to produce a cloud of trapped @xmath atoms. The later sections
of Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen focus on apparatus and
techniques which have not yet been detailed in other theses and
publications; these include the method for metastable decay
measurements. Chapter Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen delves
into several aspects of the physics of metastable H in a magnetic trap,
mostly from a theoretical standpoint. Chapter Studies with Ultracold
Metastable Hydrogen describes the magnetic trap configurations used in
decay measurements and introduces data suggesting the presence of
two-body loss in our metastable clouds. The analysis of decay data to
calculate a @xmath - @xmath loss rate constant and place limits on
inelastic @xmath - @xmath collision rates is presented in Ch. Studies
with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen . In the concluding chapter, some
suggestions are made for further experiments using the current apparatus
and also for a new apparatus optimized for spectroscopy of metastable H.

Throughout this thesis, the term “ @xmath ” is used interchangeably with
the term “metastable”; the same applies for “ @xmath ” and “ground
state.”

## Chapter \thechapter Apparatus and Experimental Techniques

The apparatus used for experiments described in this thesis was
developed with two principal goals in mind: (1) observation of
Bose-Einstein condensation in atomic hydrogen and (2) high resolution
spectroscopy of ultracold hydrogen on the @xmath - @xmath transition.
These goals required the parallel development of a sophisticated
cryogenic apparatus and a highly frequency-stable UV laser system. Many
of the important developments have been described in other PhD theses
from the MIT Ultracold Hydrogen Group [ 29 , 36 , 38 , 39 , 1 ] . This
chapter will recapitulate the methods used to generate and probe
ultracold hydrogen with emphasis on recent refinements. The first
section provides an overview of the trap cycle used for measurements in
this thesis, while the following sections discuss details of our
techniques which, for the most part, have not been recorded elsewhere.

### 5 A Typical Trap Cycle

Samples of atomic hydrogen are generated, trapped, cooled, and probed in
a cycle lasting typically 5–15 minutes depending on the desired final
sample temperature and type of measurement. At the beginning of each
cycle, pulses of rf power are supplied to a copper coil in a cylindrical
resonator [ 1 ] which is thermally anchored (Fig. 6 ) to the mixing
chamber of a dilution refrigerator. The resulting rf discharge vaporizes
and dissociates frozen molecular hydrogen from surfaces in the
resonator. Atoms in all four @xmath hyperfine states are injected into a
trapping cell. The two high field seeking states ( @xmath and @xmath )
are drawn back to the 4 T magnetic field in the discharge region, while
the low field seekers ( @xmath and @xmath ) are attracted to the 0.6 K
deep Ioffe-Pritchard magnetic trap [ 32 ] in the trapping cell (see
Figs. 9 and 10 ).

In order for trapping to be successful, a sufficiently thick film of
superfluid He must coat the walls of the cell. The low field seekers are
cooled initially by interaction with the cell walls. While the discharge
operates, the cell is held at a temperature of 320 mK, which is warm
enough for the residence time of H atoms on the He film to be shorter
than the time it takes for atoms to spin-flip on the walls, and cold
enough for a sizeable fraction of H atoms to settle into the trap after
exchanging energy in elastic collisions [ 29 ] . The @xmath -state atoms
disappear in a few seconds due to spin-exchange collisions, and a pure
@xmath -state ( @xmath , @xmath ) gas remains in the trap. After the
loading period is finished, the cell is rapidly cooled to below 100 mK
by the dilution refrigerator. At this temperature, atoms with enough
energy to reach the walls are permanently lost from the trapped sample.
Evaporative cooling begins, and the sample becomes thermally
disconnected from the cell. Once thermal disconnect is complete, the
atom cloud equilibrates at a temperature of typically 40 mK.

The threshold energy of the magnetic trap is determined by a saddlepoint
of the magnetic field at one end of the trap. Atoms with energy above
threshold can escape over the saddlepoint, leading to evaporative
cooling of the sample. By progressively lowering the saddlepoint field,
evaporation is forced. In this way, the sample can be cooled to
temperatures as low as @xmath @xmath K in 4-5 minutes.

In order to reach sample temperatures down to @xmath @xmath K, rf
evaporation is employed. For a given rf frequency @xmath , there is a
three-dimensional “surface of death” consisting of all points having a
magnetic field such that the @xmath - @xmath and @xmath - @xmath
hyperfine transitions of the atoms are resonant. Atoms with energy
greater than @xmath can cross the surface of death several times per
millisecond and quickly transition to an untrapped state. Thus, @xmath
sets an efficient threshold for the trap. The coldest temperatures in
the MIT hydrogen experiment are achieved by ramping @xmath from 35 MHz
(significantly above the magnetic trap threshold) to the desired final
threshold value, usually between 5 and 20 MHz (240 and 960 @xmath K).

The dramatic cooling of the sample by several orders of magnitude in
temperature is accomplished at the expense of atom number. The magnetic
trap, initially loaded with @xmath atoms, contains only @xmath atoms at
the 200 @xmath K limit of magnetic saddlepoint evaporation and fewer
than @xmath atoms at the lowest temperatures accessible by rf
evaporation.

Atoms are lost during the trap cycle not only to evaporation but also to
two-body “dipolar” decay collisions [ 40 ] . These are @xmath collisions
in which the magnetic dipole interaction causes at least one of the two
atoms to change spin state. They occur preferentially in the highest
density region of the sample, where the average energy of an atom is
less than @xmath . Thus dipolar decay leads to heating of the sample. To
maintain a favorable ratio of elastic to inelastic collisions, the
radially confining fields are reduced simultaneously with the
saddlepoint field to prevent the atom density from growing significantly
as the temperature drops. During rf evaporation, however, the peak
density grows rapidly, and dipolar losses set a limit on the temperature
which can be reached.

For experiments with metastable hydrogen, the last phase of the trap
cycle involves repeated two-photon excitation of the ground state sample
with a 243 nm UV laser nearly resonant with the Doppler-free @xmath -
@xmath transition. A typical excitation pulse lasts @xmath ms. The
resulting @xmath atoms are quenched by an electric field pulse after a
wait time of up to 100 ms; these quenched atoms are mostly lost from the
trap [ 36 ] . However, the quenching process also results in Lyman-
@xmath fluorescence photons, some of which are detected on a
microchannel plate (MCP) detector. The number of signal counts recorded
is proportional to the number of metastables present at the time of
quenching. Typically, @xmath or fewer @xmath atoms are excited per laser
pulse. Thus, metastable clouds can be generated hundreds of times with
different wait times and laser frequencies before depleting the ground
state sample.

For measurements on the ground state atoms, two methods of probing are
available. First, there is conventional @xmath - @xmath excitation
spectroscopy [ 30 , 1 ] , already introduced in Ch. Studies with
Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen . In this mode of taking data, the laser
is typically chopped at 100 Hz with a 10% duty cycle, and a quenching
electric field pulse is applied at a fixed time of @xmath ms after
excitation. The laser frequency is stepped back and forth across a
specified range, each sweep of the range lasting less than 1 s. This
provides a series of snapshots in time of some portion of the @xmath -
@xmath spectrum. The spectroscopic data provides crucial information
about the sample (see Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen ).
At higher sample densities, the broadening of the Doppler-free line due
to the cold-collision shift provides information about the density
distribution of the sample. At low densities, the Doppler-free width is
proportional to the square root of the temperature. At low temperatures,
the width of the Doppler-sensitive line is an excellent measure of
absolute temperature.

The second and older method of probing the ground state sample involves
“dumping” the atoms from the trap and detecting the recombination heat
on a bolometer [ 29 ] . This method involves rapidly lowering the
saddlepoint magnetic barrier, allowing the atoms to escape to a zero
field region and/or forming a zero field region in the trap. The atoms
quickly spin-flip and recombine. The integral of the resulting bolometer
signal is proportional to the number of atoms in the trap. An important
application of this technique is the determination of initial sample
density from the decay in @xmath number due to dipolar loss (Sec. 7.3 ).

Throughout the trap cycle a dedicated computer controls the necessary
power supplies, frequency sources, relays, heaters, and data acquisition
electronics.

### 6 Enhancements to the Cryogenic Apparatus

In 1998, our group successfully demonstrated rf evaporation in a
cryogenic trapping apparatus. The enabling technology was a new
nonmetallic trapping cell consisting of two concentric G-10 tubes [ 39 ]
. By eliminating metal parts from the cell, sufficient rf power for
evaporation could be delivered to coils wrapped directly on the inner
G-10 tube without placing an excessive heat load on the dilution
refrigerator. In the nonmetallic design, heat transport to the mixing
chamber was provided by filling the volume between the tubes with
superfluid helium.

The cryogenic trapping cell used for experiments described in this
thesis represents a second-generation nonmetallic design. A major
problem of the first-generation G-10 cell was the presence of relatively
large stray electric fields ( @xmath mV/cm) which limited metastable
lifetimes to between a few hundred microseconds and a few milliseconds.
Worse yet, the stray fields sometimes changed unpredictably on a time
scale of minutes. Many spectroscopy runs were rendered almost useless by
these fields. Furthermore, since short @xmath lifetimes did not afford
the opportunity to wait for laser-induced background fluorescence to die
away after excitation, the stray fields limited the signal-to-noise
ratio in @xmath - @xmath spectroscopy. The problem of stray fields was
solved in the second-generation G-10 cell by adding a thin copper film
to the inside cell wall. This film was thin enough to avoid significant
absorption of rf power, yet thick enough to suppress stray fields to the
40 mV/cm level. With the copper film, @xmath lifetimes in excess of
80 ms have been observed, and the stability of stray fields is much
improved. Since the film is divided into several externally controllable
electrodes, partial compensation of the residual stray fields is
possible (Sec. 10.5 ).

Another change in the second-generation design was the relocation of rf
evaporation coils to the inner vacuum chamber (IVC) “tailpiece,” which
separates the surrounding magnets and liquid helium bath at 4 K from the
vacuum space containing the trapping cell. In the first-generation G-10
cell, the heat load on the dilution refrigerator due to the evaporation
coil leads placed a limit on the allowable rf drive power. Furthermore,
intolerable heating of the cell occurred at absorptive resonances above
25 MHz. By thermally anchoring the coils to the 4 K bath instead of the
dilution refrigerator, heating of the rf leads was no longer a
limitation. The absorptive resonances were also shifted such that rf
evaporation could occur in a continuous downward sweep from 35 MHz. This
permits more efficient rf evaporation and may also enable better
shielding of the sample from a high-energy atom “Oort cloud” which forms
during magnetic saddlepoint evaporation [ 41 , 42 ] . ² ² 2 In colder
samples we have observed evidence for large numbers of atoms far above
the magnetic threshold. The effect of these energetic atoms on the cold
thermal cloud has not yet been studied systematically. To accomplish
relocation of the coils, the middle portion of the brass IVC tailpiece
was replaced by a G-10 section of slightly smaller diameter. The
nonmetallic section was necessary to allow propagation of the rf from
the coils to the atoms.

In the second-generation design, minor changes were made to the geometry
of the detection end of the trapping cell, slightly increasing the solid
angle of detection. Further details on the construction of the current
cryogenic apparatus are given by Moss [ 43 ] .

The introduction of a nonmetallic trapping cell allowing rf evaporation
in a cryogenic environment was not only necessary for the achievement of
BEC, but also enabled us to generate higher densities of metastables
than ever before. These higher densities, together with the addition of
electrical shielding to the “plastic” G-10 tube, were crucial
prerequisites for the observation of two-body metastable loss described
in Chapters Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen and Studies with
Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen .

### 7 The Bolometer

#### 7.1 Construction

The current bolometer design is a refinement of those described in the
theses of Yu [ 44 ] and Doyle [ 29 ] . Following a suggestion of
D. G. Fried, the area of the electrodes was reduced to ameliorate rf
pickup. A new construction method was developed after thermal cycling
tests with different glues and wire-bonding methods, and it has proven
to be highly robust against thermal stress and mechanical shock. For the
benefit of those wishing to construct such a bolometer themselves, a
detailed description of this important diagnostic device is presented
here.

The ideal bolometer has a very small heat capacity, good internal
thermal conductivity, and good thermal and electrical isolation from its
surroundings. Quartz was chosen as the substrate because its heat
capacity at millikelvin temperatures is tiny, it has sufficient thermal
conductivity, and it is commercially available in very thin plates. The
current bolometer substrate is a chemically polished plate (1 cm @xmath
1 cm @xmath 50 @xmath m) [ 45 ] . The heat capacity of the substrate is
probably only a few percent of the total bolometer heat capacity
(roughly @xmath J/K at 350 mK), which is likely dominated by amorphous
graphite patches (Fig. 7 (a)) and the superfluid film which is
ubiquitous in the trapping cell. The time resolution of the bolometer is
limited ultimately by the time it takes for heat deposited at one point
on its surface to spread throughout its bulk. An upper limit on the time
constant for this spreading, @xmath , is obtained by dividing the heat
capacity by the thermal conductivity between two edges of the quartz
plate. At a typical operating temperature of 350 mK, the result is
@xmath @xmath s. A detection bandwidth of several kilohertz has been
demonstrated with the bolometer described here. For most measurements,
however, a low-pass filter is used to suppress 60 Hz and other noise
pickup in the sensitive bolometer circuit.

A physical mask was made for the electrode pattern by cutting an
aperture in a thin metal plate and soldering three @xmath @xmath m
diameter wires across the aperture. An evaporator was used to deposit
5 nm of chromium followed by 100 nm of gold onto the quartz. The
resulting pattern is shown in Fig. 7 (a). Electrical leads were bonded
to the gold pads using silver epoxy to establish good electrical
contact, while droplets of Stycast 1266 epoxy [ 46 ] near the edge of
the plate provided a strong mechanical bond between the leads and the
quartz (see Fig. 7 (b)). To avoid adding unnecessary heat capacity to
the bolometer in the form of excess epoxy, the droplets were applied
with the end of a fine wire. To minimize the thermal link between
bolometer and cell, 30 @xmath m diameter superconducting NbTi filaments
were used as electrical leads. These filaments were obtained by
dissolving the copper matrix of a multi-filament magnet wire in nitric
acid.

Across the gaps between gold pads, amorphous graphite resistors were
deposited by repeated applications of Aerodag [ 47 ] . The graphite
patches have resistances of @xmath - @xmath k @xmath at room
temperature, but increase to several tens of k @xmath below 300 mK. In
practice, only two electrical connections and one resistor is used at a
time; the others provide redundancy in case of a failure. As explained
below, the resistor serves as both temperature sensor and heater.

The quartz plate was laid across two nylon threads, about 10 @xmath m in
diameter, which were stretched taut across a G-10 cradle piece having
the same radius of curvature as the inside of the cell. Small drops of
Stycast 1266 were allowed to wick along the threads, providing a
large-surface-area bond between the threads and quartz plate. The G-10
cradle was then mounted by epoxy on the cell wall so that the bolometer
sits vertically below the magnetic trap.

#### 7.2 Operation

In typical operation, the bolometer is held at a temperature between
200 mK and 350 mK, considerably above the cell wall temperature in the
later stages of the trap cycle. ³ ³ 3 The bolometer resistance as a
function of temperature was calibrated by introducing @xmath He exchange
gas into the cell. The bolometer acts as a “thermistor” in a resistance
bridge feedback circuit; its temperature setpoint is determined by a
variable resistor outside of the cryostat. A signal is derived by
amplifying the changes in feedback voltage required to hold the
bolometer at constant temperature. This feedback mode of operation
allows for much higher linearity and bandwidth than simply monitoring
changes in the bolometer resistance. Different temperature setpoints are
selected depending on the type of bolometric measurement; the bolometer
is more sensitive at lower temperatures because heat capacity is lower,
and the temperature coefficient of its resistance is larger.

The primary purpose of the bolometer in our apparatus is to detect the
recombination heat released when atoms from the trap are allowed to
reach the cell wall or spin-flip at a zero of the magnetic field. The
resulting H @xmath molecules retain much of the 4.6 eV recombination
energy in their rovibrational degrees of freedom [ 48 ] . Since the
molecules are insensitive to the magnetic field, they bounce freely
around the cell, transferring some of their energy in collisions with
surfaces. In this way, a small fraction of the recombination energy
reaches the bolometer. Doyle estimated this fraction to be @xmath for a
similar bolometer [ 29 ] . Operating at a temperature of @xmath K, the
current bolometer is sensitive enough to detect a flux of @xmath
atoms/s. If Doyle’s fraction is still appropriate, this flux corresponds
to a power of @xmath W at the bolometer.

#### 7.3 Density Measurements

As mentioned in Sec. 6 , the relative number of atoms in the trap can be
determined by dumping the atoms from the trap and integrating the
bolometer signal. Since the atom number after loading and evaporation
processes is reproducible to a few percent in successive trap cycles, it
is possible to map out the decay curve of an equilibrium sample by
waiting different lengths of time before dumping. From the local
equation for dipolar density decay,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

it is possible to derive the following equation involving atom number
@xmath as a function of time:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Here, @xmath is the peak density in the trap, and @xmath cm @xmath /s is
the theoretical rate coefficient for dipolar decay of @xmath -state
atoms [ 40 ] . The quantity @xmath is known as the effective volume and
is defined as the ratio @xmath . It can also be expressed in terms of
the normalized spatial distribution function @xmath : @xmath . The
quantity @xmath can be considered the effective volume for two-body
loss. Both @xmath and @xmath depend on the temperature @xmath . The
factor @xmath is a correction factor accounting for the fact that some
evaporation must occur simultaneously with dipolar decay if the sample
is in equilibrium. More specifically, @xmath represents the ratio of
elastic collisions to inelastic collisions, and @xmath is the fraction
of elastic collisions which result in an atom leaving the trap.

Equation 3 describes the time-dependence of the inverse normalized atom
number, @xmath . This can be determined from integrated bolometer
signals without knowing the bolometer detection efficiency. As shown in
Fig. 8 , the inverse atom number has a linear time dependence,
characteristic of two-body decay. The slope of @xmath can be used to
determine the initial density @xmath assuming the other quantities are
well known. The theoretical value of @xmath is believed accurate to
better than 10% [ 49 ] . Furthermore, the ratio @xmath can be calculated
numerically from the known geometry of the magnets to about 10%. The
uncertainty stems from both imperfect knowledge of the trapping field
and uncertainty in the sample temperature.

From thermodynamic considerations, it can be shown that the evaporation
correction factor is given by [ 50 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

In this equation, @xmath is the ratio of trap depth to temperature (
@xmath for samples analyzed in this thesis); @xmath is the average
fraction of thermal energy @xmath carried away by an evaporated atom in
excess of the the threshold energy @xmath . Numerical calculations by
the MIT group as well as theoretical calculations by the Amsterdam group
[ 51 ] have shown that @xmath for the range of @xmath found in our
experiment, assuming a cylindrical quadrupole trap. The constant @xmath
, defined by @xmath , where @xmath is potential energy, is equal to 2
for a cylindrical quadrupole trap, 1 for a cylindrical harmonic trap,
and 3 for a spherical quadrupole trap. For the traps relevant here, it
is a good approximation to take @xmath , and Eq. 4 simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

This expression is believed accurate to a few percent for all but the
coldest samples in the MIT hydrogen experiment. (An alternative approach
to calculating the correction factor is outlined in [ 51 , 39 ] ).
Depending on @xmath , which generally decreases as the sample
temperature decreases, the evaporation correction amounts to a 10-20%
reduction in the apparent density.

The uncertainties in @xmath , the evaporation correction factor, and the
effective volumes are the dominant contributions to the error in ground
state density measurements. By adding these contributions in quadrature,
the total uncertainty is estimated to be about 20%.

### 8 Loading the Magnetic Trap

Over the past several years, a number of studies have been undertaken to
better understand what is arguably the most physically complex stage of
the trapping cycle: the loading phase. The goal of these studies has
been to understand what limits the number of atoms which can be
accumulated in our trap. This section summarizes the current state of
knowledge about the physics of hydrogen trap loading, highlighting our
recent investigations.

The loading phase can be divided into two parts: accumulation and
thermal disconnect. In preparation for accumulation, the largest of the
computer-controlled magnets are ramped to maximum current, generating a
0.6 K deep Ioffe-Pritchard trap. At this time, a “loading magnet” is
energized to prevent the existence of a zero field region near the lower
end of the trapping cell (Figs. 9 and 10 ). In the next few seconds, the
cell is heated above 300 mK by heaters inside the superfluid helium
jacket, making the cell walls less “sticky.” At this temperature, atoms
are adsorbed on the helium film for less than 1 @xmath s before
returning to the gas [ 29 ] . (The binding energy for hydrogen atoms on
superfluid helium is about 1 K [ 52 ] ). Once the cell is sufficiently
warm, discharge pulses begin puffing atoms into the trapping cell, at a
typical pulse rate of 50 Hz. The atoms thermalize with the walls and
explore the entire cell volume. The population of @xmath -state atoms in
the magnetic trap region grows to a saturation value. While the
discharge pulses feed this population, a number of loss processes can
occur, including dipolar decay and other two-body inelastic collisions
in the gas, one-body spin-flips on the cell walls, and two-body
recombination on the walls. As will be explained below, however, most of
these processes can be ruled out as the limiting factor in determining
how many atoms are trapped.

When accumulation is complete, the cell heater is switched off, and the
cell temperature drops below 150 mK in about 2 s. After about 10 s, the
temperature reaches 100 mK. During the rapid cooldown, the flux of atoms
to the wall from the magnetic trap minimum decreases. However, the
residence time of atoms on the walls dramatically increases, and the
relatively slow wall loss processes begin to remove atoms with enough
energy to reach the wall. When the cell passes through a temperature of
roughly 150 mK, the magnetically trapped sample thermally disconnects
from the walls; the probability of atoms returning from the walls goes
to zero. Meanwhile, the sample continues to cool by evaporation of atoms
to the walls, and its temperature drops below the wall temperature. In a
typical trap cycle, the loading magnet is ramped down simultaneously
with thermal disconnect, and evaporation over the magnetic saddlepoint
begins. About @xmath atoms equilibrate at a temperature of 40 mK and a
peak density of @xmath cm @xmath .

The primary means for studying the loading process is to introduce
variations in the sequence and observe the effect on atom number. The
atoms can be dumped directly from the initial deep magnetic trap and
detected on the bolometer.

#### 8.1 Pulsed Discharge

The 300 MHz discharge resonator currently in use is described by Killian
[ 1 ] . Several studies were performed to optimize the duty cycle, pulse
length, and rf power parameters of the discharge. These studies show
that all of these parameters can be varied over a wide range without
changing the saturation atom number by more than a few percent. The time
constant for reaching saturation, however, depends on the average power
supplied to the discharge.

For constant rf power, it was found that larger duty cycles result in
more atoms trapped per unit energy supplied to the discharge. An energy
efficient discharge is desirable since it requires less heat to be
removed from the copper resonator by the dilution refrigerator. As will
be explained in Sec. 8.4 , maximum cooling power is desired during
thermal disconnect. Very short @xmath @xmath s) discharge pulses are
inefficient because it takes 15-25 @xmath s for the discharge to start
firing after the beginning of each rf pulse. The energy deposited in the
resonator during this time heats the fridge but does not produce atoms.
The reason for this “dead time” may be that sufficient helium vapor
pressure must develop in the resonator before discharge activity can
begin.

Some effort was expended to optimize the shape of the rf pulses. An rf
switching scheme was used to apply two different power levels, a lower
level during the dead time (25 @xmath s) and a 5-9 dB higher level
during the firing time (100 @xmath s-10 ms) of each pulse. Typical peak
powers at the amplifier output driving the discharge were 50-100 W,
applied at duty cycles of 0.5-5%. ⁴ ⁴ 4 These values imply average
powers far greater than can be tolerated by the dilution refrigerator.
Since less than 10% of the power is reflected from the resonator, most
of the rf power must be dissipated in parts of the apparatus not
thermally anchored to the dilution refrigerator. The bolometer was used
to record atom pulses as the discharge was firing. Also, studies were
made of the trapped atom number as a function of accumulation time. A
number of different pulse lengths and power levels were tried. Although
the size of the atom pulses scaled linearly with the product of RF power
and firing time, it was found that almost regardless of pulse
characteristics the trapped atom number after thermal disconnect
saturated at nearly the same value. A couple conclusions were drawn from
these studies. First, the trapped atom number is not limited by the
number of atoms produced in a single discharge pulse. Second, since we
were unable to trap more atoms using attenuated rf power during the dead
time of each pulse, it seems that overheating of the resonator is not
the number-limiting factor. The power switching scheme provided no clear
advantage.

Even though the saturation atom number is not better, a high average
flux from the discharge is desirable because it shortens the
accumulation time. This means less total heat is required to hold the
cell at its relatively high accumulation temperature; after the loading
phase the cell can more quickly reach a cold temperature advantageous
for sensitive bolometric detection. For the experiments described in the
remainder of this thesis, discharge parameters were chosen which loaded
the trap 3-4 times faster than in the initial nonmetallic cell
experiments. Typically, the discharge operates with 1 ms pulses repeated
at 50 Hz for a total of 8 s. The peak power of the (square) rf pulses at
the amplifier output is @xmath W.

A sufficient helium film thickness is important for efficient loading of
the trap from the discharge. If the the film is too thin, bare spots can
form in the cell and resonator while the discharge fires. The bare spots
serve as sticky sites where atoms spin-flip and recombine. The discharge
itself can become erratic with a very thin film, probably due to low
vapor pressure in the resonator.

#### 8.2 The Accumulating Sample

The discharge injects a flux of both high field and low field seekers
into the trapping cell. The average flux (counting only @xmath states)
is more than 10 @xmath atoms/s, and a single 1 ms pulse may inject
nearly 10 @xmath atoms. The high field seeking @xmath and @xmath states
are eventually pulled back toward the 2.7 K source field (Fig. 10 ),
though this can take some time if they reach the trap region and
equilibrate with the wall. In the trap region, the gradient in @xmath is
low, and high field seekers bounce randomly on the cell wall until
reaching the high gradient in @xmath . From the ratio of the cell wall
area in this region to the cell cross-section, we can estimate that the
the atoms must bounce 25 times before leaving the low-gradient region.
At 300 mK, the average time between bounces is about 1 ms, implying a
time constant of @xmath ms for high field seekers to return to the
source. High field seekers reaching the relatively high field at the
opposite end of the trap may linger there and take even longer to
return. In the meantime, the high field seekers can undergo
hyperfine-changing collisions with @xmath atoms, potentially causing
trap loss.

The other low field seekers, @xmath -state atoms, disappear due to spin
exchange collisions on a time scale of seconds. As a result, the sample
becomes purely @xmath -state within seconds after the end of
accumulation.

Some insight was gained from studies in which the bolometer was
deliberately made bare of helium film for a time during or after
accumulation. This was accomplished by applying several hundred
microamps to the bolometer. When the bolometer was bare throughout
accumulation, the number of atoms loaded into the trap was reduced by
nearly two orders of magnitude. What is more, the number remaining
depended on the magnetic potential @xmath at the bolometer, which sits
at approximately @xmath cm in the coordinate system of the Figures. We
varied @xmath using the loading magnet current. Under the assumption
that the bare bolometer surface was the dominant loss mechanism during
loading, the dependence of the atom number on @xmath was found roughly
consistent with a thermally distributed sample at the cell temperature.
Furthermore, it was found that the sample could be depleted by baring
the bolometer at a time long after the discharge stopped firing as long
as the cell temperature was maintained. If the bolometer was not bared,
then the sample could be held at the cell temperature for 30 s or more
after accumulation without significant depletion. Finally, if the cell
was allowed to cool after accumulation, a subsequent baring of the
bolometer had no effect on the atom number. This was interpreted as a
signature of thermal disconnect.

These observations provided evidence that the assumption of the
accumulating sample being in equilibrium at the cell temperature is a
good one. In addition, we found evidence that the peak trap density
reaches a saturation value during accumulation which is too low for
significant loss due to dipolar decay. Since the evaporation process
during thermal disconnect is believed to be well understood (Sec. 8.4 ),
measurements of atom number following thermal disconnect allow an order
of magnitude estimate of the sample density before thermal disconnect.
These measurements led to the conclusion that the peak loading density
is @xmath cm @xmath @xmath , at which the decay time due to dipolar
decay is many minutes. The fact that the atom number after thermal
disconnect does not change appreciably when the atoms are held for many
seconds at the loading temperature following accumulation also suggests
a low density at the end of accumulation. This would mean that the key
limiting process during loading occurs in the accumulation phase.
However, in the absence of more direct measurements of the density
before thermal disconnect, we admit the possibility that an unknown
process during thermal disconnect may cap the atom number at a definite
maximum.

If indeed the sample can be held in thermal contact with the walls for
many seconds without loss, an implication is that surface loss processes
at the cell loading temperature are not important for a @xmath -state
sample. In other words, one-body spin flip and surface recombination are
not limiting processes during accumulation.

Since the bolometer is the most poorly thermally anchored part of the
trapping cell, there was some concern that the bolometer was heating
enough to become bare while the discharge was firing even under normal
circumstances. This possibility was ruled out by the bare bolometer
studies.

One unexpected observation was that the time to reach saturation number
in the trap was unaffected by the bare bolometer. This implies that
there is another loss mechanism other than the bare bolometer which was
determining the saturation atom number in the above studies.

#### 8.3 Phenomenological Model

We will assume for the moment that the most important loss mechanism
occurs during accumulation. The fact that the saturation atom number is
independent of discharge pulse parameters suggests a phenomenological
model for trap loading which involves a loss rate proportional to the
discharge flux. Consider the simple model

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the number of @xmath atoms in the trap, @xmath is the
average flux of @xmath atoms from the discharge, including @xmath atoms
resulting from hyperfine-changing collisions, and @xmath is a
proportionality constant for the dominant loss mechanism. The solution
to Eq. 6 is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

The saturation time constant @xmath depends inversely on the average
flux, consistent with data from discharge parameter studies. In
addition, the saturation value depends only on @xmath and not the flux.
The question remains: what physical process gives rise to @xmath ?

One candidate is the inelastic collisions between @xmath atoms and high
field seekers in the thermal gas during the time @xmath after a
discharge pulse (Sec. 8.2 ). According to theoretical calculations [ 40
] , there are several @xmath inelastic processes with large cross
sections. The channels @xmath and @xmath , for example, both have rate
coefficients of approximately @xmath cm @xmath /s at 300 mK and zero
field. Rate coefficients for @xmath processes have not been calculated
at finite temperature, but in the zero temperature limit, the rate
coefficients of the most likely @xmath channels are several orders of
magnitude below the @xmath channels at all magnetic fields. Taking
@xmath collisions to be the dominant source of loss, the local rate of
@xmath -state density change due to collisions with high field seekers
can be expressed

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the local total loss rate constant for @xmath
collisions, and @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath and @xmath atom
densities, respectively. The rate constant is a function of position
because it depends on the magnetic field. Using equilibrium
distributions for the atoms, the rate of change of @xmath -state number
during accumulation is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the total number of @xmath atoms in the trapping cell
which are not already accelerating in a high gradient region back to the
source; @xmath and @xmath are effective volumes for low field and high
field seekers, respectively. The integration is to be taken over the
cell volume occupied by the quasi-static @xmath -state population @xmath
. From comparison of Eq. 9 with Eq. 6 , we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

To test the plausibility of this physical model, we plug some numbers
into Eq. 10 and compare it with an observed time constant for saturation
of @xmath . Since this is an order of magnitude calculation, we
arbitrarily take the integration volume to be the entire cell volume
excluding the region of large gradient at @xmath cm. At 320 mK,
numerical integration yields @xmath cm @xmath and @xmath cm @xmath . For
the currently preferred discharge parameters, @xmath is observed to be
@xmath s. Since there are about @xmath atoms accumulated in the trap,
@xmath , implying @xmath s @xmath . The discharge fires at 50 Hz, so
each pulse brings about @xmath @xmath atoms into the cell. The discharge
pulses are separated by a time comparable to @xmath . If the number of
@xmath atoms per pulse is not too different from the number of @xmath
atoms, then @xmath is @xmath . If we further assume that @xmath averaged
over the cell is @xmath cm @xmath /s, the result is @xmath s, which is
3-4 orders of magnitude too long. It seems unlikely that either @xmath
or @xmath have been grossly underestimated here. In other words, @xmath
collisions in the gas probably do not cause the observed saturation of
@xmath .

Inelastic @xmath collisions are another possibility. However, the rate
coefficients for @xmath channels are probably far smaller than the
@xmath channels which remove @xmath atoms from the trap. At zero
temperature, the sum of theoretical @xmath rate coefficients is
comparable to the sum of rate coefficients for @xmath processes, which
are known not to cause significant loss during loading.

Not only the gas densities but also the surface densities of the four
hyperfine states should be proportional to the discharge flux. For state
@xmath , the equilibrium surface density @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the gas density of species @xmath near the wall, @xmath
is the thermal deBroglie wavelength, and @xmath is the binding energy on
the film. Can inelastic processes on the helium surface give rise to the
loss term in the phenomenological model? Loading studies with different
film thicknesses have shown that as long as the helium film is not too
thin, the saturation atom number is about the same. Since changing the
film thickness changes the binding energy of the hydrogen atoms on the
surface, the rate of surface collisions should be affected by changing
the film thickness. Thus, it also seems unlikely that inelastic surface
collisions limit the atom number.

Another idea for a loss mechanism proportional to discharge flux is that
high energy particles from the discharge knock @xmath atoms out of the
trap. The discharge likely produces many other species besides the
@xmath hyperfine states of H. These could include metastable H, excited
states of He, molecular states of H, and various ions. As these other
species stream through the trapping region, they could cause loss of
@xmath states.

To see if direct flux from the discharge causes loss, in one
experimental run a series of baffles was installed in the opening
between the discharge resonator and cell volume. The baffles were made
of copper and were thermally anchored to the copper resonator. They were
constructed such that any particles leaving the discharge would have to
bounce several times on a cold, helium-covered surface before entering
the cell. Most of the species mentioned above would not be able to
bounce because of their relatively large surface binding energies.
Furthermore, any particles streaming into the cell would have energies
determined by the cold baffles rather than the discharge. The trap
loading behavior was found, however, to be very similar to loading
without the baffles. The maximum number of atoms loaded was again the
same. We concluded that energetic particles from the discharge were not
limiting the atom number.

Since the baffles were located in a high field gradient, the baffle
studies also provided experimental evidence that high field seekers do
not cause significant loss during loading. The baffles should have
prevented most high field seekers from reaching the trap, and yet the
saturation behavior of loading was unchanged.

#### 8.4 Thermal Disconnect

Some light was shed on the physics of thermal disconnect by holding the
cell at various temperatures following accumulation and observing the
effect on atom number. The typical hold time was 30 s. A dip in the atom
number was consistently observed at hold temperatures between 100 and
200 mK (See Fig. 11 ). This dip was interpreted as the crossover between
the residence time on the surface, which varies as @xmath and the flux
of atoms to the wall, which varies as @xmath . Since the temperature of
the atoms tracks with the temperature of the cell before thermal
disconnect, there is a temperature range where significant numbers of
atoms can be depleted by surface loss processes since the wall is sticky
and the flux to the wall from the sample is significant. At higher
temperatures, the residence times on the wall are shorter, and the wall
is less lossy. At lower temperatures, the wall is so sticky that
efficient evaporation is initiated, and @xmath quickly falls below
@xmath , resulting in thermal disconnect. Thus, the dips in Fig. 11 are
believed to be closely associated with the temperature at which thermal
disconnect occurs.

The binding energy @xmath of H on a helium film is a function of the
film thickness. For a very thin film, @xmath can be much larger than 1 K
because H atoms on the surface can interact with the substrate. For a
thin film and larger @xmath , the wall becomes sticky at a higher
temperature, and the dip should occur at a higher temperature.
Furthermore, for a given hold time, it is reasonable to expect the
fractional depletion of the sample to be larger since a larger fraction
of atoms have energies large enough to reach the wall. These qualitative
trends can be observed in Fig. 11 . In principle, it should be possible
to derive quantitative information about @xmath from such data, but this
has not been attempted.

One conclusion drawn from the temperature setpoint studies is that to
maximize atom number, it is crucial to cool the cell as quickly as
possible through the temperature range where significant depletion
occurs. This underscores the importance of reducing the heat deposited
during accumulation to a manageable level. For this reason also, it is
important to have a dilution refrigerator with ample cooling power.

For the sake of completeness, it should also be mentioned that a number
of loading studies were performed with about 1 part @xmath He to 3 parts
@xmath He in the cell. The presence of @xmath He reduces the binding
energy of the film [ 53 ] , and, for a given temperature, increases the
vapor pressure in the cell. Accumulation was optimized at a lower cell
temperature than before, presumably because of the higher vapor
pressure. Bolometric detection was impaired, however, and it was only
possible to determine that the maximum number of atoms loaded was the
same as without @xmath He to within a factor of 2.

#### 8.5 Trap Loading: Conclusion

The constancy of the number of atoms loaded is probably the most
remarkable feature of the trap loading process. The saturation number
does not change for wide variations in the film thickness, discharge
parameters, cell temperature, and the nature of the conduit between
discharge and magnetic trap. Our studies have enabled us to rule out a
number of possible loss mechanisms as the limiting factor in loading. A
phenomenological model involving a loss term proportional to discharge
flux is consistent with our observations, but a physical model remains
elusive. Although several aspects of loading are now better understood,
we still do not know what process causes the atom number to saturate. To
trap more atoms, it may be necessary to increase the effective trap
volume, which will require a new magnet system design.

### 9 UV Laser System

Excitation on the @xmath - @xmath transition in H requires a powerful,
frequency-stable source of 243 nm radiation. In order to achieve the
high excitation rates necessary to observe two-body metastable H
effects, UV power on the order of 10 mW is required. To sufficiently
resolve the Doppler-free spectrum at typical sample temperatures and
densities, the UV laser linewidth must be no more than a few kilohertz.
With currently available laser technology, these requirements are best
satisfied by frequency doubling the output of a 486 nm dye laser which
is locked to a stable frequency reference. Following the design of
Hänsch and co-workers [ 54 ] , Sandberg [ 36 ] and Cesar [ 38 ]
developed such a system at MIT; further improvements were introduced by
Killian [ 1 ] . The remainder of this section describes the UV laser
system of the Ultracold Hydrogen Group as used for measurements in this
thesis.

#### 9.1 System Overview

Stable, narrowband light originates in a 486 nm dye laser (Fig. 12 ),
which is a modified Coherent 699 system [ 55 ] . The dye solution is
circulated at a pressure of 8 bar by a high pressure circulation system
purchased from Radiant Dyes [ 56 ] . A dye jet of 200 @xmath m thickness
is produced using a polished stainless steel nozzle from the same
manufacturer. An intracavity EOM allows for high-bandwidth locking of
the laser frequency. When fresh dye solution is pumped by 4 W of violet
from a Krypton ion laser, around 650 mW of single-frequency output power
is obtained. This power is more than 3 times the specification for an
unmodified commercial system.

Frequency stability is achieved by locking the dye laser to a
Fabry-Perot reference cavity by the Pound-Drever-Hall phase modulation
technique [ 57 ] . The cavity, which has a spacer made of zerodur glass,
is enclosed in a temperature-stabilized vacuum chamber. It has a free
spectral range of 598 MHz and a linewidth of about 600 kHz. When locked
to the reference cavity, the laser has a linewidth of about 1 kHz at
486 nm. The reference cavity has a long term drift rate of less than
1 MHz per week.

For finding the cavity resonance closest to the H @xmath - @xmath
frequency, the absorption spectrum of a temperature-stablized Te @xmath
gas cell serves as an absolute frequency reference. Precise tuning of
the laser frequency is achieved by locking the first order diffraction
beam from an AOM to the cavity. The AOM drive frequency, which is the
offset frequency between laser and cavity, is determined by a high
resolution frequency synthesizer. By saturated absorption spectroscopy
of a specific Te @xmath line [ 58 , 36 , 1 ] , the dye laser can be
tuned to within several hundred kilohertz of the @xmath - @xmath
frequency.

Most of the 486 nm laser power is coupled into a bow-tie enhancement
cavity where the blue light is frequency doubled in a 10 mm long
Brewster-cut BBO crystal [ 36 ] . The Hänsch-Couillaud [ 59 ] scheme is
used to lock the cavity in resonance with the incoming blue light. An
enhancement factor of @xmath is achieved, resulting in circulating
powers as high as 50 W. More than 40 mW of 243 nm light can be generated
by this doubling cavity. Due to the large walk-off angle of BBO, the UV
is generated in a highly astigmatic transverse mode.

#### 9.2 UV Beam Transport and Alignment

After passing through astigmatism compensation optics [ 36 ] , the beam
is widened in a telescope for low-divergence propagation to the
cryostat, which is 30 m away in a different laboratory. As shown in Fig.
13 , the beam passes through another telescope near the cryostat before
propagating into the dilution refrigerator. A lens on top of the
discharge resonator brings the beam to a focus near the magnetic trap
minimum. A concave retromirror glued to the MgF @xmath window at the
bottom of the trapping cell reflects the beam onto itself, producing the
standing wave configuration necessary for Doppler-free two-photon
excitation of the @xmath - @xmath transition.

Since the cryostat is located in a different lab, an active beam
steering system is required to maintain a steady pointing of the beam
into Telescope 2 (see Fig. 13 ). The beam steering system, which
consists of a position sensing photodiode, a servo circuit, and a mirror
mounted on piezoelectric transducers (PZT’s), is necessary to compensate
for relative motion of the laser table and cryostat and for UV pointing
variations due to dye laser pointing instability. The PZT-mounted mirror
is 12.7 mm in diameter and 6.4 mm thick. It was mounted using a 5-minute
epoxy on a fulcrum and two low voltage PZT stacks [ 60 ] ; the PZT’s
cause deflection in orthogonal directions. We have found this
construction to be mechanically robust. In previous incarnations, much
thinner (1-2 mm) and lighter mirrors were used to maximize PZT
bandwidth. However, the stress on these thin mirrors caused significant
distortion of the UV beam at the cryostat. Furthermore, the distortion
changed constantly as the PZT voltages required to maintain lock drifted
on a time scale of minutes. These problems were eliminated by going to a
thicker mirror. The low voltage PZT’s currently in use have very high
resonance frequencies. In spite of the relatively large mass of the
mirror, a servo bandwidth of several kilohertz is achieved.

To ensure a good overlap of incoming and return beams at the atoms, the
position of the return beam is monitored on a fluorescent aperture near
the beam steering mirror. The aperture is just large enough to allow the
incoming beam to pass through without diffraction effects. While
spectroscopy is in progress, the return beam alignment on the aperture
is monitored from the cryostat lab via video camera. If the return beam
is not centered on the aperture, corrections are made by micromotor
translation of one of the Telescope 2 lenses.

The UV beam immediately following the astigmatism compensation optics is
nearly square in shape. After propagating nearly 30 m to Telescope 2,
the transverse mode consists of a bright central lobe flanked by a
series of weaker lobes. The outer lobes are cut off by an iris aperture
in Telescope 2. The remaining transverse mode structure is a slightly
astigmatic Gaussian beam. By adjusting the length of Telescope 1, more
than 60% of the power after Telescope 1 remains after the aperture in
Telescope 2. The UV power reaching the atoms is typically 10-20 mW.

In previous spectroscopic experiments with our apparatus, the beam waist
near the atoms had a radius of @xmath @xmath m. For BEC experiments, it
was desirable to employ a tighter focus, since the excitation rate for
nearly motionless condensate atoms should scale with the square of laser
intensity. It was also desirable to change the size of the waist to
study the effects of laser geometry on the @xmath - @xmath lineshape.
For these reasons, the length of Telescope 2 was reduced, resulting in a
waist radius of about 21 @xmath m and a Rayleigh range of 6 mm. These
values are calculated by using previously determined Gaussian beam
parameters for the input to Telescope 2 and adjusting the length of the
telescope for perfect overlap of incoming and return beam modes. In the
case of perfect overlap, the position of the waist in the cell is fixed
by the radius of curvature of the retromirror. If there is a small
mismatch between incoming and return modes, then the incoming and return
waists are slightly separated on the trap axis, with the midpoint
between waists located at the waist position of ideal overlap. To
optimize overlap, the spot sizes of the incoming and return beams are
viewed on a folding mirror in Telescope 2, and the length of the
telescope is adjusted until they are the same.

Good alignment of the laser beam with the center of the atom cloud is
essential for high signal rates and reproducible results. An effective
method was developed for achieving this alignment. In our magnet system,
there are four “racetrack” quadrupole coils which give rise to the
radial confining field of the trap. By adding a small trim current to
one coil in each pair of opposing quadrupole coils, it is possible to
precisely displace the trap minimum in both directions perpendicular to
the trap axis. By placing the trim current in both coils under computer
control, it is possible to move the atom cloud rapidly in a lateral
raster pattern while exciting the atoms at a constant laser frequency.
The resulting plot of excitation signal as a function of trim currents
is a kind of spatial image of the atom cloud (Fig. 14 ). From such a
“lateral scan” image, the trim currents can be chosen which center the
atom cloud on the laser beam. In addition, if the laser beam axis
intersects the trap axis at a significant angle, a highly elliptical
distribution results; the lateral scan is a useful diagnostic for
overlapping the laser and trap axes.

### 10 Data Acquisition

#### 10.1 Lyman-@xmath Detection

The metastables excited in our trap are detected by applying an electric
field of about 10 V/cm, which quenches them within a few microseconds.
The detection efficiency for the resulting Lyman- @xmath photons is
small, however. Due to the closed geometry of the magnet system, the MCP
detector sits beyond the lower end of the trapping cell, about 30 cm
from the center of the atom cloud. The detection solid angle is only
@xmath sr. Lyman- @xmath photons must pass through not only the MgF
@xmath window at the end of the cell but also a second window on the MCP
vacuum chamber. Each window transmits at most 40% at 122 nm. The best
case quantum efficiency for the MCP itself is about 25%. An upper limit
for metastable detection efficiency @xmath is thus @xmath . From
measurements described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen
, @xmath appears to be about @xmath . Most of the additional losses are
likely due to absorption on window surfaces and sub-optimal MCP quantum
efficiency. Futhermore, at typical @xmath densities up to 30% of the
Lyman- @xmath fluorescence in the detection solid angle is scattered
into other directions before it can escape the sample. A discussion of
this radiation trapping effect will be presented in Sec. 16 .

#### 10.2 Microchannel Plate Detector

The microchannel plates in the current detector are similar to those
described by Killian [ 1 ] . In previous work, a Lyman- @xmath filter
was used to prevent the detector from being saturated by scatter from
the 243 nm laser. The transmission of the filter at 122 nm was only 10%,
however. To increase the signal detection efficiency by a factor of 4,
the Lyman- @xmath filter was replaced by a MgF @xmath window, and a
switching scheme was developed which turns on the gain of the upper MCP
plate only long enough to detect the Lyman- @xmath fluorescence at each
quench pulse.

The relevant circuit diagrams are given in Fig. 15 . A triac switch,
whose state is governed by a digital signal, allows the voltage across
the upper plate to be switched between 140 V and 680 V in a few
microseconds. At 140 V the detector is blind to incoming radiation. At
680 V on the upper plate and with the detector biased as shown in Fig.
15 , the detector gain is @xmath . In the present scheme, the channels
of the upper plate have a 40:1 length to diameter ratio and the lower
plate a 60:1 ratio.

#### 10.3 Data Acquisition Electronics

An overview of the data acquisition system is given in Fig. 16 . The
sequence of events during a trap cycle is determined by a program
running on a CAMAC crate computer. When the laser excitation phase
begins, a mechanical shutter near the cryostat entrance window opens,
and laser pulses are allowed to trigger a timing generator with 8 output
channels and sub-microsecond resolution. The timing generator allows
precise timing control of the MCP switch and quench (electric field)
pulses with respect to the excitation pulses. It also gates four
counters to count MCP pulses when signal is present. When the timing
generator sequence is finished, the CAMAC computer reads out the
counters, the counters are reset, and the timing generator waits to be
triggered by the next laser pulse.

#### 10.4 Metastable Decay Measurements

Figure 17 shows the timing sequence used for the decay measurements
described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen . The
sequence determines wait times for quench pulses following four
consecutive laser pulses. Each quench pulse lasts for 90 @xmath s, and a
counter is gated on for the first 40 @xmath s of each. The MCP is
switched on 1.4 ms before each quench in order to fully charge the
plates. To obtain more time points in a single decay measurement, a
delay generator is enabled before every other trigger, introducing an
additional delay between the laser pulse and the start of the timing
sequence. For example, the sequence shown in Fig. 17 contains wait times
of 2, 11, 38, and 74 ms (not in this order) after the end of a laser
pulse; with an additional delay of 18 ms before every other trigger,
eight consecutive laser pulses are associated with wait times of 2, 11,
20, 29, 38, 56, 74, and 92 ms. The accuracy of these delay times is
limited by phase jitter in the mechanical chopper used to pulse the
laser. In the worst case, this jitter leads to a 0.4 ms wait time
inaccuracy.

Results from a single eight-point decay measurement are shown in Fig. 18
. The laser detuning is constant to assure the same metastable density
at the beginning of each decay, and the ground state density does not
change appreciably during the 800 ms required to make the measurement.
The nonstatistical scatter, which arises from fluctuations in laser
alignment and power, is typical for a single measurement. To reduce this
scatter, many decay curves made at similar laser detuning and @xmath
density are averaged together. As will be explained further in Chapters
Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen and Studies with Ultracold
Metastable Hydrogen , the decay curves are analyzed by fitting them with
either a simple exponential or a model including both one-body and
two-body decay terms.

In the example of Fig. 18 , the raw data has been corrected for
laser-induced background fluorescence, which has its own characteristic
decay behavior (Fig. 19 ). Although the MCP is @xmath times less
sensitive to 243 nm than to Lyman- @xmath , fluorescence photons at
243 nm and longer wavelengths are so numerous after each laser pulse
that a few give rise to MCP pulses. The background fluorescence decay is
measured at the end of each trap cycle by detuning the laser far off
resonance and recording decay curves in the manner described above. The
fluorescence decay can be fit to the sum of a fast exponential component
and a very long-lived component well approximated by a constant over
100 ms. This fit is used to subtract the background contribution from
individual decay curves. For most data, however, the background
correction results in only small changes to the metastable decay curves.

#### 10.5 Stray Field Compensation

In the presence of an electric field of strength @xmath , metastable H
quenches at a rate

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

due to Stark-mixing with the @xmath state [ 61 ] . To minimize the stray
field in our apparatus, we apply a compensation dc offset voltage across
the copper film electrodes used for detection quench pulses (Fig. 20
(a)). The total electric field @xmath experienced by the atoms is the
sum of applied and stray fields:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

At any given point in space, the rate @xmath is proportional to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the stray field components
perpendicular and parallel to the applied field. If both the applied
field and the stray field are nearly uniform over the atom cloud, then
the optimal compensation voltage is the one which gives @xmath . In a
situation where only one-body loss mechanisms are important, the total
decay rate is the sum of @xmath , the natural decay rate of 8.2 s @xmath
, and any other one-body rates which may be present. One-body loss
dominates in metastable clouds excited from warm, low-density samples.
In this case, Eqs. 12 and 14 imply a parabolic dependence of the total
decay rate on @xmath , as shown in Fig. 20 (b). The best compensation
voltage is determined by fitting a parabola to the one-body decay rates
measured at several dc voltages. The minimum of the parabola has been
found to be stable over several hours.

In the current apparatus, two of the electrodes are hard-wired to the
electrical ground of the cryostat. This means that stray field
compensation is only possible along one direction, and there is a
residual stray field with magnitude @xmath . An upper limit for the
decay rate due to @xmath is 4 s @xmath , obtained by subtracting the
natural decay rate from the rate at the parabola minimum. This implies
that the residual stray field is less than 40 mV/cm.

In future experiments, it should be possible to float all four
electrodes, allowing compensation in two dimensions. The stray field
component in the third dimension, along the cell axis, is probably very
small.

## Chapter \thechapter Trapped Metastable Hydrogen

The physics of metastable hydrogen excited in a magnetic trap is
potentially very rich. Metastable H can participate in several types of
inelastic collisions, including ones that result in energetic ions.
Diffusion is also important. Due to the presence of the @xmath
background gas, a metastable cloud does not immediately fill the volume
of the ground state sample, but instead diffuses slowly outward from a
region defined by the focus of the excitation laser. In addition, the
intense UV radiation can subsequently photoionize many of the
metastables.

This chapter summarizes some of the microscopic and macroscopic physics
relevant to metastable H in a trap. An understanding of this physics is
important for both the interpretation of metastable decay measurements
described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen as well as
the preparation for future high resolution spectroscopy measurements.

### 11 Collisions between Metastables

Stimulated by our experimental work, theoretical investigations of
@xmath - @xmath collisions were begun recently. Jonsell et al. have
calculated the complex interaction potentials between two metastable
hydrogen atoms [ 62 ] . Forrey et al. used the potentials to compute
elastic, double excitation transfer, and total ionization cross sections
[ 9 ] . The initial calculations neglected the Lamb shift and fine
structure, and the results were considered valid for thermal energies
large compared to the splittings between @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
states (that is, for @xmath K). In the past year, Forrey, Jonsell, and
collaborators have included the Lamb shift and fine structure in their
potentials, allowing the first calculations of elastic and inelastic
@xmath - @xmath rate constants down to @xmath [ 7 ] . The effect of the
hyperfine interaction has not yet been included, but the rate
calculations which neglect hyperfine structure are expected to be
accurate to within an order of magnitude [ 63 ] .

As described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen , the
trapped metastables are in the @xmath state @xmath of the @xmath
manifold. Just as with the @xmath @xmath -state atoms, dipolar decay
collisions can change the hyperfine state of the metastables, causing
them to be lost from the trap. The rate constants for the inelastic
@xmath channels of the @xmath manifold have not been calculated.
However, the approach of Stoof, et al. for @xmath dipolar decay
collisions [ 40 ] is applicable to the @xmath case as well. The rate for
@xmath dipolar decay is governed by weak magnetic dipole interactions
between atoms. These interactions in the @xmath - @xmath case are
similar in strength to the @xmath - @xmath case, and the corresponding
inelastic rates are not expected to differ by more than an order of
magnitude [ 49 ] . At the metastable densities achieved in the
experiments described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen
, @xmath dipolar decay should be undetectable.

Several @xmath - @xmath collision processes which may occur in the trap
are outlined below in more detail. Unless denoted otherwise, the label “
@xmath ” refers to the magnetically trapped @xmath state of the @xmath
manifold.

#### 11.1 Summary of @xmath-@xmath Collision Processes

Elastic Collisions.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

According to recent theoretical calculations [ 7 ] , these collisions
occur more frequently than @xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions at all
temperatures accessible in our trap. However, due to the fact that the
metastable density is several orders of magnitude smaller than the
ground state density, elastic @xmath - @xmath collisions are much less
frequent than elastic @xmath - @xmath collisions. They contribute
insignificantly to the dynamics of the metastable cloud, and they are
not detectable in current experiments.

Excitation Transfer. During a collision between metastables, either one
or both of the atoms may undergo a transition to the @xmath state. The
processes are formally known as single excitation transfer,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

and double excitation transfer,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

These collisions are, in principle, directly detectable because the
@xmath products radiate Lyman- @xmath after a lifetime of 1.6 ns. At
high temperatures, where the @xmath and @xmath levels can be considered
degenerate, the allowed molecular symmetries for a pair of metastables
do not permit single excitation transfer [ 9 ] . Single excitation
transfer may be allowed at low temperatures, but it would require
coupling between the orbital angular momentum of the nuclei and the
electronic angular momentum. The calculations of Forrey, et al. to date
have assumed that this coupling is zero. Forthcoming theoretical work
will determine whether this assumption is justified for spin-polarized
metastables [ 63 ] .

The rate constant for excitation transfer collisions is predicted to be
larger than the rate constant for ionizing collisions at all
temperatures.

Ionization. Two types of ionization can occur when metastables collide.
One type is Penning ionization,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

which liberates 6.8 eV ( @xmath K) of energy. Most of the energy is
imparted to the electron, which leaves the trap instantly. A fraction of
the energy approximately equal to @xmath , the electron-to-proton mass
ratio, becomes the kinetic energy associated with the center of mass of
the H ion (proton) and ground state atom. This small fraction still
amounts to more than 40 K, and the proton and atom will generally leave
the trapped sample within a couple microseconds. The magnetic field at
the center of the trap is far too weak to hold the proton in a cyclotron
orbit; the proton will quickly move away from the trap axis and towards
the cell wall, guided by the radially-pointing magnetic field of the
quadrupole magnets.

The second type of ionization is associative,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

Between 6.8 eV and 9.45 eV of translational energy is liberated,
depending on the rovibrational state of the molecular ion. By arguments
similar to those of the preceding paragraph, both the ion and electron
products leave the trap quickly.

The cross section for associative ionization has been measured in beam
experiments for collision energies down to 4.1 meV (48 K) [ 6 ] . At
this energy, the measured cross section for associative ionization is
100 times smaller than the theoretical total ionization cross section [
9 ] , indicating that Penning ionization is far more prevalent than
associative ionization. The experiments showed that the associative
cross section varied as @xmath at high temperatures, while theory
predicts the total ionization cross section to vary as @xmath . It has
not yet been established whether Penning ionization also dominates at
low temperatures.

Dipolar Decay. Due to the electron-electron and electron-proton magnetic
dipole interactions between two @xmath atoms, inelastic collisions can
occur in which the sum of magnetic quantum numbers @xmath of the two
atoms is not conserved. The hyperfine state of one or both atoms can
change from @xmath to another hyperfine state which is weakly-trapped or
anti-trapped. Under typical trap conditions, enough kinetic energy is
liberated in the transition to eject even the weakly-trapped products
from the trap. Very generally, these dipolar decay transitions can be
written

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where at least one of @xmath and @xmath is not @xmath . These magnetic
interactions are weak compared to the central forces responsible for
other inelastic processes. For ground state H, the sum of rate constants
for dipolar decay of @xmath states was determined to be @xmath cm @xmath
/s across the range of temperatures and magnetic fields relevant to
hydrogen trapping [ 40 , 64 ] . The same order of magnitude is expected
for the sum of rates corresponding to Eq. 20 .

#### 11.2 Theoretical Rate Constants

The rate constants for double excitation transfer and ionizing @xmath -
@xmath collisions have recently been calculated down to @xmath and are
summarized in Fig. 21 . The methods of calculation are outlined in [ 9 ]
and a forthcoming paper [ 7 ] . For each collision channel @xmath , the
corresponding rate constant @xmath is defined such that @xmath , where
@xmath is the local density of metastables, is the local rate of
collision events of type @xmath . If we assume that double excitation
transfer and ionization are much more prevalent than other inelastic
collisions, the total two-body loss constant @xmath can be expressed

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the rates for double excitation transfer and
ionization. The factor of 2 appears since two metastable atoms are lost
from the trap in each collision event. Chapter Studies with Ultracold
Metastable Hydrogen describes how @xmath was determined experimentally.

As can be seen from Fig. 21 , below @xmath K the elastic collision rate
varies as @xmath , and the inelastic rates are nearly independent of
temperature. In this regime, only @xmath -wave collisions are important,
and both the elastic and inelastic collisional behavior of metastable H
are characterized by a single quantity, the complex scattering length
@xmath . In general, for a complex @xmath -wave scattering length @xmath
involving identical bosons, the elastic cross section is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the inelastic cross section by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where k is the relative wave vector of the colliding atoms [ 10 ] . ⁵ ⁵
5 For distinguishable particles, the expressions in Eqs. 22 and 23 are
reduced by a factor of 2. The elastic cross section at collision energy
@xmath is thus independent of @xmath while the inelastic cross section
has a @xmath dependence. This @xmath dependence of @xmath is an example
of the Wigner threshold law [ 65 , 66 ] . To find the rate constants for
a thermal sample, the average over a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is
taken: @xmath . The resulting elastic rate goes as @xmath , and the
inelastic rate is given by @xmath , where @xmath is the two-body reduced
mass. The results of Forrey and co-workers [ 7 ] imply that in the zero
temperature limit

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath nm, @xmath nm, and @xmath nm.

Since metastable hydrogen can be excited at temperatures below 100
@xmath K, our experiments are able to probe the theoretically predicted
Wigner threshold regime. It should be noted, however, that even up to
temperatures as high as 10 mK, the theoretical inelastic collision rates
do not change by more than a factor of 2.

The accuracy of the theoretical rates is difficult to estimate.
Hyperfine structure has not yet been included in the calculations, nor
an allowance for coupling between electronic angular momentum and
nuclear orbital angular momentum. In addition, the effects of the
trapping magnetic field on the collision rates have not been examined.
For the magnetic fields of a few gauss experienced by colder samples,
the rate constants are predicted to be accurate to within an order of
magnitude.

### 12 Collisions between Metastable and Ground State Atoms

In our experiments, the peak metastable densities are typically three or
more orders of magnitude smaller than the peak ground state density.
Although the @xmath - @xmath cross sections are smaller than the @xmath
- @xmath cross sections, the metastables still collide with ground state
atoms much more frequently than with each other. Most of the @xmath -
@xmath collisions are elastic, and most of what has been learned
theoretically and experimentally about @xmath - @xmath interactions so
far pertains to elastic collisions.

#### 12.1 Elastic @xmath-@xmath Collisions

With the advent of ab initio calculations for the short range @xmath -
@xmath molecular potentials, it became possible in the last decade for
theorists to predict @xmath , the @xmath -wave elastic scattering
length. ⁶ ⁶ 6 More precisely, @xmath denotes here the scattering length
corresponding to the @xmath molecular potential on which a 1S @xmath
-state atom interacts with a 2S @xmath -state atom. Other @xmath -
@xmath potentials have been studied as well, but they are not relevant
for the present discussion. Since @xmath - @xmath collisions are
predominantly @xmath -wave at the temperatures of magnetically trapped
hydrogen, this single parameter is sufficient to describe the elastic
collisions. The elastic cross section, @xmath , is independent of
collision energy.

Calculations of @xmath depend sensitively on the molecular potential. A
first calculation of @xmath was made by Jamieson, et al. [ 3 ] using the
best available ab initio potential of the time, which extended only to
20 bohr. The result was @xmath nm. The accuracy of this calculation was
limited by (1) the mismatch between the short range potential and the
asymptotic long range potential and (2) uncertainty in the very short
range part of the ab initio potential. More recently, Orlikowski and
collaborators recalculated the entire short range potential, extending
it to 44 bohr and realizing a much better match to the long range
potential [ 4 ] . From their improved potential, they found @xmath nm.
Although the uncertainty is difficult to estimate [ 67 ] , this is
believed the most accurate calculation of @xmath to date.

As mentioned in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen , there
is a density-dependent cold-collision shift of the @xmath - @xmath
transition frequency due to the difference in @xmath - @xmath and @xmath
- @xmath interactions. Since the @xmath - @xmath scattering length is
theoretically known to be @xmath nm with a relatively small uncertainty
[ 68 ] , the cold-collision shift parameter @xmath can be used to
measure @xmath provided that the relationship between the shift and
scattering lengths is well understood. According to the arguments given
by Killian [ 1 ] , the energy shift of the @xmath - @xmath transition
for homogeneous weak excitation in a homogeneous ground state gas of
density @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the atomic mass. The fact that the two scattering
lengths in this formula are multiplied by the same factor follows from
assuming uniform coherent excitation of the many-body wave function of
the ground state gas. The bosonic bunching correlations which enhance
the @xmath - @xmath interactions are maintained as each @xmath atom in
the many-body wave function gains @xmath character. Eq. 25 has been
derived by Stoof and Pethick using a microscopic approach [ 5 ] , and a
more general sum rule extension of Eq. 25 to inhomogeneous cases has
recently been posited by Oktel and collaborators [ 69 ] . If instead we
consider the case where a @xmath atom is introduced into a homogeneous
@xmath gas by means other than coherent excitation, then Hartree-Fock
theory predicts that the energy of the @xmath state will be shifted only
half as much; this is because @xmath and @xmath atoms are
distinguishable particles and, in this case, they are spatially
uncorrelated. The energy difference between the two states would then be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

Both Eq. 25 and Eq. 26 assume that the contributions of inelastic
processes to the energy shifts are negligible.

The MIT Ultracold Hydrogen Group used Eq. 25 to determine @xmath nm from
the experimental cold-collision shift [ 2 ] , which is a factor of two
smaller than the value of Orlikowski, et al. Interestingly, if Eq. 26 is
used, @xmath nm is obtained, in good agreement with the theoretical
value. This suggests that Eq. 26 is closer to the correct description of
the cold-collision shift in our experiment. Further support for this
conclusion is provided by recent time-resolved spectroscopic
measurements of hydrogen BEC’s performed in our group [ 43 , 70 ] . A
possible reason why Eq. 26 may be favored over Eq. 25 is that @xmath -
@xmath collisions occurring during the excitation may destroy the
spatial correlations of the ground state gas. Furthermore, it remains an
open question how to correctly describe the cold-collision shift in
terms of scattering lengths for the experimentally realistic case of an
inhomogeneous thermal gas and an inhomogeneous laser field.

In the remainder of this thesis, the theoretical value of @xmath will be
assumed correct. This implies an elastic scattering cross section @xmath
cm @xmath . The magnitude of @xmath is important for determining the
rate at which metastables can diffuse through the ground state sample.

#### 12.2 Inelastic @xmath-@xmath Collisions

At least two types of inelastic collisions are possible between
metastables and ground state H in the trap. First, there is the analog
of dipolar decay,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where at least one of the products is not a @xmath -state. As mentioned
in Sec. 11.1 , these processes are mediated by weak magnetic dipole
forces, and their rates should be small compared to the important @xmath
- @xmath inelastic channels. Second, excitation transfer can occur as
follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

To our knowledge, no theoretical work has been done to date on inelastic
@xmath - @xmath collisions. If they occur at significant rates in the
hydrogen trap, then they should be observable as one-body metastable
decay processes; the decay component would be a simple exponential since
the ground state density does not change appreciably during the
metastable lifetime. An upper limit for these rates based on decay
measurements is presented in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable
Hydrogen .

### 13 Photoionization

The 243 nm UV photons which create metastable H can also ionize the
metastables (Fig. 22 ). By cubic interpolation of the tabulated values
from Burgess [ 71 ] , the cross section for photoionization is found to
be @xmath cm @xmath at 243 nm. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Although citing the same reference,
Killian quotes a cross section which is nearly 30% larger [ 1 ] . If we
express the single-atom photoionization rate due to incident laser
intensity @xmath as @xmath , the proportionality constant is @xmath
(mW/cm @xmath ) @xmath s @xmath .

At warmer sample temperatures ( @xmath mK), the volume of the metastable
cloud which forms during the laser pulse is much larger than the laser
beam, and the fraction of atoms experiencing high laser intensity at any
given time is small. As a consequence, only a small fraction of the
metastables are photoionized. In colder samples, however, a significant
fraction of the metastables are in the laser field. For samples below
100 @xmath K, photoionization may be the most important metastable loss
process during the excitation pulse.

For a given trap shape, temperature, sample density, and laser intensity
distribution, we can numerically calculate the fraction of metastables
@xmath which are lost to photoionization during an excitation pulse.
This calculation is straightforward assuming that the time required to
establish a quasi-static metastable spatial distribution @xmath is short
compared to the length of the excitation pulse. Since the collision time
and radial transit time are both typically 10 times or more shorter than
the pulse length at @xmath @xmath K, this is a good assumption for
colder samples (see Sec. 14 ).

To find @xmath , we consider the number of atoms @xmath in a slice
perpendicular to the trap axis at @xmath with thickness @xmath . In each
slice,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the total rate of metastable generation due to laser
excitation, and @xmath is the fraction of metastables which are
photoionized per unit time. The distribution @xmath can be calculated
using the Monte Carlo simulation of excitation described in Sec. 21 . If
@xmath corresponds to the beginning of the excitation pulse, the
solution to Eq. 29 for times up to the end of the pulse can be written

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a correction factor which expresses the effect of
photoionization on the otherwise linear growth of the metastable
population at @xmath . The time-dependent correction factor is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

The fraction photoionized at @xmath per unit time is found by evaluating

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the sum of incoming and return laser beam intensities.
The fraction of metastables photoionized in a pulse of length @xmath is
the spatial average of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

As an example, for perfectly overlapped UV beams in the 87 @xmath K
sample of Trap W in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen , the
fraction of @xmath atoms lost to photoionization during a 2 ms
excitation pulse is found to be @xmath at 12 mW of UV power and @xmath
at 18 mW. The fraction photionized has a weak dependence on the beam
radius, the laser detuning, and the location of the laser focus along
the trap axis.

At @xmath K the rate of metastable production in the trap should begin
to saturate due to photoionization after a few milliseconds. This
expectation was confirmed in a preliminary experiment which recorded
signal rates in consecutive trap cycles using different pulse lengths
(see Fig. 47 ).

A natural question to ask is whether any of the charged particles
generated by photoionization remain in the trap long enough to affect
the metastable cloud. If enough space charge lingers after a laser
pulse, the metastables could quench in the resulting electric field. To
investigate this, we consider the energy and momentum of the resulting
proton-electron pair (see Fig. 22 ). Almost all of the of energy above
threshold, 1.7 eV ( @xmath K), goes to the electron, causing the
electron to leave the trap instantaneously. The proton recoils with a
fraction @xmath of the electron energy, about 0.93 meV (11 K). In the
center-of-mass frame, this recoil is opposite to the direction of
electron emission. For an @xmath -orbital electron, the angular
distribution of photoelectric emission is peaked around the laser
polarization axis (see [ 72 ] , for example). The lab frame does not
look much different from the center-of-mass frame, since the initial
momenta of the photon and atom are small compared to the photoionization
momentum. In our experiments, the excitation laser is linearly polarized
in a direction perpendicular to the trap axis; this means that the
protons will recoil in a radial direction, exiting the atom cloud in
less than 1 @xmath s. Similar to the case of ion collision products
described in Sec. 11.1 , the protons quickly move into the quadrupole
field, where the magnetic field is parallel to the direction of motion.
In this way, the protons leave the trap without causing much loss in the
sample.

### 14 Dynamics of the Metastable Cloud

The dynamics of the @xmath cloud are more complex than the dynamics of
the quasi-equilibrium @xmath cloud. This is because the metastables are
excited at the focus of the laser and spread along the trap axis by
diffusion. At the densities typical of experiments described in this
thesis, the lifetime of the metastables is much shorter than the time
required to establish equilibrium along the axis.

Since Doppler-free excitation imparts no momentum to an atom, each
metastable atom initally possesses the velocity of the ground state atom
from which it was excited. Different velocity classes in the ground
state gas have different probabilities for excitation, however, and it
is because @xmath atoms collide frequently with @xmath atoms that a
Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution is quickly established in the
metastable cloud. The @xmath - @xmath collision time is between 100
@xmath s and 1 ms for typical sample densities, and an equilibrium
velocity distribution is established within a few collision times [ 73 ]
. Since the mean free path of the @xmath atoms @xmath is typically
comparable to the thermal radius of the @xmath cloud (0.7 mm at 2.5 mK,
0.18 mm at 100 @xmath K), an equilibrium radial spatial distribution is
achieved on a short time scale. In other words, the radial extent of the
metastable cloud quickly matches the radial extent of the ground state
cloud.

Much more time is required for the metastable cloud to spread out to its
equilibrium extent in the axial direction, however. The metastable cloud
is excited in a region along the trap axis which is defined by the depth
of focus of the laser. Initially, the length of the @xmath cloud between
its 1/e density points is @xmath cm, while the length of the ground
state cloud varies between 4 cm and 24 cm. The distance which @xmath
atoms must travel along @xmath to fill up the equilibrium trap volume is
more than 100 times longer than a mean free path. Thus, to approach
equilibrium, the metastables must diffuse along the trap axis. The time
required is typically much longer than the lifetime of the @xmath state.

If we neglect for the moment @xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions, a
metastable cloud excited from a ground state sample with peak density of
at least a few times 10 @xmath cm @xmath will have a quasi-static
spatial distribution. This is because (1) the metastable cloud is
axially confined by @xmath - @xmath collisions and (2) radial
equilibrium is maintained over the lifetime of the metastable cloud. To
examine the transport of the cloud more generally, we must consider the
diffusion of @xmath atoms in a @xmath background gas.

To accurately describe the time evolution of the metastable
distribution, the density-dependent losses due to @xmath - @xmath
inelastic collisions must also be considered. The effects of diffusion
and two-body losses on the metastable cloud shape have been studied
using a dynamic simulation described in Sec. 23.3 . One of the inputs to
this simulation is a parameter describing the rate of diffusion along
the trap axis; the remainder of this section summarizes an approach for
determining the diffusion parameter.

#### 14.1 Diffusion Constant

From the results of a hard-sphere kinetic theory, the diffusion constant
for a dilute gas of one species in a background gas of another species
with the same atomic mass is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the background gas density, @xmath is the cross section
for collisions between the two species, and @xmath is the atomic mass [
74 ] . ⁸ ⁸ 8 More sophisticated diffusion theories lead to a constant
which is about 10% smaller [ 75 , 76 ] . However, Eq. 34 is sufficiently
accurate for the arguments presented here. The dilute gas atoms are here
assumed to collide much more frequently with the background gas atoms
than with each other. For the case of @xmath atoms in a @xmath gas, Eq.
34 becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the theoretical value of @xmath has been used.

If the length scales for variations in @xmath were much larger than the
@xmath mean free path in all directions, then a three-dimensional
diffusion equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

would describe the transport of the metastables. However, as mentioned
above, an equilibrium distribution is rapidly established in the radial
direction. Futhermore, the @xmath atoms oscillate through the radial
density distribution at a frequency comparable to the @xmath - @xmath
collision frequency. A better approach is to find the effective
diffusion constant along the trap axis as a function of the peak ground
state density. In this way, metastable transport in the trap can be
described as a one-dimensional diffusion process.

#### 14.2 Monte Carlo Diffusion Simulation

The rate of diffusion in @xmath has been studied by Monte Carlo
simulation of metastable atom trajectories. The computer simulation uses
a normally-distributed random number generator to select the components
of an initial @xmath atom velocity @xmath from the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution. The equations of motion for the atom are integrated in a
trap potential @xmath whose shape is specified by the sum of an axial
bias field and a radial field gradient. To simplify the coding, the
variation of the trapping field in @xmath is neglected. Collisions are
simulated by taking time steps @xmath much shorter than the average
collision time and using random numbers to test for a collision in each
time step. The collision probability per step is @xmath , where @xmath .
After each collision, a new random velocity is selected.

Fig. 23 shows an example trajectory calculated in this way. In a typical
simulation, 1000 such trajectories are generated, each covering a period
of tens of milliseconds. Statistics are collected for the trajectories,
including the distribution of distances traveled in @xmath (Fig. 24 ).
The rms width of the distribution, @xmath , serves as a measure of the
characteristic diffusion length for the given trap conditions. At a peak
@xmath density @xmath cm @xmath and @xmath K (Trap W of Ch. Studies with
Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen ), @xmath is 2.3 mm after a period @xmath
ms. The @xmath - @xmath collision rate is found to be about half that
expected in a uniform sample at the peak density of the trap.

It was verified that @xmath is proportional to @xmath and inversely
proportional to @xmath , as expected for a diffusion process. The
distribution of distances traveled did not depend on the choice of
initial @xmath .

### 15 Fluorescence in a Quenching Field

For the measurements in this thesis, metastables were detected by
applying a quenching electric field and observing the Lyman- @xmath
fluorescence. The recoil energy associated with this photon is 670
@xmath K. Whether or not the recoiling atom leaves the trap depends on
the depth of the trap and the ground hyperfine state into which the atom
decays. The relevant traps in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable
Hydrogen are all deeper than the recoil energy for the @xmath state, but
not for the weakly-trapped @xmath state. Generally speaking, atoms
returning to the @xmath state in these relatively deep traps remain
trapped, but atoms returning to other hyperfine states will leave the
sample.

To calculate the branching ratios of trapped metastable H in a quenching
electric field, it is necessary to know the eigenstate @xmath in the
presence of simultaneous electric and magnetic fields. Numerical
diagonalization of a Hamiltonian including interactions with weak fields
E and B reveals that the state is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath has units of V/cm, and @xmath is the angle between E and B
[ 36 ] . The first label in each ket on the right-hand-side of Eq. 37
indicates the orbital state, while the second and third labels indicate
the electron and proton spin states, respectively. A shorthand notation
has been used for the @xmath components: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath as
a first label denote the orbital states @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath of
the @xmath basis, respectively. The expression is valid provided both
the Stark shift and Zeeman shift are small compared to the Lamb shift
separating @xmath and @xmath ; the experimental situation is well within
this regime. The relative probability of decaying to each of the ground
hyperfine states, which in the relevant magnetic field regime are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

is obtained from the squares of the dipole matrix elements between these
states and @xmath . For a fixed position in the trap, the fraction of
atoms @xmath returning to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

This ratio ranges from 20% when E and B are parallel to 59% when the
fields are perpendicular. To find the branching ratio for the sample as
a whole, @xmath must be averaged over the metastable distribution. One
way to calculate this average is by a Monte Carlo simulation, described
in Sec. 16 . It turns out that nearly 50% of the metastables in a
typical trap return to @xmath , subsequently thermalizing with the
ground state cloud.

When examining the effect of sample geometry on the detection efficiency
for metastables, it is necessary to consider the polarization of the
emitted Lyman- @xmath photons. The polarization of a photon emitted in a
transition between specific @xmath and @xmath hyperfine states is
determined by the change in @xmath represented in the contributing
dipole matrix element. The relative probabilities of obtaining @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath polarization as a function of @xmath are summarized
in Table 1 . The dipole radiation patterns with respect to the
orientation of B depend on the polarization (Table 2 ) [ 77 ] . For a
quenched metastable, taking into account the probability of emitting
into each polarization, the angular probability distribution of
fluorescence is shown in Fig. 25 for the limiting cases of @xmath and
@xmath . In the lab frame, the far-field angular distribution can be
obtained by taking a spatial average over the local emission patterns in
the metastable cloud.

### 16 Radiation Trapping

The fluorescence photons which result from metastable quenching have a
frequency very nearly equal to the @xmath - @xmath transition frequency.
Since this frequency is only detuned by @xmath GHz (about 11 natural
linewidths of the Lyman- @xmath line) from the strong @xmath - @xmath
transitions, the photons have a non-negligible probability of absorption
as they move through a dense @xmath sample. This phenomenon is known as
radiation trapping, and it has consequences for the detection efficiency
of metastable atoms when using Lyman- @xmath fluorescence as the means
of detection. In particular, the detection efficiency can potentially
vary with the @xmath density, the trap shape, and also with the geometry
of the @xmath cloud. This section, which extends the work of [ 36 ] ,
describes calculations relevant to predicting the effects of radiation
trapping in realistic experimental geometries.

#### 16.1 Cross Sections for Lyman-@xmath Absorption

In the absence of fine or hyperfine structure, the absorption
cross-section @xmath for incident photons detuned by @xmath from the
resonant @xmath - @xmath transition is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the transition wavelength, and @xmath is a Lorentzian
function centered at @xmath with @xmath and a FWHM of 100 MHz. ⁹ ⁹ 9 We
neglect here the Doppler broadening of the @xmath - @xmath transition
which is only 3.3 MHz at 100 @xmath K and varies as @xmath . To simplify
matters, we can neglect all transitions to the @xmath level. These
transitions are detuned 10 times further away from the fluorescence than
the @xmath level, and the total cross section for @xmath - @xmath
absorption is about 2 orders of magnitude smaller.

Equation 43 can be scaled to find the cross section for a particular
pair of hyperfine states and a particular polarization. The procedure is
to multiply Eq. 43 by the square of the appropriate matrix element of r
between hyperfine states, normalizing by

  -- -- -- ------
           (44)
  -- -- -- ------

the square of the spinless matrix element. We can also take into account
the variation in @xmath . In the low magnetic field limit, the two
possible detunings are @xmath GHz and @xmath GHz, for transitions from
@xmath into @xmath and @xmath states, respectively, of the @xmath level.
These detunings account for the Lamb shift, the @xmath and @xmath
hyperfine splittings, and the recoil shift.

At magnetic fields smaller than the hyperfine decoupling field of the
@xmath level (about 40 G), the composition of the @xmath hyperfine
states is roughly independent of the magnetic field. This is a good
approximation for most of the samples in this thesis. In terms of the
@xmath magnetic quantum number basis, the @xmath hyperfine states are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

There is only one possible transition between the @xmath and @xmath
manifolds with a @xmath -polarized photon. The square of its matrix
element is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the cross section @xmath for absorption of this polarization is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

Two matrix elements contribute to @xmath absorption:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

It follows that the cross section for absorption of fluorescence photons
with @xmath polarization is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

Due to the absence of @xmath components in the @xmath level, there are
no matrix elements corresponding to absorption of @xmath photons. This
polarization can only excite transitions to the far-detuned @xmath
level, and thus we neglect @xmath in comparison to @xmath and @xmath .

#### 16.2 Monte Carlo Simulation of Radiation Trapping

In order to accurately predict the effects of radiation trapping under
various experimental conditions, a Monte Carlo simulation of the process
was developed. The simulation takes as inputs the shape of the magnetic
trap, calculated numerically from magnet currents, and the distribution
of metastables along @xmath . The @xmath distribution is calculated
using a simulation of the @xmath - @xmath excitation process described
in Sec. 21 . It has a sensitive dependence on the geometry of the
excitation laser field. The radiation trapping simulation assumes that
the @xmath cloud is distributed radially according to the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution at a specified temperature @xmath .
Meanwhile, the @xmath cloud is assumed to have a Maxwell-Boltzmann
density distribution throughout the trap.

One Lyman- @xmath photon is simulated at a time. For each photon, its
trajectory is computed by selecting the location of the emitting atom at
random from the @xmath cloud and then randomly choosing a propagation
direction. Typically, the propagation direction is restricted to be
within the detection solid angle. The quenching electric field is
assumed to be uniform and perpendicular to the trap axis, and the photon
polarization is randomly selected according to the expressions in Table
1 . To account for the different angular distributions of circularly and
linearly polarized fluorescence, each photon is assigned a statistical
weight in the simulation according to Table 2 . Next, the photon is
propagated through the @xmath cloud in steps which are small compared to
the local absorption length @xmath , where @xmath is the absorption
cross section corresponding to the photon polarization. Random numbers
are used to determine at each step whether the photon has been absorbed.
Once a photon is absorbed, the simulation assumes that, since the
detection solid angle is only @xmath sr, the photon scattered into a new
direction will not be detected.

To a good approximation, the weighted fraction of photons absorbed in
the detection solid angle equals the attenuation of metastable signal
due to radiation trapping. At low @xmath densities ( @xmath cm @xmath ),
the fraction absorbed is proportional to the density. For a sample with
peak density @xmath cm @xmath and @xmath K (Trap W of Ch. Studies with
Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen ), simulations predict that radiation
trapping reduces the signal by 24-28%, with the uncertainty coming
predominantly from the shape of the metastable cloud.

Most photons are not initially emitted into the detection solid angle.
One might imagine that enough of these are scattered into the detection
solid angle to significantly increase the detection efficiency. However,
due to the fact that the detector is located on the long axis of the
trap, the scattering effect is small. Most photons are initially emitted
in directions where the sample is optically thin, and they have little
chance to be scattered. A modified version of the radiation trapping
simulation, in which photons are allowed to radiate into all @xmath
steradians, predicts that less than 3% of the total fluorescence is
scattered in the coldest and densest of the relevant samples.
Furthermore, the average probability of a scattered photon reaching the
detector is less than that of an unscattered photon, since scattering
happens preferentially in the densest part of the sample, where a second
absorption event is more probable. For these reasons, we neglect the
effects of Lyman- @xmath scattering.

The simulation of fluorescence into all directions uses the matrix
elements of Table 1 to additionally calculate @xmath , the fraction of
metastables returning to the trapped @xmath ground state. The branching
ratio is found to be nearly 50% for a typical cold, dense sample.
Knowledge of @xmath is required for a detection efficiency determination
described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen . Results
from the radiation trapping simulations are applied to the analysis of
metastable decay data in the following chapters.

## Chapter \thechapter Metastable Decay Measurements: Evidence for
Two-Body Loss

The decay behavior of metastable clouds was studied in hydrogen samples
spanning a wide range of densities, temperatures, and magnetic trap
shapes. Measurement techniques were improved over several experimental
runs, culminating in the data which is the focus of this chapter and the
next. Most of the data presented here was taken over a three week period
during which apparatus conditions were relatively constant. To improve
the signal-to-noise ratio, the same measurements were repeated multiple
times in a few standard magnetic trap configurations at specific points
along an evaporation pathway. These traps are described in the first
section below.

A main motivation for the metastable decay studies is to measure the
loss rate due to @xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions. For such
measurements to be possible, there must be a discernible density
dependence of the metastable decay. A simple first-pass analysis of the
data in Sec. 18 provides evidence that, in cold, dense samples, the
decay rate of the metastable cloud depends strongly on the metastable
density. Furthermore, at high metastable densities, the early part of a
decay curve can be fit much better by a model with a free two-body loss
parameter and a fixed one-body parameter than by a simple exponential
decay model. In Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen the model
incorporating two-body loss is applied to extract a two-body loss rate
constant for metastable H.

### 17 Summary of Traps

The four magnetic traps chosen for detailed studies are known as Traps
W, X, Y, and Z. In each trap, a ground state sample was prepared
according to a consistent procedure, and metastable clouds were excited
in this sample. The label “Trap W” will sometimes be used below to mean
“the sample in Trap W.” The trap shapes and some parameters of the
@xmath cloud are shown in Figs. 26 , 27 , 28 , and 29 .

In order to determine collisional rate constants from the metastable
decay, it is important to know the @xmath density and temperature for
each sample. Both parameters are needed to calculate the spatial
distribution of the metastable cloud; these calculations will be
detailed in Ch. Studies with Ultracold Metastable Hydrogen . To
determine the metastable density, it is also necessary to know the
detection efficiency for metastables. The calibration of the detection
efficiency presented in Sec. 22 requires knowledge of @xmath , the
initial number of atoms in the sample. To find @xmath , the peak density
@xmath can be multiplied by the numerically calculated effective volume
@xmath . The measured temperature and @xmath density, together with
@xmath and @xmath , are summarized for the four traps in Table 3 .

When measuring the temperature or density of a sample, it is important
to ensure that the temperature has reached an equilibrium value which is
maintained during the measurement. After the end of an evaporation
sequence in which the trap depth is ramped downward, the sample will
continue to cool for a time up to tens of seconds as the temperature
asymptotically approaches an equilibrium value. This cooling has been
observed directly in Trap W by scanning the excitation laser frequency
repeatedly across the Doppler-sensitive line for about 1 minute after
the evaporation ramp (Fig. 30 ). The average temperature during a given
time interval was found by fitting the lineshape accumulated during the
interval to a Gaussian, as in Fig. 5 . In the case of Traps W, X, and Y,
the standard practice was to hold the sample for 30 s after the
evaporation ramp to allow equilibrium to be reached. At higher
temperatures, evaporation proceeds more efficiently, and the sample is
expected to be near equilibrium throughout the evaporation sequence. For
this reason, no hold time was employed for Trap Z.

The temperatures of the equilibrated samples were determined by a
combination of methods. For Trap W, which involved the coldest sample,
the temperature was determined with an uncertainty of 5% from a Gaussian
fit to the Doppler-sensitive @xmath - @xmath line (Fig. 5 ). In the case
of Trap X, the temperature was found by comparing the width of the
Doppler-free @xmath - @xmath lines for low density samples in it and
Trap W (Fig. 4 ). The temperature extracted in this way agrees well with
the trap depth divided by the equilibrium value of @xmath , determined
self-consistently from numerical simulations of a cylindrical quadrupole
trap uniform in @xmath [ 29 ] . For higher temperature samples, the most
reliable way to determine temperature at present is to obtain @xmath
from simulations and use @xmath , where @xmath is the trap depth. This
was done for Traps Y and Z. The estimated uncertainty in the
temperatures for Traps X, Y, and Z is 10%.

Once the temperature of a sample is known, the @xmath density can be
determined by the bolometric method described in Sec. 7.3 . The
densities in Table 3 were determined this way. They have an estimated
total uncertainty of 20%. Some of this uncertainty stems from systematic
uncertainty in the dipolar decay constant and affects all of the density
measurements in the same way; the measured densities should be accurate
to 10% relative to each other.

Values for the effective volume of the @xmath cloud were obtained by
numerical evaluation of @xmath exp @xmath over the trap region. Since
the gravity gradient (12 @xmath K/cm) is not strong enough to
significantly distort the trapping potentials at these temperatures, it
was neglected in the calculations. The uncertainty in @xmath is
dominated by the temperature uncertainty. For small changes in @xmath ,
numerical calculations show that @xmath in all of the traps. Thus,
@xmath is accurate to about 10% for Trap W and 20% for the other traps.
The number of atoms @xmath in each trap was obtained by multiplying
@xmath by @xmath . Since the fractional uncertainties in @xmath and
@xmath are essentially independent, we can add them in quadrature to
find that the accuracy of the @xmath values is 20-30%, closer to 20% for
Trap W, and closer to 30% for the others.

A phase space representation of the four standard samples is shown in
Fig 31 . To prepare the sample in Trap W, an rf evaporation field was
ramped from 35 MHz to 20 MHz and then held constant at 20 MHz for the
duration of measurements. No rf evaporation was employed in the other
traps. Although Trap W is considerably colder than Trap X, it contains
almost as many atoms. This is because Trap W has less radial compression
than Trap X. For Traps W, X, and Y, the energy of the trap minimum was
determined by slowly sweeping the rf frequency upward from near DC until
atoms were ejected from the sample and observed on the bolometer. In
each of these traps, the minimum was found to be consistently 180-200
@xmath K lower than the value predicted by numerical calculations based
on the magnet currents. This discrepancy is assumed to be due either to
uncertainty in the magnet geometry or to a stray field component
pointing along the trap axis. For Trap Z, the trap minimum was estimated
by subtracting 200 @xmath K from the numerically calculated trap
minimum.

### 18 Density-Dependent Decay Rates

To measure a two-body loss process in metastable H, it is important to
have close control of not only the one-body decay rate and but also the
@xmath density. A first goal for our experiments was to see a systematic
effect on metastable decay due to density. In this section, it is shown
how the effective decay rate varied in each trap over the achievable
@xmath density range. More specifically, an effective decay rate is
calculated as a function of the metastable signal in a decay curve. To a
first approximation, the signal is simply proportional to the @xmath
density in the trap.

The density of metastables excited by a UV laser pulse varies during the
excitation phase for several reasons. First, the ground state sample
density decreases over many seconds due to dipolar decay. Second, the
laser frequency is generally scanned back and forth across the center of
the Doppler-free @xmath - @xmath resonance. This allows the line center
frequency relative to the laser’s reference cavity to be established in
each trap cycle. The relative frequency drifts typically @xmath kHz per
hour, measured at 243 nm. Since the laser frequency is stepped after
each decay curve measurement, the detuning is stepped, and the
excitation rate changes. Finally, there are sources of noise operating
on a time scale which is short compared to the time required to make a
decay measurement. These include fluctuations in the laser power and the
overlap of the counterpropagating UV beams.

In order to obtain enough signal-to-noise for a useful analysis, the
decay curves from the data set for a given trap must be grouped or
“binned” together. To look for an effect dependent on the number of
metastables excited, the decay curves can be binned according to the
total number of metastable signal counts in each decay curve. This means
that decay curves corresponding to approximately the same initial
density are averaged together. Next, the average decay curve for each
signal bin is fit with a model function. For a preliminary analysis, we
use a simple exponential decay function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

as a model, where @xmath is the number of signal counts at a time @xmath
following the laser pulse, and the free parameters are an effective
decay rate @xmath and initial signal amplitude @xmath . Even when the
decay curve is distinctly nonexponential, the quantity @xmath derived
from a fit provides a useful measure of the lifetime of the metastable
cloud. For cases where the decay is well described by Eq. 51 , @xmath
can be interpreted as the total rate of one-body metastable loss
processes.

Figure 32 summarizes the results for decay rates determined from fits to
a simple exponential. The most dense metastable cloud is excited in Trap
W, which contains the coldest, most dense ground state sample. In this
trap, there is a clear monotonic increase of the effective decay rate
with the number of metastables excited. For Trap X, which is warmer and
less dense, the maximum decay rates are not as large, but the same trend
with metastable signal is present. In the warmest and least dense
samples, there is only a small increase in decay rate at the largest
metastable population achievable in those traps.

It should be mentioned that the observed dependence of decay rate on
metastable number is not a consequence of correlated variations in
ground state sample density. To generate Fig. 32 , all metastable decay
curves with approximately the same initial metastable signal were binned
together without regard to the ground state density, which decayed over
the course of each laser scan from the initial values in Table 3 . For
each ground state density, a range of metastable populations was
generated by varying the laser detuning.

Since @xmath density increases with @xmath signal in a given trap, the
data indicate the presence of metastable loss processes which depend on
the metastable density. The effect is strongest in Trap W, where the
largest metastable densities were achieved. As will be explained in Sec.
21 , a numerical simulation can be used to calculate the spatial
distribution of @xmath atoms for a given trap and laser geometry. This
distribution can be integrated to obtain the effective volume of the
metastable cloud. For resonant excitation, the peak number of
metastables excited in a laser pulse is 50-70% larger in Trap W than in
Trap Z, while the volume occupied by the @xmath cloud in Trap W is
@xmath times smaller (assuming perfect overlap of the counterpropagating
UV beams). This means that the peak metastable density achieved in Trap
W may be as much as 100 times larger than in Trap Z.

Qualitatively, the increase in peak decay rate going from Z to W is
consistent with the existence of two-body inelastic processes which
become increasingly significant at higher @xmath densities. The data
could also be consistent with an inelastic rate constant which increases
with decreasing temperature. However, theoretical predictions for the
relevant inelastic processes indicate that the rate coefficients should
be nearly independent of temperature in the temperature range of these
experiments (Fig 21 ).

In Traps W and X, the decay curves were observed to be exponential for
low @xmath signal and distinctly nonexponential at high @xmath signal.
This is illustrated in the semi-logarithmic plots of Fig. 33 . In Fig.
33 (a), the data is well fit by a simple exponential. For the decay
curve starting at high signal in Fig. 33 (b), there is a clear departure
from an exponential. The data is better fit with a model which has a
fixed one-body decay parameter and a free two-body parameter
(“one-plus-two model”). The procedure for fitting to this model and
extracting a @xmath - @xmath inelastic rate constant is described in the
following chapter.

## Chapter \thechapter Analysis of Metastable Loss Dynamics

In order to determine the loss rate constant @xmath associated with
@xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions, it is convenient to first assume
that the metastable cloud shape does not change as it decays. This
allows the decay data to be fit by a simple model incorporating both
one-body and two-body loss terms. The one-body parameter of the model
can be fixed at the exponential decay rate inferred from the data for
the limit of zero metastable density. With the one-body parameter fixed,
the two-body parameter is easily determined from fits to decay curves.
To find @xmath , it is also necessary to know the geometry of the
metastable cloud and the detection efficiency for metastables; these
pieces of information establish the link between the @xmath density and
the observed signal. As will be explained in this chapter, the geometry
and detection efficiency are difficult to determine precisely, and this
gives rise to much of the uncertainty in the final values for @xmath .
Some more uncertainty arises because the @xmath spatial distribution
flattens significantly during a decay, and it is necessary to apply a
correction factor based on a dynamic simulation of the cloud.
Nevertheless, it is possible to determine @xmath to within a factor of
about 2 with our data, and the results are compatible with the current
state of theory. It is also possible with our data to set limits on the
loss rates due to @xmath - @xmath inelastic collisions. The details of
the analysis follow.

### 19 One-Plus-Two Model

The extraction of a rate constant from the decay data is straightforward
if we assume that (1) loss occurs solely due to a combination of one-
and two-body processes (“one-plus-two model”) and (2) the shape of the
metastable cloud is constant in time (“static approximation”).
Three-body loss is not expected to play a role at the metastable
densities achieved to date ( @xmath cm @xmath or less). If the @xmath
distribution in the trap and the detection efficiency are known, then a
total two-body loss constant in terms of density can be computed from
the two-body parameter in the model.

In the static approximation of the one-plus-two model, the decay of the
metastable signal is described by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the one- and two-body fit
parameters. The solution to Eq. 52 is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since @xmath and @xmath are highly correlated, it is not useful to vary
both of these fit parameters simulataneously. Fortunately, @xmath can be
determined by extrapolation of effective decay rates @xmath to the limit
of very low metastable density; this will be explained more fully in
Sec. 23 . The parameter @xmath represents the background one-body decay
rate which occurs in a given trap regardless of the metastable density.
With the fixed value for @xmath , the decay curves for all initial
@xmath densities can subsequently be fit with Eq. 53 , using @xmath and
@xmath as free parameters. This was the procedure used to determine the
solid curve in Fig. 33 (b).

### 20 Two-Body Loss Constant in the Static Approximation

As discussed in Sec. 14 , the relative spatial distribution of the
metastable cloud evolves during its lifetime due to diffusion and
two-body loss. For the purposes of extracting a value for the two-body
loss constant from the decay data, however, we start with the
simplifying assumption that the relative @xmath distribution is static
in time. The effect of metastable cloud dynamics will be considered
afterwards in Sec. 23.3 .

The desired two-body loss constant, @xmath , is defined so that it gives
the total local rate of @xmath density change due to two-body processes:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

In terms of the normalized metastable distribution @xmath , where @xmath
is the peak density, the two-body loss from the entire trap is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the metastable population. Since the peak density cannot
be measured directly in the current experiments, it is useful to rewrite
the right-hand-side of Eq. 55 in terms of @xmath . Making use of the
effective volume definitions

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a quantity having units of volume and encapsulating all
necessary information about the @xmath cloud geometry. The quantity
@xmath is a measure of the spatial extent of the metastable
distribution; @xmath decreases as @xmath becomes more sharply peaked in
space.

The quantity measured experimentally is @xmath , the number of
metastable signal counts observed when quenching at time @xmath after
excitation. The signal is proportional to the number of @xmath atoms in
the trap by the detection efficiency @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since the signal decay due to two-body loss is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

it immediately follows that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

The method for determining @xmath from the data has already been
described. We turn our attention next to the calculations and
measurements required to obtain @xmath and @xmath .

### 21 Spatial Distribution of Metastables

#### 21.1 Monte Carlo Calculation of @xmath Distribution

A lineshape simulation was developed by L. Willmann of the MIT Ultracold
Hydrogen Group to calculate the @xmath - @xmath excitation spectrum for
realistic experimental conditions. The simulation can be used to
calculate the spectrum due to atoms excited at different @xmath
positions. If contributions for enough different @xmath positions are
calculated, the distribution of metastables immediately following
excitation can be extracted from the lineshape results.

The input parameters to the simulation include the laser field geometry,
the trap shape, the sample temperature, and the chemical potential,
which is related to the sample density by the Bose-Einstein
distribution. The simulation is based on the principle that the
contribution to the excitation spectrum by a single atom is proportional
to the Fourier transform of the electric field experienced by the atom
during the excitation pulse. Moreover, the cold-collision shift is
incorporated by allowing the resonance frequency to vary during the
pulse according to the trajectory of the atom in the trap; if @xmath (t)
is the atom trajectory, the resonance frequency as a function of time is
@xmath , where @xmath is the unperturbed resonance frequency and @xmath
is the cold-collision shift per unit density. When the laser field
intensity and instantaneous resonance frequency are sampled at a
sufficient number of points along the trajectory, a Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) algorithm accurately produces the single-atom lineshape
contribution.

In each simulation, a Monte Carlo routine first generates a density of
trajectory states table with trajectories classified according to @xmath
, the maximum distance from trap center @xmath during a complete
“orbit”, and the orbital angular momentum @xmath . The orbits are
considered to occur at constant @xmath , since the distance traveled by
the atoms along @xmath during a laser pulse is small compared to the
trap length scale. Momentum-changing collisions are neglected since
typical collision times are longer than the laser pulse. Next, the FFT’s
of a prescribed number of trajectories are computed in a second Monte
Carlo procedure. The contribution of each FFT to the final spectrum is
weighted according to the density of trajectory states and the
Bose-Einstein distribution.

The lineshape simulation has produced spectra in good agreement with
experimental spectra for a wide range of trap shapes, laser geometries,
sample densities, and temperatures. For the purposes of the analysis
presented here, sufficient accuracy in the @xmath distribution is
obtained for a given set of input parameters after about one hour of CPU
time on a computer which performs the FFT of a 1024-point trajectory
every @xmath ms.

#### 21.2 Results of Spatial Distribution Calculations

The Monte Carlo simulation provides the axial distribution of
metastables in the trap. Under the assumption that a thermal
distribution is established quickly in the radial direction, the
distribution function @xmath is easily calculated for the entire trap.
Using the photoionization correction factor @xmath described in Sec. 13
, the distribution function is corrected for photoionization losses
during the excitation pulse. Numerical integration can then be used to
determine the geometry factor @xmath .

By varying the input parameters to the simulation, the sensitivity of
@xmath to various experimental uncertainties can be determined. The most
important uncertainty by far is found in how well the focuses of the
counterprograting UV beams are overlapped along @xmath . The alignment
of the beams to the trap axis can be done accurately using the imaging
technique of Fig. 14 , and the concave cell retromirror effectively
fixes the centroid of the incoming and return focuses. However, it is
difficult to ensure that no separation exists between the focuses. The
present method of minimizing the separation is to match the sizes of the
overlapped incoming and return beam modes in Telescope 2 of Fig. 13 .
This is accomplished by adjusting the length of the telescope. The
estimated typical discrepancy in mode sizes for the decay measurements
presented here is 10% or less, which translates into a separation of
1.8 cm or less between the two beam waists.

The dependence of the @xmath spatial distribution on the separation of
the laser focuses is illustrated for Trap W in Fig. 34 . A separation of
1.8 cm produces a significant change since the local Doppler-free
excitation rate depends on the product of incoming and return beam
intensities, and the Rayleigh range is only 0.6 cm for the 21 @xmath m
waist radius. Values of @xmath determined in this and other traps for
zero laser detuning are summarized in Table 4 .

Though the laser field geometry is the most important factor in
determining the shape of the metastable cloud, the shape also depends on
laser detuning. This is a consequence of the cold-collision shift. The
atomic resonance frequency of an atom passing in and out of a dense
region of the ground state cloud is chirped by the changing
cold-collision shift, which is proportional to the local density. In
this way, the excitation spectrum of a single atom is both broadened and
shifted. At red detunings (laser frequencies less than the unperturbed
@xmath - @xmath resonance frequency), the @xmath distribution is
slightly more concentrated near the trap minimum in @xmath than for zero
detuning. This is because the high density near the trap minimum shifts
the atomic resonances to lower frequency. At blue detunings the relative
metastable distribution will generally again become more concentrated
about the trap minimum since most of the excited atoms are ones whose
resonances have been sufficiently chirped in a high density region.

Figure 35 shows the variation of @xmath in Trap W over the range of
detunings used for most @xmath decay measurements. The dependence on
detuning is stronger when the laser focuses are separated. In traps
where peak densities are smaller and the ground state cloud extents are
larger relative to the laser depth of focus, the dependence on detuning
is less. For example, in Trap Z, @xmath varies by less than 20% over the
detuning range used in Fig. 35 , even for focuses separated by 1.8 cm.

### 22 Measurement of Detection Efficiency

To obtain @xmath from @xmath in the static approximation, it is crucial
to know not only @xmath but also the detection efficiency @xmath . The
detection efficiency completes the connection between the metastable
signal, which we observe, and the metastable density.

While it is difficult to measure @xmath precisely with the current
apparatus, it can be calibrated to better than a factor of 2 by
depleting the ground state sample as quickly as possible through @xmath
- @xmath excitation. For an ideal measurement by this approach, the only
significant loss mechanism would be excitation, and the detection
efficiency would be given simply by the total number of signal counts
observed divided by the initial number of atoms in the trap, @xmath .
However, even in cases where the depletion rate due to excitation is
high, there can also be significant loss due to dipolar decay and due to
laser heating of the trapping cell, which causes helium atoms to be
evaporated from the cell walls. Another complicating factor in a real
experiment is that a considerable fraction of the metastables relax back
to the trapped @xmath ground state and are subsequently excited again
(see Sec. 16.2 ). Finally, since the metastables are quenched after some
wait time following the laser pulse, some correction needs to be made
for the signal “missing” due to inelastic collisions of metastables
during the wait time. The following paragraphs outline a method for
extracting the detection efficiency which takes all these factors into
account.

Figure 36 shows the results of a ground state depletion experiment in
Trap X. The 243 nm laser frequency is swept back and forth across the
central 10 kHz of the @xmath - @xmath line, completing a sweep in one
direction every 150 ms. Since the laser frequency remains near the
center of the line, the sample is depleted quickly; after 120 s, only a
few percent of @xmath remain in the trap. To analyze the data, the
number of signal counts observed after each laser pulse was first
corrected for the loss which occurs during the 5.4 ms wait time between
excitation and quench pulses. This was done by extrapolating backwards
in time using Eq. 53 with experimentally determined values of @xmath and
@xmath . Next, the extrapolated signal was summed across each laser
sweep, and the results were fit with a smooth curve @xmath , shown in
Fig. 36 , where @xmath is the beginning of the depletion experiment. The
quantity @xmath serves as a distribution function of the @xmath - @xmath
signal in time.

To understand how the detection efficiency is extracted from @xmath , we
consider its relationship to @xmath , the excitation rate at time @xmath
averaged over a laser sweep:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

We neglect here the small number of metastables lost during the
excitation pulse itself. The detection efficiency is an increasing
function of time, because the number of fluorescence photons “lost” due
to radiation trapping decreases as the @xmath density decreases (Sec.
16.2 ). It is useful to calculate the average detection efficiency
@xmath per metastable during the depletion experiment,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

The integration is to be taken over the duration of the experiment.
Equation 63 can be written in terms of the initial detection efficiency
@xmath using

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the fraction of fluorescence photons in the detection
solid angle which are absorbed by the @xmath cloud. The radiation
trapping simulation described in Sec. 16.2 predicts @xmath in Trap X
with an uncertainty of 20% stemming primarily from uncertainty in the
initial ground state density. This number is relatively insensitive to
the sample temperature, the laser detuning, and the separation of the
laser focuses. Results from simulations at several sample densities in
Trap X were used to show @xmath . The fraction of atoms remaining,
@xmath , can be obtained by taking @xmath and making a correction for
the changing width of the @xmath - @xmath line due to decreasing
cold-collision shift. Substituting into Eq. 63 , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now, Eq. 63 can be interpreted as equating the average detection
efficiency with the total number of signal counts divided by the total
number of atoms excited to the @xmath state. We can write the total
number of atoms excited as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the total number of atoms lost to dipolar decay, @xmath
is the number lost due to laser heating in the trapping cell, and @xmath
is the number of relaxations back to the trapped @xmath state when
metastables are quenched. The small number of atoms remaining in the
trap at the end of the depletion measurement are neglected. Substituting
Eq. 66 into Eq. 63 yields an alternative expression for the average
detection efficiency:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The rate of relaxations back to the trapped sample is approximately
given by @xmath , where @xmath is the spatially-averaged branching ratio
to @xmath for metastables in the quenching electric field. Thus,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

For Trap X, Monte Carlo simulations predict that @xmath , virtually
independent of sample density, temperature, laser detuning, and
separation of the focuses. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In the simulations, the electric
field was uniform and pointing in a direction perpendicular to the trap
axis. This should be a good approximation to the actual quenching field.
See the electrode arrangement in Sec. 10.5 . Equation 68 is not exact
because the branching ratio is unknown for those metastables decaying
before the quench field is applied. The resulting uncertainty is small,
however, relative to other uncertainties in the detection efficiency
determination.

The number of atoms lost to dipolar decay and the number lost to laser
heating are calculated numerically from @xmath , using

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dipolar decay constant, and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the time constant for sample decay due to laser heating.
At the high laser power ( @xmath mW) used to obtain the data in Fig. 36
, @xmath was determined to be about 200 s by tuning the laser far off
resonance and observing the depletion of the sample. Taking @xmath from
Table 3 , Eqs. 69 and 70 evaluate to @xmath and @xmath for this data.

By combining Eqs. 65 , 67 , and 68 , the initial detection efficiency in
Trap X is determined to be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

The errors are due predominantly to uncertainties in temperature and
initial density. By comparing radiation trapping calculations for Traps
W, X, Y, and Z, the detection efficiency can be predicted for the other
traps as well (see Table 5 ). It turns out that @xmath (and thus @xmath
is roughly constant across the traps. As the sample becomes cooler and
denser along the evaporation pathway, it also becomes shorter along the
trap axis, and the optical density seen by Lyman- @xmath photons
traversing the axis towards the detector remains nearly the same. We
note that the detection efficiency for metastables at zero @xmath
density is simply @xmath , with relative uncertainties similar to those
in Eq. 71 .

With knowledge of the detection efficiency, the population of a
metastable cloud can be inferred from the number of signal photons
detected during the quench pulse. In Trap W, for example, as many as 150
counts were observed for a single laser shot, implying @xmath .
Depending on the separation of the laser focuses, the effective volume
of the @xmath cloud in Trap W lies between @xmath and @xmath cm @xmath .
This means that peak metastable densities as high as @xmath cm @xmath
have been achieved.

### 23 Two-Body Loss: Experimental Results

#### 23.1 @xmath in the Static Approximation

With values for @xmath and @xmath in hand, we can finally turn our
attention again to @xmath and the determination of @xmath .

Before fitting the decay curves of a given data set to extract @xmath ,
the fixed value for @xmath , the “background” one-body loss rate, must
be chosen. This is accomplished by fitting decay curves at different
metastable signal levels with simple exponentials and extrapolating the
corresponding decay rates to zero metastable signal. Plots of the
best-fitting exponential decay rate @xmath against metastable signal
show, to a good approximation, that decay rates are linear with
metastable signal, suggesting that linear extrapolation is a reasonable
way to obtain @xmath .

Figure 37 shows linear extrapolations of the one-body rates to zero
signal for two different data sets in Trap W. The resulting values of
@xmath , employing decay curves from the entire data sets, are in good
agreement. Since the data sets were taken on different days with
different laser powers, the agreement provides evidence that (1) trap
conditions, including stray electric fields, were relatively constant
over a period of several days and (2) systematic effects associated with
changes in the laser power are small.

The decay data compiled to create Fig. 37 was taken continuously over
the first 120 s after sample preparation at a rate of one decay curve
every 0.8 s. The ground state sample depletes substantially during this
time due to dipolar decay. In Trap W, for example, the peak ground state
density decreases by two-thirds. To minimize the role of systematics
associated with changes in the ground state sample density, only decay
curves taken within the first 10-15 s after sample preparation were
considered in the determination of @xmath . In all of the traps, the
@xmath density decreased by less than 20% in the time required to
acquire this data subset. Furthermore, since the laser duty cycle was
only 2%, ground state losses due to laser heating and excitation were
insignificant. Since @xmath can vary as the ground state density changes
(see Sec. 24 ), the same 10-15 s subset of decay curves was employed to
determine a value of @xmath to use when fitting to the one-plus-two
model. As an example, Fig. 38 shows the linear extrapolation used to
find @xmath for the first 9.6 s of a Trap W data set.

After @xmath has been determined, the decay data is fit to the
one-plus-two model. To accumulate enough statistics, a typical data set
encompasses five consecutive trap cycles. The decay curves taken during
the first two or three sweeps across resonance in each trap cycle are
binned according to laser detuning. The resulting curves are fit with
Eq. 53 , using only @xmath and @xmath as free parameters. The values for
@xmath at different laser detunings are substituted into Eq. 61 to
obtain values for @xmath in the static approximation. Since the @xmath
density and the cold-collision shift do not change much in 10-15 s, it
is a good approximation to assume that the value of @xmath calculated
for each detuning is constant. As shown in Fig. 39 , the @xmath values
are relatively independent of detuning, indicating that the variations
in metastable cloud shape with detuning are reasonably accounted for by
the spatial distribution calculations. The experimental value of @xmath
for a given trap is taken to be the weighted average of the values
determined at different detunings.

Table 6 summarizes the results for @xmath obtained in the static
approximation. The asymmetric error bars for Traps W and X derive mostly
from systematic uncertainties, which are summarized in Sec. 23.2 . In
traps Y and Z, the weighted average of @xmath is consistent with zero
(Fig. 40 ). Nevertheless, an upper limit for @xmath has been established
by linear addition of the uncertainties in @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
appropriate for these traps. If @xmath maintains the same order of
magnitude across the temperature range spanned by Traps W, X, Y, and Z,
it is not surprising that two-body loss is difficult to detect in Traps
Y and Z, given the much lower metastable densities and the sizeable
systematics.

At red detunings larger than 10 kHz and blue detunings larger than
5 kHz, the metastable cloud in Trap W appeared sometimes to decay very
rapidly in the first 10-20 ms after excitation, implying values of
@xmath far above the wighted average. For example, note the outlying
point in the most blue-detuned bin of Fig. 39 . The origin of these
anomalously steep decay curves is not yet understood. Perhaps at large
detunings either (1) the metastable distributions calculated by Monte
Carlo simulation are inaccurate or (2) transient redistribution of the
@xmath cloud in the first @xmath ms somehow leads to an accelerated
decay of the observed fluorescence. The statistical weight of the
anomalously fast decay curves is small, however, and their inclusion in
the weighted average has little effect on the final results.

A check was made to see if the results for @xmath were biased by the
fact that only the first few time points in the decay curve are
sensitive to two-body decay. For example, consider that during the first
30 ms following excitation of a large metastable population in Trap W,
the @xmath number decays by a factor of 4. The two-body loss rate, which
depends locally on the square of the metastable density, decreases
dramatically during this time. For the remaining @xmath ms of the
measured decay curve, one-body loss dominates. The check consisted in
repeating the measurements in Trap W with eight wait times concentrated
in the first 30 ms of the decay. The resulting value for @xmath agreed
to within 10% of the previous measurements made with eight time points
distributed across 92 ms. This confirms that the results were not
significantly biased by the chosen distribution of wait times.

#### 23.2 Uncertainties: Static Approximation

The uncertainties relevant to determination of @xmath under the
assumption of a static @xmath cloud shape are summarized for Trap W in
Table 7 . Most of the uncertainties are systematic in nature, stemming
from imprecise knowledge of the excitation geometry and also of the
sample temperature and density. The uncertainties which enter through
@xmath have been estimated by varying the inputs to the numerical
calculation of the @xmath distribution. The overall error bars are
asymmetric due to asymmetric uncertainty in the detection efficiency and
the fact that laser misalignments generally lead to an increase in
@xmath .

The uncertainty budget for Trap X is similar to Table 7 . For Trap X,
however, the uncertainty in @xmath is 30%, and the upper relative error
associated with overlap of the focuses is 65%. The smaller relative
errors associated with @xmath have not been explicitly calculated for
Trap X, but are assumed not to differ significantly from those in Trap
W. In both of these traps, the uncertainty in @xmath stems mainly from
the imprecise extrapolation of @xmath ; the parameters @xmath and @xmath
are highly correlated in the one-plus-two model.

With a couple exceptions, the uncertainties in Table 7 are assumed to be
uncorrelated. The errors in ground state temperature and density are
responsible for most of the uncertainty in @xmath . However, the @xmath
and @xmath contributions to @xmath are somewhat anti-correlated with the
corresponding contributions to @xmath . In other words, an error in
@xmath (or @xmath ) leads to errors in @xmath and @xmath with opposite
signs. To be conservative, the possibility of small partial
cancellations is ignored by neglecting the @xmath and @xmath
contributions to @xmath . The estimated total relative error is found by
adding all other uncertainties in quadrature.

#### 23.3 Effects of the Changing Metastable Cloud Shape

As acknowledged before, the shape of the metastable cloud changes while
it is decaying. Although thermal equilibrium is maintained in the radial
direction, the shape of the cloud evolves in the axial direction due to
diffusion and to two-body loss, which occurs preferentially where
metastable density is highest. To estimate the corrections which must be
made to the static approximation analysis in order to account for these
dynamics, a numerical simulation of the decaying metastable cloud was
developed.

The simulation begins with a distribution @xmath , calculated for a
particular trap, excitation geometery, and laser detuning by the Monte
Carlo method of Sec. 21 . Other inputs to the simulation include the
peak ground state density @xmath , a putative value for @xmath , a
uniform one-body loss rate @xmath , a one-dimensional diffusion
parameter, the detection efficiency @xmath , and @xmath , the number of
signal counts which would be experimentally observed when quenching
immediately after the excitation pulse.

The diffusion parameter is the proportionality constant @xmath in the
relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the rms diffusion length of @xmath atoms along @xmath in
a background @xmath gas, @xmath is the corresponding diffusion time, and
@xmath is the @xmath density on the trap axis. Using the Monte Carlo
diffusion simulation described in Sec. 14.2 , @xmath was calculated to
be @xmath (cm ms) @xmath at the minimum of Trap W. This constant has
some dependence on the local radial curvature of the trap. However, for
the purpose of simulating the evolution of the metastable cloud in the
presence of large two-body losses, it is a good approximation to neglect
the variation of @xmath with @xmath .

In the simulation, the initial number of metastables @xmath is used to
establish an initial absolute @xmath distribution. At any given time, if
the number distribution @xmath is known, the density distribution @xmath
can be calculated everywhere assuming that the radial distribution is
Maxwell-Boltzmann. For each step in time @xmath , the total number of
atoms lost to one- and two-body processes is numerically integrated as a
function of @xmath , and @xmath is adjusted accordingly. To account for
diffusion during the time step, the distribution in @xmath is also
convoluted with a Gaussian of rms width @xmath , whose @xmath dependence
comes from @xmath . The time evolution of @xmath for an example
simulation in Trap W is shown in Fig. 41 .

To compare the cases of “static” and “dynamic” evolution of the
metastable cloud, the dynamic simulation also evolves the number in a
static cloud starting from the same initial conditions. At each time
step, loss is calculated in the static cloud in the same way as in the
dynamic cloud, but only the total @xmath number is adjusted and not the
relative distribution. The static and dynamic evolutions for the initial
conditions of Fig. 41 are compared in Fig. 42 . After each step in time,
the geometry factor @xmath is calculated for both static and dynamic
cases. Since diffusion and two-body loss cause @xmath to become less
sharply peaked, @xmath increases with time in the dynamic simulation.
The rate of increase slows as the peak @xmath density drops and two-body
loss becomes less important relative to one-body loss. The effect of the
increase in @xmath in the dynamic case is to decrease the two-body loss
rate relative to the static case (Eq. 58 ). This effect is only
important, however, during the early part of the decay when two-body
loss dominates.

As illustrated in Fig. 43 , the results of the simulation can be used to
calculate a dynamic correction for @xmath in the one-plus-two model
(Sec. 19 ). In the figure, the simulated @xmath curves have been
multiplied by @xmath at the experimental wait times to obtain decay
curves similar to those in the experiment. Applying statistical error
bars and using an experimentally determined value for @xmath , the
simulated static and dynamic decay curves are fit to the one-plus-two
model to find @xmath in each case. A dynamic correction factor @xmath
can be defined as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

The values of @xmath extracted from fits of the one-plus-two model to
experimental decay curves can be multiplied by @xmath to account for the
flattening of the metastable distribution as the cloud decays.

The simulation was executed many times with the parameters of Traps W
and X to find @xmath as a function of laser detuning. These results were
used to correct the static approximation values for @xmath , and a new
weighted average @xmath was determined for each trap. The input
parameters to the simulation were varied to estimate the uncertainty in
the overall correction to @xmath . It was found that the static
approximation values of @xmath must be multiplied by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, to correct for dynamics in Traps W and X. The uncertainty
in these factors is estimated to be 10%. For Traps Y and Z, a
conservative upper limit for the correction factor is 2, and the upper
limits for @xmath in the static approximation are multiplied
accordingly. The corrected experimental values for @xmath are listed in
Table 8 .

In principle, the dynamic simulation could be used to accurately “fit”
the experimental decay curves. However, the simulation has too many
weakly constrained parameters for a more accurate determination of
@xmath than what has already been accomplished by correcting the static
approximation. In addition, since many iterations of the simulation are
required to find a convergence of the simulation results, the CPU time
required is enormously larger than when fitting to the simple
one-plus-two model.

It should be noted that the one-body loss rate was assumed in the
simulation to be uniform over the entire sample. This is a good
assumption if the one-body loss rate is mostly due to natural decay and
quenching by stray fields. In Trap W, however, it is possible that there
is significant one-body loss due to inelastic @xmath - @xmath collisions
(see Sec. 24 ). Since the contribution to the one-body loss rate due to
@xmath - @xmath collisions is proportional to the ground state density,
the total one-body loss rate in this case will be appreciably higher
where the ground state sample is most dense, and there will be
additional flattening of the @xmath spatial distribution. This
additional flattening is not likely to perturb the results for @xmath by
more than a few percent, however.

The effects of the rf evaporation field (present only in Trap W) on the
metastable cloud were neglected in the simulation. In principle, since
the hyperfine structure of the @xmath atoms is the same as the @xmath
atoms at low fields, the rf “surface of death” can eject @xmath atoms
with the same probability as @xmath atoms. Experimentally, however, this
additional source of loss appears not to be significant for the rf field
strengths in our apparatus. Decay measurements were made with a cold,
dense sample where the rf field was switched off during the wait time
before each quench pulse. The results were compared to the case where
the rf field was on throughout the decay measurements. Within
uncertainties, no difference in decay behavior was observed.

Evaporation of metastables over the magnetic saddlepoint threshold
should not play a role in the evolution of the metastable cloud in any
of the traps. The @xmath atoms do not have time to diffuse from the
region of excitation to the magnetic barrier.

#### 23.4 Summary of Two-Body Loss Results

The final experimental values for the two-body loss constant of
metastable H are plotted in Fig. 44 along with a theoretical curve based
on Eq. 21 . There are at least two features noteworthy in the
comparison.

First, in its current state of development, the theory of Forrey et al.
predicts a somewhat larger value of @xmath than what was measured at the
lowest temperatures. However, considering that the theory does not yet
include hyperfine structure or the effects of a trapping magnetic field
(Sec. 11.2 ), corrections which could shift the theoretical results by
as much as an order of magnitude, we conclude that the theory and
experiment are in range of one other.

Second, the two experimental data points suggest that there is a
significant temperature dependence of the inelastic rates between 87
@xmath K and 230 @xmath K. Although the uncertainty ranges on the
absolute values of @xmath are large enough to overlap, the error bars
are mostly due to systematic uncertainties which affect both points in
approximately the same way. When the correlated errors are removed, our
analysis leads to the conclusion that @xmath increases by a factor of
@xmath as the temperature decreases from 230 @xmath K to 87 @xmath K.
This temperature dependence is considerably larger than predicted by
theory. It will be interesting to see whether further theoretical
refinements resolve this discrepancy.

### 24 One-Body Loss and Inelastic @xmath-@xmath Collisions

Taking advantage of the fact that metastable decay data is taken
continuously while the @xmath sample decays, we can look for a
dependence of decay rates on the @xmath density. This will lead to
quantitative conclusions about the prevalence of loss caused by
inelastic @xmath - @xmath collisions in the trap.

The total one-body decay rate @xmath for a metastable cloud is the sum
of several rates, including the natural decay rate, the quenching rate
due to stray electric fields, the loss rate due to the generation of
helium vapor by laser heating, and any @xmath - @xmath inelastic
collision rates. Ejection of metastables by an rf evaporation field
would also contribute to the total one-body loss rate; as mentioned in
Sec. 23.3 , however, loss due to rf has not been detected in our
apparatus. The natural decay rate is well known: @xmath s @xmath . Loss
due to residual electric fields is difficult to measure directly, but
field compensation measurements (Sec. 10.5 ) repeated several times in a
single data-taking session showed that the rate varies by less than 1 s
@xmath over several hours. In the decay experiments reported here, the
laser heating loss is expected to be very small due to the small laser
duty cycle. If there are inelastic @xmath - @xmath collisions causing
measurable metastable loss, then the one-body decay rate should vary
with the ground state density. Experimentally, the parameter @xmath ,
found by extrapolating fitted exponential decay rates to zero metastable
density, ranges between 10 and 17 s @xmath in the initially prepared
samples of Traps W, X, Y, and Z. There is not an obvious trend with
@xmath density, though, which may be due of the fact that these samples
are at different temperatures.

By dividing the decay data for a single trap into time bins
corresponding to a fixed number of sweeps across resonance, we can
examine whether the one-body loss rate changes as the ground state
sample decays at a constant temperature. Figure 45 (a) shows values for
@xmath determined in consecutive time bins for Trap W. The putative
ground state density is shown for the same time interval in Fig. 45 (b).
Although not conclusive, the data suggests that the total one-body loss
rate decreases as the @xmath density decreases. This decrease in @xmath
may be due to a decline in inelastic @xmath - @xmath collision rates,
which are proportional to the ground state density. In principle, the
points of Fig. 45 (a) could be fit to a model which includes constant
one-body decay terms and a term proportional to the @xmath density. The
uncertainties in both the determinations of @xmath and the density as a
function of time are too large, however, to extract a meaningful value
for the total @xmath - @xmath inelastic loss rate without prior
knowledge of the stray electric field contribution.

On the other hand, it is possible to establish a conservative upper
limit on the total inelastic contribution @xmath to the one-body decay
rate by subtracting the natural decay rate from @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the static approximation, @xmath can be simply related to the total
metastable loss rate constant for inelastic @xmath - @xmath collisions
@xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that @xmath only encompasses collisions resulting in loss of a
@xmath atom from the trap; for example, collisions in which only the
@xmath atom changes state are not included. Integrating both sides of
Eq. 75 over all space, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (76)
              @xmath   @xmath      (77)
              @xmath   @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an overlap integral for the ground state and metastable
clouds. Since by definition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

it immediately follows that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

By combining an upper limit for the initial value of @xmath in a trap
with an upper limit for the ratio @xmath and the known peak density
@xmath , an upper limit for @xmath is obtained. An upper limit for
@xmath has been estimated for each trap by first fitting a line to
@xmath as a function of time and then subtracting @xmath from the
initial value of the fitted line. In Trap W, for example, the data
suggests that @xmath may be as large as 18 s @xmath , implying an upper
limit of 10 s @xmath for @xmath . The ratio @xmath can be computed
numerically using the Monte Carlo @xmath distribution results; it has a
maximum value of approximately 3 for all traps with all probable
excitation geometries. Upper limits for @xmath are summarized in Table 9
.

The experimental upper limits for @xmath are more than two orders of
magnitude larger than the rate constant @xmath cm @xmath /s for @xmath -
@xmath dipolar decay. If the true value of @xmath turns out to be closer
to the upper limits in Table 9 than to @xmath in this temperature range,
this may imply that @xmath - @xmath excitation transfer collisions (Eq.
28 ) are much more likely than @xmath - @xmath hyperfine-changing
collisions (Eq. 27 ) mediated by magnetic dipole forces. More precise
metastable decay measurements are required to establish lower bounds for
@xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Outlook: Spectroscopy of Metastable Hydrogen

As mentioned in the introduction to this thesis, the ability to produce
large, long-lived clouds of metastable H in a magnetic trap opens the
door for a variety of new experiments involving excited states of
hydrogen. Of particular interest are spectroscopic experiments involving
transitions from the @xmath state to higher-lying states (Fig. 46 ).
Spectroscopy of a strong single-photon transition such as the @xmath -
@xmath Balmer- @xmath transition will provide a more sensitive probe of
the metastable cloud. Excitation on this transition may also allow the
first direct imaging of the metastable cloud. From a fundamental physics
standpoint, the most exciting possibilities of all involve precision
spectroscopy of two-photon @xmath - @xmath transitions [ 21 ] . Recent
breakthroughs in optical frequency metrology [ 18 ] make it more
feasible than ever to measure these frequencies with unprecedented
accuracy, leading to improved values for the Lamb shift and Rydberg
constant [ 12 ] .

This chapter contains a brief discussion of experiments which could
feasibly be carried out in the next few years. Much fruitful work can be
done yet with the current cryogenic apparatus. However, to fully exploit
the promise of metastable H spectroscopy, a new apparatus with more
optical access and better detection efficiency is desired.

### 25 Further Experiments with the Current Apparatus

#### 25.1 Optical Refinements

The principal sources of systematic noise and uncertainty for
experiments with metastables are currently related to the UV excitation
laser. There are a number of possible refinements to the optical
apparatus which would dramatically reduce these systematics.

In the determination of @xmath described in Ch. Studies with Ultracold
Metastable Hydrogen , a major source of uncertainty stemmed from
uncertainty in the overlap of the laser focuses along the trap axis.
This overlap can be done empirically by changing the length of the
telescope nearest the cryostat (see Fig. 13 ) and observing the change
in metastable signal. Assuming the centroid of the laser focuses is near
the bottom of the trap in @xmath , the signal will be optimized when the
focuses are overlapped. To perform this optimization accurately, the
telescope length should be scanned during a single trap cycle with
stable UV power. This could be accomplished by mounting one of the
telescope lenses on a computer-controlled stepper motor. Another source
of uncertainty is the spot size at the laser focuses. It is difficult to
measure the beam radius at the UV waists directly, but the radius could
be inferred more accurately by measuring the beam profile at several
points outside of the cryostat.

On a time scale of seconds to minutes, fluctuations in the transverse
overlap of the laser focuses is probably the most important source of
non-statistical noise in our @xmath - @xmath spectroscopy. Some of this
noise is apparently due to the pendulum motion of the 2.5 m-long
cryostat. Greater efforts to mechanically isolate the cryostat from low
frequencies may alleviate this problem. Improving the pointing and
transverse mode stability of the UV beam will also make the task of
actively stabilizing the beam overlap in the cryostat much easier.
Currently, much of the noise in the UV beam pointing and mode quality is
due to the instability of the 486 nm dye laser beam which pumps the SHG
cavity (Fig. 13 ). The pointing and mode stability of the dye laser
output could be greatly enhanced by spatial filtering, such as by
passing the the beam through a short length of fiber. This would come at
the expense of a significant amount of power, but the trade-off of power
for stability may be worthwhile for some experiments.

With a more stable UV laser and less uncertainty in the laser geometry,
the decay measurements described in this thesis could be performed with
a better signal-to-noise ratio, and interpretation of the data would be
more straightforward. In general, the geometry of the metastable cloud
could be predicted more accurately, thus reducing a major uncertainty in
the measurement of @xmath . Another important source of uncertainty, the
calibration of the detection efficiency, would also benefit from a
better-known and more stable laser geometry. However, it may be
difficult to significantly improve the measurement of @xmath or other
collisional parameters without a new method for metastable detection.
One possibility is Balmer- @xmath spectroscopy, discussed below in Sec.
25.3 .

#### 25.2 Excitation Studies

Information about photoionization and two-body loss can be gleaned from
studies of the number of metastables excited as a function of the
excitation pulse length. Results from a preliminary study of this type
can be seen in Fig. 47 . The number of @xmath atoms generated begins to
saturate after a few milliseconds. This is consistent with simulations
of excitation behavior which incorporate the theoretical value for the
photoionization cross-section at 243 nm. In cold, dense samples, @xmath
- @xmath two-body loss can play an important role in the saturation
behavior as well.

Each point in Fig. 47 was measured in a different trap cycle. The duty
cycle of the mechanical beam chopper and the timing generator were
adjusted between cycles to produce different excitation pulse lengths
with a constant wait time between the end of the excitation pulse and
the quench pulse. Such a study requires a couple hours to execute and is
sensitive to drift in mode quality, power, and alignment of the UV beam
over this time scale. A better way to look at the excitation behavior of
metastables would be to use different excitation pulse lengths in
succession during a single trap cycle. This could be accomplished using
a fast mechanical shutter or a chopper wheel with several
different-sized apertures. An AOM could also be used to chop the beam at
the expense of about 40% of the UV power.

Experimental excitation curves measured in different traps could be
analyzed with a numerical model incorporating excitation,
photoionization, and collisional loss mechanisms. In traps where the
metastable density is low enough so that two-body loss is not important,
photoionization will be the principal loss mechanism at high UV powers.
If geometry and laser power are well known, the data could be analyzed
to verify the photoionization cross section. Alternatively, it may be
possible to use the theoretical cross section to calibrate the laser
intensity. Finally, in situations where the metastable density is very
large, it may be possible to correct the saturation curve for
photoionization and extract a two-body loss rate. Excitation studies may
serve as a useful complement to the decay measurements described in this
thesis.

#### 25.3 Balmer-@xmath Spectroscopy

Preliminary work has been completed in the MIT Ultracold Hydrogen Group
towards probing the @xmath - @xmath transition with a 656 nm diode
laser. The retromirror of the current trapping cell has a dichroic
dieletric coating which is 99% reflective at both 243 nm and 656 nm.
Thus, red Balmer- @xmath light can be introduced into the cryostat along
the same path as the UV beam, and the retro-reflected red light can be
detected using a beam splitter outside the cryostat. This is potentially
a highly sensitive probe of the metastable cloud. Alternatively, the
absorption of red light can be surmised from the depletion of the
metastable number, observed by quenching and detecting Lyman- @xmath as
before.

Diode lasers with free-running wavelengths near 656 nm and output powers
up to 50 mW are commercially available for @xmath . The diodes can be
induced to operate at a single frequency in a single transverse mode by
optical feedback from an external grating. The laser frequency can be
actively stabilized by piezoelectric control of the grating angle. With
a standard external-cavity grating-stabilized diode laser design, a
linewidth of a few hundred kilohertz is easily achieved [ 78 , 79 ] .
For Balmer- @xmath spectroscopy, it is convenient to use the @xmath -
@xmath saturated absorption lines of a hydrogen discharge as the
frequency reference. The stabilized laser linewidth is small compared to
the 30 MHz natural linewidth of the Balmer- @xmath transition. At 100
@xmath K, the Doppler width is only about 10% of the natural linewidth,
and Zeeman broadening will be insignificant. Thus, in experiments with
trapped metastables, the experimental Balmer- @xmath linewidth will be
approximately the natural linewidth.

The Einstein coefficients relevant for atoms in the @xmath state are
@xmath s @xmath and @xmath s @xmath [ 80 ] . The excitation rate @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath in the presence of a resonant 656 nm laser can be
written

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the intensity and the resonant absorption cross-section
is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

For absorption experiments, the Balmer- @xmath beam waist should be
larger than the thermal radius of the metastable cloud. This will
facilitate alignment and allow saturation intensity to be achieved over
most of the atom cloud with a modest laser power. Consider, for example,
a metastable cloud in Trap W, which has a thermal radius of
approximately 110 @xmath m. If the laser radius is three times larger,
then the minimum power required for saturation at the center of the trap
is 24 @xmath W. In an absorption experiment, the Balmer- @xmath laser
would be pulsed at a tiny duty cycle, and even at powers far above
saturation, the heating of the trapping cell and cryostat would be
negligible.

It should be possible to make absorption measurements which are nearly
shot noise limited. To minimize shot noise, laser pulses can be used
which contain only as many photons as are necessary to excite most of
the metastables. For the case of a saturation power beam with radius
three times larger than the thermal radius in Trap W, a @xmath ns pulse
of @xmath photons can excite most of a cloud of @xmath metastable atoms
to the @xmath state. The relative error due to shot noise for each laser
pulse will only be @xmath , which is less than 0.1%. In practice, it
will be more convenient to use somewhat longer laser pulses and lower
power, but similar shot noise levels should be achievable. This shot
noise limit would be a dramatic improvement from the @xmath %
statistical error on the @xmath Lyman- @xmath photons observed after a
typical quench pulse.

By calibrating the number of photons removed from the Balmer- @xmath
beam, it will be possible to measure the number of metastables in the
trap. This may lead to a better calibration of the detection efficiency
for metastables by the quenching method. The relative attenuation of the
656 nm beam will additionally give the column density of the metastable
cloud. Used in combination with the shape of the magnetic trap, this
data may allow a better determination of the spatial distribution of
metastables. Spectroscopy of the Balmer- @xmath line may also provide
information about the temperature of the sample. For an accurate
temperature determination, the signal-to-noise ratio will have to be
high, since the Doppler broadening of typical samples is much smaller
than the natural @xmath - @xmath linewidth. Other experiments, such as
photoassociation spectroscopy on the @xmath - @xmath transition may
become possible as well.

In the long term, imaging of the metastable cloud using Balmer- @xmath
fluorescence may be the most useful diagnostic of all for trapped
metastable hydrogen. The implementation of an imaging detector, however,
will require major changes to the apparatus (Sec. 26 ).

#### 25.4 Precision Spectroscopy and Frequency Metrology

In the introduction to this thesis, it was described how the measurement
of a @xmath - @xmath frequency interval, when combined with the
accurately known @xmath - @xmath frequency, allows various contributions
to the structure of the hydrogen atom to be deconvolved. With a sample
of cold metastable hydrogen, it should be possible to improve the
accuracy of @xmath - @xmath frequencies by an order of magnitude over
the best measurements to date. This will lead to a corresponding
increase in the accuracy of the Rydberg constant and Lamb shift. If the
frequencies of several @xmath - @xmath transitions can be measured
precisely, we will have stringent checks on the understanding of
systematic effects.

As a first demonstration of two-photon metastable H spectroscopy, the
MIT Ultracold Hydrogen Group plans to use light from a 972 nm diode
laser to excite the the @xmath - @xmath transition. To perform
Doppler-free two-photon spectroscopy, a standing wave is required, and
most likely the current retromirror will have to be replaced with one
designed for higher reflectivity at 972 nm. The diode laser technology
for this and other @xmath - @xmath transitions is similar to what was
described above for the Balmer- @xmath frequency. The @xmath - @xmath
interval differs by less than 5 GHz from @xmath of the @xmath - @xmath
interval; frequency metrology can be accomplished by looking at the beat
note between the 486 nm dye laser, which is frequency-doubled to excite
the @xmath - @xmath transition, and the second harmonic of the 972 nm
laser. Because it has been calibrated precisely against a cesium
standard, the @xmath - @xmath transition serves as a de facto secondary
frequency standard [ 13 ] .

Stimulated by our need for convenient optical frequency metrology, a new
mode-locked femtosecond laser has recently been developed in the group
of F. Kärtner at MIT [ 81 , 82 ] . The “double-chirped” mirrors of this
laser allow it to produce an extraordinarily broad comb of frequencies
without dispersion-compensating prisms or fiber. It will allow direct
comparison of optical frequencies in the range 600-1100 nm. Likely
candidates for precision spectroscopy are the @xmath - @xmath (two
photons at 778 nm) and @xmath - @xmath (two photons at 759 nm)
transitions, whose frequencies have been measured previously in beam
experiments. In an experiment with cold metastable hydrogen, these
frequencies could be calibrated with the frequency comb and the 972 nm
subharmonic of the @xmath - @xmath transition. An alternative approach
is to frequency-triple part of the comb for direct comparison with the
243 nm frequency.

Based on our studies with metastable hydrogen so far, we can speculate
that the optimum metastable cloud for @xmath - @xmath spectroscopy in
the current apparatus will be similar to the one excited in Trap X (Sec.
17 ). In this sample, the peak @xmath density @xmath cm @xmath and
number @xmath are sufficient to allow high @xmath - @xmath excitation
rates. At the same time, two-body loss will not play a significant role
in limiting the signal rate; @xmath appears to be roughly a factor of 2
smaller at 230 @xmath K as compared to 90 @xmath K (Fig. 44 ), and the
metastable density is somewhat smaller in the warmer trap as well. The
moderate ground state density in Trap X may also be desired to reduce
the complicating effects of cold collision shifts and inelastic
collisions involving @xmath atoms.

Before concluding this section, it is worth mentioning that the
mode-locked femtosecond laser will also permit a new determination of
the @xmath - @xmath absolute frequency. Using an appropriate optical
frequency divider [ 11 ] , two optical frequencies with an interval
having a simple relationship to the @xmath - @xmath frequency can be
produced inside the range of the mode-locked laser’s frequency comb.
With the apparatus changes described in the next section, it should be
possible to perform @xmath - @xmath spectroscopy with much lower ground
state densities, minimizing the cold collision shift, which is currently
the most source of important systematic error. Provided a primary
reference such as a cesium fountain clock, the transition frequency can
potentially be measured with an accuracy surpassing that of Hänsch and
collaborators [ 13 ] .

### 26 A Cryogenic Trap Optimized for Optical Studies

A redesign of the magnet system and cryostat to improve optical access
and detection solid angle will have many benefits for spectroscopic and
other optical studies of trapped hydrogen. These include better
signal-to-noise ratios, easier alignment, more possible geometries for
probe beams, and the potential to use imaging detectors.

Figure 48 is a schematic for a possible cryostat and magnet system with
a geometry favorable for optical experiments. The cross section shows
eight superconducting “Ioffe bars” which give rise to a radial
quadrupole field. “Pinch” solenoids above and below the plane of the
page would provide the axial confinement. Spaces between the Ioffe bars
provide access for laser beams and detectors. As in the current
apparatus, an additional window on the axis of the trap could allow
entry of a retro-reflected 243 nm beam for generation of metastables.

The cryogenic apparatus can be greatly simplified if we sacrifice the
ability to do rf evaporation. Our experiments have shown that large
numbers and high densities of metastables can be produced without rf
evaporation of the ground state sample (as in Trap X, for example). In
Fig. 48 , the trapping cell could be made from a tube of non-magnetic
metal with high thermal conductivity, such as copper. To incorporate
four windows as shown, a square profile may be most convenient. Even
more complexity can be avoided if the cryostat is based on a @xmath He
refrigerator rather than a dilution refrigerator. The lowest practical
temperature of a @xmath He refrigerator is about 300 mK, which in the
present loading scheme is too warm for the atom cloud to thermally
disconnect from the cell walls (Sec. 8.4 ). It may be possible, however,
to induce thermal disconnect by raising the magnetic fields at the walls
and forcing magnetic saddlepoint evaporation elsewhere.

It is desirable to reduce both the aspect ratio of the trap and the
length of the axial dimension of the entire apparatus. With more axial
compression, the atom clouds would be more easily probed with transverse
laser beams, and the efficiency of magnetic saddlepoint evaporation at
low temperatures may be enhanced [ 83 ] . If the length of the whole
apparatus can be significantly reduced, this will facilitate reduction
of fluctuations in the transverse overlap of the UV beams, currently a
major source of noise in our experiments. With a @xmath He refrigerator,
it may even be possible to mount the entire cryostat on an optical
table.

Bringing the detectors close to the atoms and providing them with a
large numerical aperture will greatly enhance the detection efficiency.
Fig. 48 depicts an arrangement where the detectors sit in contact with a
liquid nitrogen jacket and can be easily swapped out, depending on the
experiments being performed. With a large detection solid angle, it
should be possible to observe the natural two-photon fluorescence decay
of metastables without applying a quench pulse. With Lyman- @xmath
detectors, the fluorescence occurring due to excitation transfer can be
observed during the decay of the metastable cloud; the relative
importance of ionization and excitation transfer processes could be
unraveled. With a CCD camera and a Balmer- @xmath source, the metastable
cloud can be imaged as in most other atom trapping experiments. This
diagnostic would potentially yield a wealth of information about the
@xmath and, indirectly, the @xmath samples.

With a much improved detection efficiency, it will be possible to do
spectroscopy with significantly lower laser powers or significantly
lower ground state densities than at present. If lower laser powers are
possible, then the UV retromirror could exist outside of the cryostat,
and it could be either vibrationally isolated or actively stabilized to
ensure a stable overlap of the counterpropagating beams. Lower @xmath
densities are key for minimizing cold collision shifts. In particular,
the combination of high detection efficiency and low sample density is
desired for pushing spectroscopy of the @xmath - @xmath transition to
unprecedented resolution levels.

For spectroscopy of the metastable cloud, the benefits of close optical
access to the atoms on two sides are clear. The necessary beams would be
easy to introduce and align. For one-photon transitions like @xmath -
@xmath , single-pass absorption experiments would be possible. For the
the two-photon @xmath - @xmath transitions, the retromirror needed to
achieve a standing wave could be positioned outside the cryostat.

The possibilities for the next generation spectroscopy apparatus are so
many, it may be difficult to choose which ones to pursue. We can be
certain, however, that metastable H has many stories yet to tell us
about cold collisions and fundamental physics.