Theory of quantum games is a new area of investigation that has gone
through rapid development during the last few years. Initial motivation
for playing games, in the quantum world, comes from the possibility of
re-formulating quantum communication protocols, and algorithms, in terms
of games between quantum and classical players. The possibility led to
the view that quantum games have a potential to provide helpful insight
into working of quantum algorithms, and even in finding new ones. This
thesis analyzes and compares some interesting games when played
classically and quantum mechanically. A large part of the thesis
concerns investigations into a refinement notion of the Nash equilibrium
concept. The refinement, called an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS),
was originally introduced in 1970s by mathematical biologists to model
an evolving population using techniques borrowed from game theory.
Analysis is developed around a situation when quantization changes ESSs
without affecting corresponding Nash equilibria. Effects of quantization
on solution-concepts other than Nash equilibrium are presented and
discussed. For this purpose the notions of value of coalition,
backwards-induction outcome, and subgame-perfect outcome are selected.
Repeated games are known to have different information structure than
one-shot games. Investigation is presented into a possible way where
quantization changes the outcome of a repeated game. Lastly, two new
suggestions are put forward to play quantum versions of classical matrix
games. The first one uses the association of De Broglie’s waves, with
travelling material objects, as a resource for playing a quantum game.
The second suggestion concerns an EPR type setting exploiting directly
the correlations in Bell’s inequalities to play a bi-matrix game.
