## 2.1 Conductance matrix

We consider two coupled electron systems in the linear-response limit
where the currents @xmath are related to the applied voltages @xmath
through a @xmath conductance matrix,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the phase-coherent regime one often assumes that the systems consist
of non-interacting particles and the diagonal parts can then be
calculated from the two-probe Landauer formula in terms of the
scattering matrices. The aim of this work is to study the off-diagonal
elements in the case of inter-subsystem Coulomb interaction, but with
electrons of each subsystem being otherwise non-interacting.
Furthermore, in order to study the pure effect of Coulomb drag we assume
that there is no tunneling, i.e. no charge transfer between the two
electron systems.

We start from Kubo formalism which can as well be used to derive the
Landauer formula for the diagonal elements fisher1981 , sols1991 ,
nockel1993 . The Kubo formalism has already been used for studying
Coulomb drag in extended ( @xmath ) two-layer systems kamenev1995 ,
flensberg1995 and here we shall closely follow the work of Flensberg et
al. flensberg1995 . The main difference is that for extended systems the
formalism becomes translationally invariant (after standard impurity
averaging is performed) and thus transformation to the Fourier space is
convenient. On the other hand this is not possible in the case of
mesoscopic systems ( @xmath ) where a formulation in real space
coordinates is required to deal with the broken translation symmetry of
these systems.

For simplicity our starting point is a bi-layer system as sketched in
Fig. 2.1 , but the formalism is general valid and more exotic geometries
like in Fig. 1.6 , are in fact included by adding some in-plane
confinements. The relative orientation of the two subsystems only enters
the functional form of the Coulomb interaction between them.

### 2.2 From conductivity to conductance

In linear response, the induced charge density currents @xmath are
related to the electric fields @xmath by the conductivity tensor @xmath
through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath label the spatial directions, and
@xmath and @xmath label the two subsystems.

For the study of drag we want to calculate, say, the DC current @xmath
in subsystem 2 due to an applied voltage @xmath in system 1 so that we
can identify @xmath . From Eq. ( 2.2 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a position in one of the leads of subsystem 2 with
@xmath being the transverse direction. In fact, since we consider the DC
limit we can choose the point any where due to current conservation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The electrical field is given by @xmath with the bias @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

By partial integration we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the second term both @xmath and @xmath are in the leads and we
have assumed the two leads of subsystem 1 to be identical. In the DC
limit the last term is zero due to current conservation and comparing to
Eq. ( 2.1 ) we identify the drag conductance to be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) is in one of the leads of subsystem 1 (2). The
advantage of this choice is that in the leads the asymptotic form of the
single-particle scattering states is given in terms of plane waves and
scattering matrices. In the following we use Kubo formalism to establish
a quantum mechanical description of @xmath in mesoscopic structures.

### 2.3 Kubo formalism

In the following we briefly review the Kubo formalism, but in the case
of coupling of two subsystems. First, we present the Hamiltonian and
include the perturbation by an external vector potential. Next, we
derive the Kubo result for the drag conductivity @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 Coupling of two subsystems

We consider a coupling of the two subsystems described by the
Hamiltonian

  ---------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------
                                                             @xmath      (2.8a)
  where in absence of intra-subsystem interactions we have               
                                                             @xmath      (2.8b)
  and for the inter-subsystem interactions                               
                                                             @xmath      (2.8c)
  ---------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are the field operators, @xmath is the Hamiltonian of
subsystem @xmath , and @xmath is the electron-electron interaction
between electrons in subsystem @xmath and electrons in subsystem @xmath
.

#### 2.3.2 Vector potential

The effect of a vector potential may be included through an additional
term. This is seen by considering the kinetic part @xmath of the
singe-particle Hamiltonian @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

By partial integration we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the surface term at infinity has been omitted. As shown by Sols
sols1991 a more careful analysis of the boundary term leads to the same
result for the Kubo formula, which we will derive in the subsequent
section. This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the particle current operator is given by @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The full Hamiltonian can therefore be written as @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we “linearize” this term in @xmath and treat it as a
perturbation.

#### 2.3.3 Conductivity

In the Coulomb gauge where @xmath the electric field is described in
terms of a time-dependent vector potential @xmath according to @xmath
corresponding to @xmath . Eq. ( 2.13 ) can thus to first order in @xmath
(linear response) be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we consider the full Hamiltonian @xmath where the
perturbation @xmath is switched on at time @xmath . After the
perturbation is switched on, the system develops according to the
Schrödinger equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where from here on the time-dependent operators (with @xmath as an
explicitly stated argument) are given in the Heisenberg picture where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total charge current can now be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and in linear response we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.19)
  -- -- -- --------

Here, we have used that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Let us now consider the current density in, say, the @xmath direction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and comparing to Eq. ( 2.2 ), we identify @xmath and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the unperturbed particle density and the retarded current-current
correlation function is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Eq. ( 2.22 ) is the celebrated Kubo formula kubo1957 , mahan , but here
derived in real space for the case of two subsystems so that it in
principle applies to all the four elements in the conductance matrix in
Eq. ( 2.1 ). For the diagonal elements the calculation leads to the
Landauer formula fisher1981 , sols1991 , nockel1993 . For the
off-diagonal elements we note that only the last term in Eq. ( 2.22 )
contributes so that we do not have to worry about the usual problem with
the divergence of the diamagnetic term in the DC limit, see e.g. Ref.
haug .

#### 2.3.4 Finite temperatures

At finite temperatures, @xmath denotes the usual statistical average
over the grand-canonical ensemble of the quantum mechanical expectation
value of the operator @xmath , i.e.

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.25)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath (no confusion should be made with the @xmath labeling the
spatial direction!) and the “Kamiltonian” is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a discussion of the absence of @xmath in the Kamiltonian, see Ref.
mahan . The trace is taken over states @xmath with any number @xmath of
particles and @xmath is the grand thermodynamic potential. We shall
later make a perturbation expansion in @xmath , so that these states are
eigenstates corresponding to the unperturbed Hamiltonians of the two
decoupled systems, i.e. @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Formal calculation of drag conductivity

We are only interested in the transconductivity which is given by the
last term in Eq. ( 2.22 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is also the starting point of Ref. flensberg1995 . In order to
calculate it we apply the Matsubara formalism, imaginary-time formalism.
Turning to the interaction representation we make a systematic
perturbation expansion in @xmath . After a Fourier transformation we
utilize the generalized Lehmann representation to obtain an expression
for the current-current correlation function.

### 3.1 Matsubara formalism

In the Matsubara formalism we write the current-current correlation
function as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the usual imaginary-time ordering operator. No confusion
with the kinetic energy operator @xmath should be made. In the
interaction representation we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and due to the usual cancellation of unconnected (unlinked) diagrams
mahan we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where only connected (linked) diagrams are to be considered. Here,
@xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the interaction picture Eq. ( 2.8c ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the particle density operator.

### 3.2 Perturbation expansion

Using the expansion of @xmath , Eq. ( 3.5 ), we can now calculate @xmath
to any order in @xmath . The @xmath th order contribution @xmath to the
transconductivity is obviously vanishing. The @xmath st order
contribution @xmath also vanishes in the DC limit flensberg1995 so that
the lowest-order contribution is of @xmath nd order in @xmath . We will
not prove the vanishing of the @xmath st order term, but just mention
that application of Fermi’s golden rule obviously would give a
lowest-order contribution of 2nd order in @xmath too since it involves
the absolute square of the matrix element.

#### 3.2.1 Quadratic contribution

The @xmath nd order contribution becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can at no cost introduce an extra @xmath -ordering operator @xmath
and since @xmath we get

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

Introducing the following three-point correlation function, the
so-called “triangle” function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is shown diagrammatically in Fig 3.1 . This result can also be
found in Ref. flensberg1995 .

#### 3.2.2 Three-particle Green function

From Eq. ( 3.9 ) it follows that the triangle function can be expressed
in terms of a three-particle Green function. We first rewrite the
particle current operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , and thus

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.12)
  -- -- -- --------

Apart from the order of the field operators this is a three-particle
Green function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that we get the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that in order to obtain the correct sequence of field operators,
@xmath interchanges are needed. This gives the additional factor of
@xmath .

### 3.3 Fourier transformation

#### — in time, but not in space

The next step will usually be to introduce a Fourier transformation in
both time and space as in Ref. flensberg1995 . However, as already
discussed we want to be able to study also systems with broken
translation symmetry and thus only Fourier transformation in time is
convenient. The transformation is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with bosonic Matsubara frequencies,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying it to the current-current correlation function, Eq. ( 3.10 ),
we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using that @xmath it is now easy to carry out two of the Matsubara sums
and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we introduce the Fourier transform with respect to the
“frequency” of the driving field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with bosonic Matsubara frequencies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying this transformation we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have reverted the sum, i.e. @xmath .

### 3.4 Generalized Lehmann representation

The aim is now to obtain a formal result within the generalized Lehmann
representation. First we find the resulting poles and subsequently we
carry out the Matsubara summation by a contour integral in the complex
plane. After obtaining the retarded correlation function by analytic
continuation we finally take the DC limit. The derivation is in
principle straight forward but contains many technical steps which may
be skipped — the final result is given in subsection 3.4.4 .

#### 3.4.1 Poles

We consider the reverse Fourier transform of Eq. ( 3.15 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the action of the imaginary-time ordering operator in Eq. ( 3.9
) gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.24)
  -- -- -- --------

We now consider the evaluation within the generalized Lehmann
representation, see e.g. Ref. fetter , where we denote the eigenstates
by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 2.25 ) this yields

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.26)
  -- -- -- --------

and since the @xmath -dependence of an operator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the closure relation, @xmath , twice we now introduce the current
and particle-density matrix elements and get

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.29)
  -- -- -- --------

Performing the inner integrals and using that the Matsubara frequencies
are satisfying @xmath the expression reduces to

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.30)
  -- -- -- --------

Proceeding in the same way with the remaining integral we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.31)
  -- -- -- --------

This can be further simplified due to the symmetries and interchanging
@xmath and @xmath in the second term yields

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.32)
  -- -- -- --------

This result corresponds to Eq. (A2) of Ref. flensberg1995 . The triangle
function is seen to be a meromorphic function in the complex @xmath
-plane with simple poles at @xmath on the lines corresponding to @xmath
and @xmath and it is analytic elsewhere. We also notice that at @xmath
the pole at @xmath is removable. Since the operators are all Hermitian,
the result can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we see that for @xmath the pole at @xmath is removable too.
We thus conclude that @xmath has no poles coinciding with the Matsubara
frequencies @xmath and @xmath !

For later use it is convenient to write @xmath as a function of the
three variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

indicating the way in which @xmath and @xmath enter the expression.

#### 3.4.2 Matsubara summation

For the evaluation of the Matsubara sum in Eq. ( 3.22 ) we consider the
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use the contour @xmath shown in Fig. 3.2 . Here, @xmath and @xmath
are infinitesimal small and positive and the radius @xmath of the arch
is infinite. We consider the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Bose function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

has simple poles at @xmath so that we get a residue

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand this means that, see Eqs. ( 3.22 , 3.35 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contribution to the contour integral from the arches,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

is vanishing since @xmath vanishes in infinity as @xmath . The
horizontal parts of the contour integral can be expressed as Cauchy
principal value integrals so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Making the substitution @xmath this means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have let @xmath in terms with @xmath and in the Bose functions
@xmath . Furthermore, we have used that @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 Analytic continuation

We now extract the retarded part by analytic continuation mahan , fetter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Shifting the variable @xmath in the @xmath rd and @xmath th terms we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and rearranging we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the notation of Ref. flensberg1995 we now introduce the functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to Eq. (20) in Ref. flensberg1995 .

#### 3.4.4 DC limit

We now consider the DC limit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Ref. flensberg1995 it was proven that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that Eq. ( 3.1 ) now gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

which simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the generalization of Eq. (22) in Ref. flensberg1995 to also
include the case of broken translation symmetry.

## Chapter 4 Sub-systems of non-interacting particles

Until this point no assumptions have been made about the unperturbed
eigenstates of the subsystems; they could be complicated many-particle
states or more simple states. Assuming that we have Fermi liquids so
that we can consider sub-systems with quadratic Kamiltonians

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can immediately apply Wick’s theorem to the three-particle Green
function, Eq. ( 3.14 ). After that we will make an eigenstate expansion
and follow the same line as in the Lehmann representation. However, the
general analysis of poles etc. can be carried over to this problem.

### 4.1 Wick’s theorem

Applying Wick’s theorem mahan

  ------------------------------------------------------ -------- -- --------
                                                         @xmath      (4.2a)
  where the single-particle Green function is given by               
  ------------------------------------------------------ -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.2b)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Only the @xmath nd and @xmath rd terms correspond to connected diagrams,
see Fig. 4.1 , so that Eq. ( 3.14 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indeed, since @xmath the sequence of the three single-particle
propagators are connected so that they form a “triangle” as also
indicated in Fig. 3.1 .

### 4.2 Eigenstate expansion

In the basis of the eigenstates of the Schrödinger equation, suppressing
the subsystem index @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the single-particle Green function takes the form fetter

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the new Green function is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Fermi function.

### 4.3 Matrix elements

Introducing the Fourier transform

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with fermionic Matsubara frequencies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting into the first term of Eq. ( 4.4 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the matrix elements

  ----- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath                              (4.12a)
  and                                       
                                            
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12b)
                          @xmath   @xmath   
  ----- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

For the current matrix element to be non-zero there is a special
constraint on the two states involved in zero magnetic field. Applying
the continuity equation @xmath to the matrix element @xmath and
replacing the Laplacian by essentially @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is seen that the two states in general have to be
degenerate, i.e. have the same energy. This will be useful later on.

Proceeding in the same way, the second term of Eq. ( 4.4 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next step is to Fourier transform with respect to time.

### 4.4 Fourier transform

We consider Eq. ( 3.23 ) and from the first term of Eq. ( 4.4 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term is treated similarly and putting things together we
arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.5 Matsubara summation

For the evaluation of the Matsubara sum in the function @xmath we use
the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Repeating this “trick” we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.20)
  -- -- -- --------

To evaluate @xmath we consider the contour @xmath in Fig. 4.2 and the
integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Fermi function.

Since the contribution from the arches is zero and the two horizontal
parts cancel only the part encircling the pole @xmath of @xmath
contributes. Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that, removing the @xmath in the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Shifting the pole we in the same way find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way we now get

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.26)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have introduced the susceptibility

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Returning to Eq. ( 4.16 ) this means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and treating the other term similarly Eq. ( 4.17 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have used that @xmath is non-zero for @xmath only, see Eq. (
4.13 ).

### 4.6 Analytic continuation

At this stage we should in principle carry out a standard analytic
continuation. However, this has already been done within the generalized
Lehmann representation and we can immediately take over the results
obtained for @xmath and @xmath , see Eqs. ( 3.46 , 3.50 , 3.51 ). The
first one

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in terms of the retarded susceptibility

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have used that @xmath to replace @xmath by @xmath , see Eq. (
4.13 ). Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same way we find that

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.35)
  -- -- -- --------

### 4.7 DC drag conductance

In the following we give the final result for the DC drag conductance,
in terms of both the matrix elements introduced in Sec. 4.3 and also in
terms of spectral functions.

#### 4.7.1 Matrix element formulation

From Eqs. ( 2.7 , 3.51 ) it now follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath has been introduced. There is no spatial dependence of the
current matrix element @xmath due two current conservation. To arrive at
this result we have used that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and assumed spin-degeneracy so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 4.36 , 4.37 ) is the generalization of the existing theory of
Coulomb drag to also include the mesoscopic regime with broken
translation symmetry. This formulation constitutes the formal starting
point in Refs. [E, F, G, H]. We will end this section by writing Eq. (
4.37 ) in terms of spectral functions.

#### 4.7.2 Spectral function formulation

The aim is to write the triangle function in terms of the spectral
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

To do that we first write out the matrix elements and re-arrange the
order of the eigenfunctions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in Eq. ( 4.37 ) we thus now have three pairs of eigenfunctions,
three sums, but only two delta functions. We can at no cost get the
third delta function by introducing @xmath into Eq. ( 4.37 ). Putting
things together this gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.42)
  -- -- -- --------

In the first term we make the shift @xmath and in the second term @xmath
and taking the limit @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is the starting point of Ref. [G]. It turns out to extremely
useful for numerical implementations since efficient methods for
obtaining the retarded Green function @xmath in mesoscopic structures
has already been developed. The original purpose of these methods was to
obtain the diagonal part of the conductance matrix via the Fisher–Lee
relation fisher1981 and other properties like the density-of-states
which can be formulated in terms of scattering matrices gasparian1996 .
For the diagonal conductance it is sufficient to know the amplitude of
propagating from one boundary to the other (one lead to the other)
whereas for the drag conductance the full Green function is needed since
the drag is mediated by Coulomb interactions between particles located
anywhere in the two subsystems.

### 4.8 Low temperature expansion

At low temperatures @xmath we expect the same temperature dependence of
the drag conductance as for the ordinary electron-electron scattering
rate since the mechanism is the same. The available phase space for
electron-electron scattering of course goes to zero at very low
temperatures and thus the Coulomb drag conductance decreases with
decreasing temperature and vanishes at @xmath . At low temperatures the
two Pauli blocking factors entering the electron-electron scattering
rate gives rise to a @xmath dependence smith . As as we shall see we
also get at quadratic temperature dependence of the drag conductance.

We start by noting that the @xmath factor in Eq. ( 4.36 ) cuts of the
frequency integration and at low temperatures we can expand the triangle
function to lowest order in @xmath . This gives @xmath and since in
Eq. ( 4.36 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get @xmath . In the following we make the systematic expansion of the
triangle function that gives rise to this result.

#### 4.8.1 Matrix element formulation

First we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and substituting into Eq. ( 4.37 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected the low temperature behavior is governed by the states at
the Fermi level where all the matrix elements are evaluated since @xmath
. This expression is the starting point for the studies of chaotic
quantum dots in Refs. [E, F] and the perturbative studies of weakly
disordered quantum wires in Refs. [E, G, H].

#### 4.8.2 Spectral function formulation

Similarly we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and substituting into Eq. ( 4.43 ) and performing the energy integral we
now get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all spectral functions evaluated at the Fermi level. This
expression is the starting point for the studies of quasi-ballistic 1D
wires in Refs. [E, G, H] where it is studied numerically by mapping it
to a lattice.

#### 4.8.3 Scattering basis formulation

We consider Eq. ( 4.46 ) with the matrix elements calculated in the
basis of scattering states,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a scattering state incident in sub-band (mode) @xmath
from either the left lead ( @xmath ) or right lead ( @xmath ), and
@xmath is the number of propagating modes.

The current is conserved and thus we are free to evaluate the current
matrix at any point we like. In particular we choose to do it within the
leads where the asymptotic behavior of the scattering states are given
in terms of plane waves and the scattering amplitudes entering the
@xmath unitary scattering matrix @xmath , which has the block form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the blocks being @xmath matrices. The states incident from the left
lead have the form

  ------------------------------------------------------ -------- -- ---------
                                                         @xmath      (4.51a)
  and similarly for the states incident from the right               
  ------------------------------------------------------ -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.51b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the transverse wave functions are orthonormal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalization in Eq. ( 4.52 ) makes all modes carry the same
current.

The previously introduced quantum number is expressed as @xmath where
@xmath . Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the sub-band energy, the summations would normally be
expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, the @xmath factor in @xmath is already included in the
normalization of the wave functions, see Eq. ( 4.52 ), and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 4.46 ) it now follows that, suppressing the subsystem index
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all matrices evaluated at the Fermi level. Since the matrices are
Hermitian we can now also write the result as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the commutator of two matrices @xmath and @xmath is defined in the
usual way @xmath .

##### Current matrix — cancellation of velocity and density-of-states

We now calculate the current matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, it is most convenient, but not necessary, to consider the right
lead ( @xmath ) for @xmath and the left lead ( @xmath ) for @xmath .
This gives @xmath and similarly @xmath . Though slightly more
complicated the off-diagonal matrices @xmath follow in the same way so
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the dimension of @xmath changes to that of @xmath with our
deffiniton of scattering states. By a straight forward matrix
multiplication and use of the unitarity of the scattering matrix it is
easy to show that the matrix can be written in the compact form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a block matrix with the form of the @xmath rd Pauli
matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the blocks are @xmath matrices. As seen the velocity @xmath is
canceled by the density-of-states, i.e. @xmath from the normalization of
the wave function, see Eq. ( 4.52 ). This is a central point in the
derivation of the Landauer–Büttiker formalism for the conductance –
essentially the diagonal parts of @xmath – but of course also in
calculation of the off-diagonal elements which are important in the
context of Coulomb drag.

The compact notation in Eq. ( 4.60 ) will be useful when studying drag
between chaotic quantum dots since in that case standard random matrix
theory beenakker1997 applies immediately to the scattering matrix @xmath
and thereby to @xmath .

##### Particle-density matrix — van Hove singularities

For the particle-density matrix @xmath it is obvious that there is no
cancellation of the density-of-states, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

will have a singular behavior — van Hove singularities — if the Fermi
level is at the onset of mode @xmath or @xmath due to the normalizations
@xmath and @xmath of the wave functions, see Eq. ( 4.52 ). In fact this
will be the case for any mode for an arbitrary scattering matrix that
allows for mode-mixing, see the the sum over @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.51 ).
The apparent divergence of the drag at the onset of new modes is of
course a failure of the low-temperature expansion and the built-in
thermal averaging in a small window around the Fermi level in Eq. ( 4.37
) removes this artifact. Though non-divergent there however will still
be a peak in the drag conductance at the onset of new modes. This was
also found in a theoretical study of drag between ballistic wires with a
multiple number of sub-bands gurevich1998 , but here it is proven for an
arbitrary scattering potential.

##### Capacitive and point-like coupling — no contribution to Coulomb
drag

Some very general consequences follow directly from Eq. ( 4.57 ). First
we notice that the general property @xmath follows directly from the
commutator. However, even more importantly it is seen that if we in
Eq. ( 4.36 ) consider a capacitive (constant) coupling,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath since it is easily realized that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This conclusion also follows in concrete calculations on simple systems
like e.g. ballistic wires, but for an arbitrary disorder potential this
property is difficult to show explicitly without Eq. ( 4.57 ). The
physical reason is that the electrons do not repel (or attract) each
other, i.e. when two electrons interact they might stay very close to
each other as well as far apart. Both situations are equally favorable
with respect to the interaction energy.

If the two subsystems interact in a single point @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

it again follows directly from Eqs. ( 4.36 , 4.57 ) that @xmath . We
note that this does not exclude neither a short ranged interaction like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

from contributing to Coulomb drag nor a set of point-like couplings.

## Chapter 5 The discrete problem

The numerical method that we will develop in the following is — as is
usual the case — based on a mapping of the continuous problem onto a
discrete lattice problem. For each subsystem we choose a finite set of
spatial points where the needed functions and quantities are calculated
and evaluated. In general the set of points may form a regular, say,
square lattice for two-dimensional problems or it might have some
irregular and even three-dimensional form. In this work the lattice only
has a mathematical meaning and the lattice constant is to be chosen
small enough that the convergence towards the continuous problem is
ensured. However, the lattice could also be the underlying physical
lattice of the atoms like it would be the case if we were going to make
a detailed study of drag between molecular wires like e.g. carbon
nanotubes. In what follows we will consider two square lattices as
illustrated in Fig. 5.1 which is the discrete version of Fig. 2.1 . The
way we number the lattice points is not crucial and here we will for
simplicity choose the one indicated in Fig. 5.1 though at the end the
overall formulation will not depend on the particular way of numbering.

### 5.1 Trace formula for drag conductance

We consider Eq. ( 4.36 ), where both the triangle function @xmath and
the interaction @xmath are functions of two spatial variables and can
thus be represented as two-dimensional matrices with elements

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Approximating the spatial integrals by sums over the lattice sites,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used that @xmath and introduced @xmath . The “missing”
factor @xmath will be incorporated into the spectral function so that
@xmath will have the dimension of energy.

For simplicity we will assume the same number of sites in the two
subsystems so that all matrices are @xmath matrices instead of the
general case with @xmath ’s being @xmath matrices and @xmath being an
@xmath matrix.

The one-dimensional case ( @xmath ) is most illustrative and the
generalization to a finite number of modes will be given afterwards.

### 5.2 One-dimensional formulation

For the one-dimensional problem we label the points by @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath and formulate the problem in terms of @xmath matrices.

#### 5.2.1 Coulomb coupling

For the Coulomb coupling the interaction between site @xmath in one wire
and site @xmath in the other wire is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In most cases @xmath will be symmetric, but e.g. a spatially dependent
screening would break this symmetry.

#### 5.2.2 Triangle function

For the triangle function we similarly have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It turns out to be most convenient to work with spectral functions,
Eq. ( 4.43 ), since the spectral function @xmath is easy to obtain
numerically whereas the eigenfunctions only follow implicitly.

Similarly to the transformation of integrals into sums we now need to
transform the spatial derivative into finite differences, see e.g. Refs.
ferry , datta . For some function @xmath this means that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which of course only becomes a good approximation when the lattice
constant @xmath becomes sufficiently small. We will return to a more
detailed criterion for that later.

Due to current conservation the point at which the derivative is taken
can be anywhere. Applying Eq. ( 5.6 ) to Eq. ( 4.43 ) at @xmath we get

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.7)
  -- -- -- -------

In the square brackets two out of four terms have canceled when
introducing the finite differences approximation. Here, the spectral
function matrix has matrix elements

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normalization by the lattice constant @xmath gives @xmath the
dimension of energy — it is a matter of choice which turns out to be
convenient.

Due to current conservation we are free to sum over @xmath and divide by
the number of lattice points corresponding to integrating along the wire
and dividing by the length. This sum can be incorporated by a matrix
product. Introducing the matrix @xmath with elements

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes an element-by-element multiplication, @xmath . In
Eq. ( 5.9 ) we only sum over the first @xmath sites since Eq. ( 5.6 )
can not be applied to the site @xmath if we insist on having @xmath
matrices.

#### 5.2.3 Spectral function

The spectral function @xmath is obtained from the retarded Green
function @xmath since from Eq. ( 4.40 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.11)
  -- -- -- --------

The problem is thus reduced to that of finding a method which provides
the retarded Green function for any given scattering potential.

#### 5.2.4 Hamiltonian

To get the Green function we first map the continuous Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

onto a lattice. We do that by applying the finite differences
approximation to the Laplacian. Eq. ( 5.6 ) is not a unique definition
and we might as well have considered the other neighboring point @xmath
. Using both neighboring points for the Laplacian we get a symmetric
expression ferry , datta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In matrix notation this means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Hamiltonian has the matrix elements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Interestingly, this is the form of a nearest neighbor tight binding
Hamiltonian with hopping element @xmath and a constant shift by @xmath
of the on-site energies from @xmath to @xmath . For @xmath the solution
is the usual cosine band shifted by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath . Expanding the dispersion relation near @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for energies @xmath the finite differences approximation provides a
very accurate description of the continuous problem, see Fig. 5.2 .
Making the grid finer — @xmath smaller --- improves the accuracy and/or
allows for a treatment of higher energies.

#### 5.2.5 Retarded Green function

Since we are considering an open system the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( 5.16 ),
is in principle represented by an infinite matrix. This also means that
the retarded Green function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

involves the inversion of an infinite matrix. If we just truncate the
Hamiltonian @xmath with @xmath being an @xmath matrix it would
correspond to a closed system – the wire would no longer be connected to
the outside through the leads. To deal with this we consider the
retarded Green function of the closed system, suppressing the energy
sub-script,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Dyson equation for the full retarded Green function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The latter can formally be solved to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leaves us with the job of obtaining the retarded self-energy
@xmath due to coupling to the leads. Normally this involves
approximations but for this particular problem where the electrons of
each subsystem are non-interacting this is not necessary. To obtain the
retarded self-energy we write the full retarded Green function as a
@xmath block-matrix

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.23)
  -- -- -- --------

where each of the three blocks along the diagonal corresponds to the
left lead, the wire, and the right lead, respectively. For the
Hamiltonian we can of course do the same

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hamiltonians of the semi-infinite leads
and the coupling of the leads to the wire is described by @xmath .
Combining Eqs. ( 5.19 , 5.23 , 5.24 ) we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.25)
  -- -- -- --------

From this result it is straight forward to obtain the sub-matrix @xmath
which is the full retarded Green function inside the wire

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing to Eq. ( 5.22 ) we read of the self-energies @xmath due to
coupling to the leads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are given in terms of the diagonal part of the retarded Green
functions of the semi-infinite leads taken at their respective
end-points.

For a semi-infinite lead (for convenience it starts at site @xmath ) the
states are those of a semi-infinite tight-binding chain,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

By a suitable contour integration it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thereby

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is given by the dispersion relation @xmath in Eq. ( 5.17 ).

#### 5.2.6 Low-temperature limit

We will end by summarizing the results for the low-temperature limit
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing the @xmath integration in Eq. ( 5.3 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the main result and it forms the basis for all numerical work
reported in Refs. [E, F, G, H]. The generalization to several transverse
channels is straight forward and it provides a very efficient method to
investigate drag in different geometries and/or for different disorder
configurations.

We note that starting from the Fisher--Lee relation fisher1981 the
Landauer conductance @xmath of the individual wires can be expressed in
a similar trace-form, see e.g. Refs. datta , meir1992 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the leads are described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.3 Two-dimensional formulation

In the presence of transverse degrees of freedom we can return to Eq. (
5.7 ) and add the transverse integral that was absent in the 1D
calculation. The net effect is to modify the matrix @xmath by a sum over
the transverse direction and with the numbering in Fig. 5.1 we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, this just means that @xmath is an @xmath block-matrix with
@xmath in each block along the diagonal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The real difference between the one- and two-dimensional systems is thus
at the level of obtaining the retarded Green function where one need to
modify the self-energies, see e.g. ferry , datta . Choosing a way of
numbering different from that in Fig. ( 5.1 ) does not change the
overall structure but only that of @xmath and @xmath .

### 5.4 Implementation

The matrix formulation is readily implemented on a computer and the
accuracy can be increased simply by having more lattice points @xmath
for a given size of the sample. The retarded Green function can be
obtained either by the suggestive direct matrix inversion, see e.g. Ref.
datta2000 , or by a recursive method, see e.g. Ref. baranger1991 . The
numerics to be presented here are based on the former.

For disordered systems the discretized set of equations are often
considered a model system where the lattice constant is just set to
unity and the important parameter is the band-filling, see e.g. Ref.
kramer1993 . Alternatively, one can also view Eqs. ( 5.32 , 5.33 ) as
formulas for a tight-binding system where @xmath is a ’hopping matrix
element’ between different orbitals and the local potential @xmath is
the energy of the orbital localized at site @xmath .

For the implementation it has been useful to carry out tests for both
the Landauer conductance @xmath and the drag conductance @xmath .

For the Landauer conductance it is obvious to test the numerics for
various geometries which can also be solved analytically, e.g. ballistic
regime, single barrier, and double barrier tunneling. For disordered
systems the outcome of the Anderson model can be directly compared to
the analytic scaling results of Abrikosov abrikosov1981 by changing the
ratio of the mean free path @xmath to the length of the wire @xmath from
the localized regime ( @xmath ) to the de-localized regime ( @xmath ).

For the transconductance @xmath it is difficult to obtain analytical
results. However, drag between one-dimensional ballistic wires is an
exception where numerics can be compared to semi-analytical results
where spatial integrals are evaluated numerically by some other method.
Another test is the predicted peaking of @xmath at the on-set of modes
in either of the two wires. Especially this can be seen for systems with
resonance transmission, i.e. peaks in @xmath .

## Chapter 6 One-dimensional wires

In the following we consider one-dimensional wires which is relavant to
the situation where the width is comparable to the Fermi wave length so
that only a single mode is propagating at the Fermi level. We first
consider the ballistic regime and afterwards we study the fluctuations
of Coulomb drag in the quasi-ballistic regime. First we however make a
unitary transformation by which the current matrix @xmath becomes
diagonal.

### 6.1 Unitary transformation

We start from Eq. ( 4.56 ) where in one dimension all matrices @xmath
and @xmath are @xmath matrices. In the presence of time-reversal
symmetry ( @xmath ) we write the @xmath unitary scattering matrix as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath has been introduced. The current matrix, Eq. ( 4.60 ) can
now be written as

  -- -- -- -------
           (6.2)
  -- -- -- -------

Next we employ a unitary transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

that satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

by choosing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We are free to choose the phases as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have inserted @xmath three times and made use of the cyclic
invariance of the trace. Since the diagonal elements of @xmath are real
this also means that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

From Eq. ( 4.56 ) it now follows that in the new basis

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and with the choice of relative phase in Eq. ( 6.6 ) we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

though the phase-factor @xmath has no importance in the context of Eq. (
6.9 ). In the following we will apply Eq. ( 6.9 ) in our studies of both
ballistic and disordered wires.

### 6.2 Ballistic regime

In the ballistic regime we have eigenstates given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the normalization is that of scattering states. In order to
calculate the triangle function there are several possibilities:
starting from Eq. ( 6.11 ) we may either i) calculated @xmath and @xmath
and then use Eq. ( 4.37 ) or ii) calculate the spectral function @xmath
and use Eq. ( 4.43 ). It can be checked that both routes of course give
the same result. Here, we will only consider the low-temperature regime
and use the approach of scattering states, Eq. ( 4.56 ), as also
suggested by the normalization in Eq. ( 6.11 ).

For the ballistic regime @xmath and it is thus easy to utilize the
unitary transformation. Eq. ( 6.10 ) gives, omitting the phase-factor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thereby

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 6.9 , 6.13 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from Eqs. ( 4.36 , 4.44 ) it now follows that in the low-temperature
limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have allowed for different Fermi levels of the two wires — the
drag is largest when they are equal.

#### 6.2.1 Matching Fermi levels

For matching Fermi levels we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

to introduce the Fourier-like transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The drag conductance can then be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we consider the long-wire limit.

#### 6.2.2 Long-wire limit

For @xmath the contribution from @xmath goes to zero due to the rapidly
oscillating exponential and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of the usual Fourier transform of the interaction potential
@xmath .

This relation is well-known, see e.g. Ref. hu1996 , and is easy to
understand: In long translationally invariant wires the electrons can
only undergo back-scattering or forward-scattering. The back-scattering
from @xmath to @xmath and vice versa corresponds to a transferred
momentum of @xmath to the other layer whereas forward-scattering with
@xmath does obviously not contribute to drag since no momentum is
transferred. In Fig. 3.1 each of the two interaction lines will carry
momentum @xmath (opposite to each other) and each line contributes a
factor @xmath to the drag so that @xmath .

#### 6.2.3 Long-range Coulomb coupling

We consider a long-range Coulomb coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the wire separation. In this case the Fourier transform
of the interaction becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which for long wires, @xmath , can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral can be performed analytically, see Eq. (3.754.2) in Ref.
gradshteyn , with the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a modified Bessel function of the second kind of order
zero. This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 6.1 shows a numerical evaluation of Eq. ( 6.18 ) along with the
asymptotic result, Eq. ( 6.24 ). The long wire limit was also
(implicitly) studied in Ref. gurevich1998 , but with no justification of
the @xmath approximation. As seen it gives the right asymptotic
behavior, but under-estimates the drag conductance by even orders of
magnitude for short wires. The oscillations for small values of @xmath
are due to the @xmath functions in the triangle functions, see Eq. (
6.14 ), and they are not a result of the numerical method that we have
used. The reason that their magnitude appears so dramatic is due to the
log-scale plot.

#### 6.2.4 Screened Coulomb coupling

In the following we study screened Coulomb interaction where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the screening length. For @xmath drag is strongly
suppressed due to screening. In the other limit @xmath we may neglect
@xmath in the exponential screening and in the long-wire limit get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Struve function of order @xmath and @xmath is the
Bessel function of the second kind of order @xmath . This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 6.2 we compare @xmath to the case of long-range interaction. For
moderate screening ( @xmath ) the effect of screening is mainly to
modify the short wave length behavior and since drag probes @xmath the
effect of screening is not dramatic. However, as we shall see later the
fluctuations of drag probes @xmath and then screening will make a more
pronounced difference.

#### 6.2.5 Short-range Coulomb coupling

We consider a point-like coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that in the long wire limit @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

All three models for the interaction have the common feature that @xmath
in the long-wire limit, see Eqs. ( 6.24 , 6.27 , 6.30 ).

### 6.3 Quasi-ballistic regime — analytics

We consider wires with a mean free path @xmath much longer than than the
length of the wires, @xmath , so that they behave as almost ideal
quantum wires with the Landauer conductance of the two wires
characterized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Though the mesoscopic fluctuations of the Landauer conductance @xmath
are vanishing in the quasi-ballistic regime @xmath it turns out that the
fluctuations of the drag conductance @xmath are finite and they can even
exceed the mean value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following sections we derive this relation and study it both
perturbatively and numerically.

We consider long wires, @xmath , in the low-temperature regime. We are
going to consider the magnitude of the fluctuations relative to the mean
value and thus we for simplicity use the short-hand notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with, see Eq. ( 6.9 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath means an integral over all spatial degrees of freedom — in
this case @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The frequency
integration has been performed to give the @xmath –dependence and all
prefactors are included in @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

#### 6.3.1 Ballistic regime

The notation is most easily illustrated by re-considering the ballistic
regime. Since we only have a single sub-band we can safely incorporate
the @xmath normalization, see Eq. ( 6.11 ), into the prefactor @xmath .
With this notation we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be compared to Eq. ( 6.13 ). The over-line of the triangle
function is used to indicate the ballistic regime. Eq. ( 6.19 ) now
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

being the Fourier transform of the interaction.

#### 6.3.2 Mutually un-correlated disorder

In the presence of disorder we consider the correction to the triangle
function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and if the disorder potentials of the two wires are mutually
un-correlated (uc) we can write

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.39)
  -- -- -- --------

as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the quasi-ballistic regime we can make an expansion in the disorder
strength. Diagrammatically we have that the average of a triangle
function with only a single impurity line attached vanishes during
disorder averaging since for the averages over disorder we assume a
potential with zero mean and a short-range correlation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the back-scattering mean free path @xmath is related to the
disorder strength @xmath within the Born approximation. This result is
easy to show with the aid of Fermi’s golden rule and we will do this
calculation in the discrete case at a later point.

This means that all corrections to averages @xmath and @xmath will be of
second order in the disorder strength, i.e. to lowest order in @xmath .
Diagrammatically this means that there should be impurity lines
connected to two points on the triangle function(s).

#### 6.3.3 Mean value

For the mean value we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the corrections to the mean value are small, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

To lowest order in @xmath the effect of disorder is just to broaden the
distribution of the drag conductance without shifting it. We now
calculate the magnitude of these fluctuations as a function of the mean
free path.

#### 6.3.4 Fluctuations

For the fluctuations,

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.44)
  -- -- -- --------

the presence of even weak disorder makes a big difference because the
broken translation invariance allows for transferred momentum different
from @xmath .

Fig. 6.3 shows different examples of diagrams with two impurity lines.
The impurity lines carry momentum @xmath corresponding to disorder
induced back-scattering within the wires. Diagrams with a single
impurity line are in principle also possible, but only if the line
carries momentum @xmath corresponding to forward-scattering cheianov .
However, forward-scattering in the disorder channel will not contribute
significantly to the fluctuations for a sufficiently long-range
interaction and for a short-range interaction where forward-scattering
becomes important the fluctuations are substantially suppressed when
compared to the mean value.

The main difference between diagram (a) and (c) is that in (a) the
interaction lines in each sub-diagram must carry the same momentum
whereas in (c) one of them can carry e.g. zero momentum while the other
carries @xmath . Each impurity line is characterized by @xmath and the
interaction lines by @xmath . For the fluctuations the contribution from
diagrams of type (a) can be estimated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas for diagrams of type (c) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath for a long-range interaction this means that diagrams of
type (c) give the major contribution to the fluctuations. This can be
tested numerically by noting that the diagrams of type (a) are relevant
to the case where wire @xmath is disordered and wire @xmath is either
disordered or ballistic whereas diagrams of type (c) are only relevant
to the case of both wires being disordered. Indeed, by numerically
calculating the fluctuations for a system where one of the wires is
ballistic and the other disordered we have found a very dramatic
reduction of the fluctuations compared to the case of both wires being
disordered.

To show the result in Eq. ( 6.46 ) in more detail we note that in the
quasi-ballistic regime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to diagram (c) in Fig. 6.3 where all four triangle
functions have an impurity line attached, i.e. two points for each of
the averages.

#### 6.3.5 Lippmann–Schwinger equation

The task is thus to calculate the correlation @xmath to lowest order
(second order) in the disorder strength. For quasi-ballistic wires,
where @xmath , Eqs. ( 6.9 , 6.10 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and formally we thus have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Lippmann--Schwinger equation, see e.g. Ref. merzbacher , we
have to lowest order in the disorder strength that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the unperturbed retarded Green function, i.e. that of a ballistic
wire. Introducing @xmath this means that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.52a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.52b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The disorder potential @xmath is “self-averaging” in the sence that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus the last term gives a small contribution

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.54)
  -- -- -- --------

which we will neglect so that @xmath .

For long wires, @xmath , we neglect terms oscillating with @xmath and
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The prefactor @xmath can be related to the reflection coefficient of the
wire. To see this we consider the Dyson equation for the retarded Green
function to second order in the disorder

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from the Fisher--Lee relation fisher1981 we notice that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

It then follows that to second order in the disorder

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the fluctuations we thus get @xmath terms, but only 4 of these terms
with the form @xmath are finite for long wires, @xmath . Eq. ( 6.47 )
now becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.61)
  -- -- -- --------

and introducing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is in close agreement with the form suggested in Eq. ( 6.46 ). To
estimate the relative magnitude we divide Eq. ( 6.63 ) by Eq. ( 6.43 )
and get

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.64)
  -- -- -- --------

From Eqs. ( 6.43 , 6.64 ) it follows that the relative magnitude of the
fluctuations is of the order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath within a numerical factor of order @xmath , see Fig. 6.4 .
This is the key result on one-dimensional wires reported the first time
in Ref. [E] and later studied in more detail in Refs. [F, G, H].

Even though @xmath the effect of long-range interaction may compensate
this since @xmath , see Fig. 6.2 . This results in relative fluctuations
of order unity, i.e. fluctuations comparable to the mean value. As we
shall see in the next section, Eq. ( 6.64 ) fully accounts for our
numerical results.

#### 6.3.6 Mutually correlated versus mutually un-correlated disorder

We will now relax the assumption of mutually un-correlated disorder, see
Eq. ( 6.40 ). In fact we will study the other extreme limit where the
disorder potentials of the two wires are mutually fully correlated (
@xmath ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The calculation of the corrections to the mean value in the case of
fully correlated disorder is not that different from the calculation of
the fluctuations in the case of un-correlated disorder. Fig. 6.5 shows
an example of a lowest order diagram which contributes in the case of
correlated disorder. Again, we consider back scattering in the disorder
channel so that in the second term the impurity line carries momentum
@xmath . This allows one of the interaction lines to carrying also
@xmath while the other one carries zero momentum, @xmath . For the mean
value we thus get the estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from Eq. ( 6.43 ) it thus follows that

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.68)
  -- -- -- --------

Since @xmath can be of order unity for long-range coupling it means that
correlation of the disorder may enhance the mean value by up to a factor
of order two compared to un-correlated disorder. Similarly to the case
of fluctuations this effect is due to a combination of back scattering
in the disorder channel and forward scattering in the Coulomb channel.
The case of correlated disorder was recently studied for bi-layer
systems where it was also found to enhance the mean value gornyi1999 .

For the fluctuations the calculation can be carried out using simple
diagrammatic arguments. We again consider the diagrams in Fig. 6.3 . For
correlated disorder both of the diagrams (c) and (d) contribute equally
whereas for un-correlated disorder only the diagram (c) is relevant.
More generally, for each topologically different diagram contributing in
the case of un-correlated disorder there are two similar diagrams
contributing equally in case of correlated disorder. Of course there are
also other possible diagrams in case of correlated disorder but to
lowest order in @xmath this means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath refer symbolically to the
diagrams in Fig. 6.3 averaged over disorder. This means that the
fluctuations in the case of correlated disorder will be enhanced by a
factor of @xmath compared to the case of un-correlated disorder,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Though these arguments may at this point seem simplistic, the result
turns out to be correct as we shall see later when comparing to
numerics.

### 6.4 Quasi-ballistic regime — numerics

The study of the statistical properties of disordered systems is an
interesting example where Eq. ( 5.32 ) can be applied to a large
ensemble of different disorder configurations. For the disorder we need
a way to represent a short-range correlated disorder potential, see
Eqs. ( 6.41 , 6.66 ). Here, we use the most often used model; the
Anderson model anderson1958 which the first time was introduced in the
study of one-dimensional localization.

#### 6.4.1 Anderson model

In the Anderson model with diagonal disorder anderson1958 , kramer1993
the site potentials @xmath at site @xmath of a given wire @xmath are
statistically independent with each site energy taken from a uniform
distribution of width @xmath centered around zero, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the disorder strength @xmath can be related to the
back-scattering mean free path. For a tight-binding chain with @xmath
sites and no disorder we have eigenstates @xmath . We calculate the rate
for back-scattering from Fermi’s golden rule, suppressing the wire index
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the disorder potential @xmath is treated as a perturbation. The
factor following the delta function restricts the @xmath sum to those
relevant for back-scattering, i.e. @xmath opposite to @xmath . For a
chain with large @xmath we take the sum into an integral and since
@xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding mean free path is given by @xmath and for the
dispersion in Eq. ( 5.17 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

at the Fermi level. This result agrees with Ref. kramer1993 except for
the trivial constant shift of the energy by @xmath .

#### 6.4.2 Numerical results

We will first consider two special cases: i) both wires being
disordered, but with @xmath and @xmath mutually un-correlated (as in
Ref. [E]) and ii) both wires being disordered and fully correlated, i.e.
@xmath (as first suggested in Ref. gornyi1999 ). Finally, iii) we
consider the more general case where the two wires have partly a
correlated (common) disorder potential @xmath and partly an
un-correlated @xmath one,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

but with the impurity strength adjusted so that the mean free path is
the same as in the two special cases (the last equation).

We consider quarter-filled bands ( @xmath ) and wires with @xmath
lattice points so that @xmath . The separation is @xmath and we assume
long-range Coulomb interaction,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the case @xmath (this corresponds to @xmath ) the disorder has as
expected abrikosov1981 almost no effect on the Landauer conductance,
i.e. @xmath with vanishing fluctuations. However, for the
transconductance the situation is very different. Panel (a) of Fig. 6.6
shows a typical histogram of @xmath for @xmath in the case of
un-correlated disorder. Depending on the disorder configuration @xmath
can be either higher or lower than in the ballistic regime. We emphasize
that the histogram peaks close to the ballistic value and not at zero
drag, i.e. the mean drag is finite and positive in agreement with Eq. (
6.43 ). The variance is of the same order as the mean value so that sign
reversal for some disorder realizations is possible. The later is
represented by the negative tail in the histogram. The sign of the drag
is thus arbitrary in the sense that both positive and negative drag can
be observed.

For the distribution of @xmath in the case of un-correlated disorder we
find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

fits surprisingly well to the data. In fact we have performed these fits
to histograms for @xmath ranging from @xmath to @xmath with @xmath in
the range from @xmath to @xmath . By rescaling of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is possible to let all histograms fall onto the same curve. There are
three parameters which may be varied: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . For
simplicity we illustrate this by fixing two of the parameters and
varying the third one. Figs. 6.7 , 6.8 , 6.9 show the rescaling for
fixed @xmath and @xmath , fixed @xmath and @xmath , and fixed @xmath and
@xmath , respectively.

Note that the distribution is non-universal in the sense that it depends
on the range of the interaction @xmath . It should also be stressed that
the particular form in Eq. ( 6.78 ) is not unique and that other similar
functions might be fitted equally well cheianov .

In Fig. 6.10 we compare the results of the Anderson model for the case
of a uniform distribution, Eq. ( 6.71 ), to a Gaussian distribution, but
with the same mean value and variance. As seen the distribution of the
drag conductance @xmath does not depend on the particular choice of
disorder model.

For the same system parameters but now with fully correlated disorder we
get a very different distribution as seen in panel (c) of Fig. 6.6 .
Again we find that rescaling is possible, see Fig. 6.11 .

In this situation the mean transconductance is enhanced by approximately
a factor of two compared to the un-correlated case. This confirms, at
least qualitatively, the prediction of Eq. ( 6.68 ). The fluctuations
are also enhanced. However, since the mean transconductance is enhanced
by almost a factor of two compared to the ballistic limit this also
means that there is no disorder configurations giving rise to negative
drag.

In Fig. 6.12 we show the dependence of the fluctuations on the mean free
path @xmath which has the expected @xmath dependence. We also notice
that correlated disorder gives rise to slightly larger fluctuations
compared to un-correlated disorder. In fact they are exactly enhanced by
a factor of @xmath as predicted, see Eq. ( 6.70 ).

For partly correlated disorder we as expected get fluctuations which are
enhanced by a numerical factor between unity and @xmath . For the
histograms we observe how the, say, histogram in the case of
un-correlated disorder evolves into that of correlated disorder when
increasing the degree of correlation, see panel (b) of Fig. 6.6 . It
should however be stressed that for partly correlated disorder the
histogram is not a simple superposition of the histograms in the two
extreme limits.

To summarize we find that our perturbative results for the fluctuations
are in excellent agreement with our numerical studies. Furthermore, the
numerical studies give insight into, not only the statistical moments of
@xmath , but in fact the full distribution @xmath which we presently
have no analytical predictions for.

## Chapter 7 Quantum dots

A quantum dot is a sub-micron cavity with electronic properties governed
by the phase-coherence of quantum mechanics. It can e.g. be one of
Nature’s own small metallic nano-particles or it can be man-made by
confining the electronic degrees of freedom in a semiconductor. Quantum
dots exhibit many exciting properties both in their charge transport and
in their optical response. Quantum dots with the classical motion being
chaotic is also a field of tremendous interest often referred to as
quantum chaos.

Here, we consider two Coulomb coupled semiconductor quantum dots such as
suggested in Fig. 1.5 . Our aim is to calculate the statistical
properties of the drag conductance with the aid of random matrix theory.

### 7.1 Statistical averages

Reviews of the statistical theory of disordered and chaotic systems are
given in Refs. beenakker1997 , mirlin2000 , alhassid2000 . For the
application of random matrix theory to the current matrix we will mainly
follow the notation used in the review of Beenakker beenakker1997 .

#### 7.1.1 Mutually un-correlated disorder

We consider an ensemble of mesoscopic chaotic systems, as suggested in
Fig. 1.5 . We assume that the region where the subsystems couple by
Coulomb interaction have mutually un-correlated disorder so that,
suppressing the integration variables,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We consider the low temperature limit and start from Eq. ( 4.46 ) — at
some later point we turn to the formulation in Eq. ( 4.56 ). The task is
to calculate @xmath and @xmath which we do using random matrix theory.

#### 7.1.2 Correlation of current and wave functions?

To lowest order in @xmath the average of two wave functions is, see e.g.
Ref. aleiner1995 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mean level spacing. Introducing the spectral
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the average spectral function @xmath at the Fermi level is given
by, suppressing the energy subscript,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, consider the average

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where to lowest order in @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to current conservation the points @xmath can be chosen freely.
Taking them to be outside the chaotic region, the decay of the spectral
function makes the second term in Eq. ( 7.7 ) vanish if @xmath or @xmath
are inside. The first term amounts to performing the average over @xmath
and @xmath separately. Similar arguments hold for higher order averages
so that to lowest order in @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.8)
  -- -- -- -------

and since @xmath and @xmath are Hermitian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the averages we have used that eigenvalues and eigenfunctions are
un-correlated so that there is quite some freedom in where to place the
delta functions. We note that in these expressions the triangle
functions are only given to lowest order in @xmath so that the right
hand sides do not depend on @xmath .

### 7.2 Random matrix theory

In order to calculate @xmath and @xmath that enter Eqs. ( 7.8 , 7.9 ) we
apply standard random matrix theory for chaotic quantum dots
beenakker1997 . By chaotic we mean that the classical motion in the dot
can be regarded as chaotic on larger time scales than the ergodic time;
the time needed for a classical trajectory to explore the entire
phase-space. We assume that the dot is coupled to the leads via
ballistic point contacts with @xmath modes. Then the distribution of the
@xmath scattering matrix @xmath , see Eq. ( 4.50 ), is given by the
circular ensemble; the scattering matrix @xmath is uniformly distributed
in the unitary group and is only subject to the constraint of a possible
time-reversal symmetry.

#### 7.2.1 Circular ensemble

Now we consider a unitary @xmath matrix @xmath ( @xmath ) which is
distributed uniformly over the unitary ensemble with no further
constraints; for @xmath this is to say that @xmath is uniformly
distributed over the unit circle. Here, we will only need a few results
which can be found in Refs. beenakker1997 , mello1990 . The most
important one is that if we consider a polynomial function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the average @xmath is zero unless @xmath and the sets of “left”
indices coincide, @xmath , and similarly for the “right” indices, @xmath
. The first constraint means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other constraints are most easily illustrated for @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the result is slightly more complicated

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

General results for @xmath and @xmath have been given by Mello mello1990
. We will need the expression for @xmath but since it contains @xmath
terms its application is not a simple task. Instead we consider the
Gaussian approximation which is the leading-order term in the average
beenakker1997

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is all the @xmath permutations of the numbers @xmath .

#### 7.2.2 Current matrix elements

The task is to calculate @xmath and @xmath but since we, as in Eq. ( 7.4
), may sum over the indices and divide by the number of modes we might
as well consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Starting from the current matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

the first average becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly it can be shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will first consider the case of time-reversal symmetry (usually
denoted by the symmetry index @xmath beenakker1997 ) and then afterwards
discuss the effect of breaking time-reversal symmetry by a weak magnetic
field ( @xmath ). Finally, we summarize the results in the asymptotic
limit @xmath .

#### 7.2.3 Time-reversal symmetry

In the presence of time reversal symmetry @xmath which motivates the
introduction of a unitary @xmath matrix @xmath by @xmath . From Eq. (
7.13 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This means that Eq. ( 7.17 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The average is zero unless for the indices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in principle allows for simplifications. Here we will just
consider the Gaussian approximation, Eq. ( 7.14 ). The calculation is in
principle simple although long. However, with the aid of Mathematica
Eq. ( 7.18 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same calculation based on the full expression of Mello mello1990 is
of course possible as soon as the @xmath terms have been fed into the
computer. The @xmath terms in the Gaussian approximation are on the
other hand easily generated by the computer itself, see Eq. ( 7.14 ).

#### 7.2.4 Breaking of time-reversal symmetry

In the absence of time reversal symmetry @xmath is unitary with no
further constraints so that Eq. ( 7.12 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus Eq. ( 7.17 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 7.18 ) it now follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Gaussian approximation, Eq. ( 7.14 ), instead we get the
result @xmath .

#### 7.2.5 Asymptotic limit

From Eqs. ( 7.20 , 7.25 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

independently of @xmath and @xmath . In fact, the last equation holds
not only in the asymptotic limit @xmath but also for any arbitrary
number of modes. From Eqs. ( 7.23 , 7.28 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which also does not depend on @xmath . From Eq. ( 7.29 ) it now also
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in the asymptotic limit reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is our main result of random matrix theory and the result does not
depend on @xmath . For the fluctuations that we are going to calculate
this means that there will be no effect of breaking time-reversal
symmetry by a weak magnetic field in contrast to the case of universal
conductance fluctuations altshuler1985 , lee1985 where there is a
factor-of-two reduction of the fluctuations when breaking time-reversal
symmetry beenakker1997 . We notice the misprint in Ref. [E] where the
factor @xmath in Eq. ( 7.32 ) has a wrong power which unfortunately
propagates throughout the paper.

### 7.3 Statistical properties of the triangle function

#### 7.3.1 Zero mean value

Since @xmath we can in the second average in @xmath replace @xmath by
@xmath , see Eq. ( 7.8 ). The second average does not depend on the
direction of the current and thus we get @xmath which in turn gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the first out of two key results for quantum dots.
Experimentally, ensemble averaging could be performed similarly to the
case of universal conductance fluctuations by magneto-conductance
experiments marcus1992 , by varying the shape of the dots chan1995 , or
by changing the Fermi level keller1996 . The prediction of zero average
drag can be considered as a test of the degree of ergodicity. Our second
key result concerns the finiteness of the fluctuations which we study
below.

#### 7.3.2 Finite fluctuations

Let us now calculate the fluctuations by using Eq. ( 7.32 ) in Eq. ( 7.9
). The first term of Eq. ( 7.32 ) does not contribute for the same
reasons as for the mean value. For the second term we perform the @xmath
and @xmath sums according to Eq. ( 4.55 ) and since the sum and the
energy integral in Eq. ( 4.55 ) can be performed independently due to
eigenstates and eigenvalue being un-correlated we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.34)
  -- -- -- --------

With the Kronecker deltas @xmath in the second term of Eq. ( 7.32 ) we
can now perform the @xmath and @xmath sums which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have introduced the spectral function at the Fermi level .

### 7.4 Fluctuations of drag conductance

To lowest order in @xmath we replace each spectral function by its
average and use @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

we perform the @xmath -integration in Eq. ( 4.36 ) and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain an estimate of the fluctuations we note that @xmath in Eq. (
7.5 ) is largest for @xmath and on long length scales

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using that approximation for all spectral functions is too crude, but

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

still gives a finite answer

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the peaked behavior of the spectral functions the mixed terms
give a vanishing contribution and introducing the new variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the interaction area. Assuming that the screening length
@xmath , the range of @xmath is longer than the range of @xmath and we
further approximate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral over the spectral function gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The approximate result can be shown with the aid of L’Hospital’s rule.
Similarly, for a screened interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the incomplete Gamma function and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two introduced functions @xmath and @xmath are shown in Fig. 7.1 .
Collecting things we now obtain the estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the numerical prefactor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is reported in Ref. [F] which generalizes the result first
given in Ref. [E] for @xmath .

For typical numbers (such as those in Table 1.1 for the quantum dots
shown in Fig. 1.5 ) we estimate the drag fluctuations to be of the order
of @xmath Ohm. As we have already noted the zero mean value and the
magnitude of the finite fluctuations are not changed by breaking of time
reversal symmetry, i.e. @xmath . The prediction of zero mean value and
finite fluctations can be considered as a test of the degree of
ergodicity.

## Chapter 8 Summary

In the following we give a brief summary on the mesoscopic drag
formalism, the numerical method, and the applications to quantum wires
and quantum dots. Finally, concluding remarks are given.

### 8.1 Mesoscopic formalism

Starting from Kubo formalism we have calculated the DC drag conductance
@xmath which relates the frictionally mediated response @xmath in
subsystem @xmath to a driving field @xmath in subsystem @xmath . The
calculation is based on a second order perturbation expansion in the
inter-subsystem Coulomb interaction @xmath . The drag conductance,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

is expressed in terms of two “triangle” functions @xmath . Whereas often
@xmath we for disordered systems with broken translation symmetry have
@xmath . This for instance means that the outcome of Eq. ( 8.1 ) can
have both signs depending on the given disorder potential.

Our calculations, which are restricted to Fermi liquids, demonstrate how
we with the aid of Wick’s theorem can formulate the @xmath ’s in terms
of the single-particle properties of the two subsystems. The
single-particle properties can be expressed by i) the wave functions in
terms of the matrix elements of the current @xmath and particle-density
@xmath , ii) by the spectral function @xmath , iii) or by scattering
states where the current matrix @xmath is expressed in terms of the
scattering matrix @xmath . Furthermore, we have derived results for the
low-temperature limit and shown that @xmath as is also the case for the
rate for ordinary particle-particle scattering. This formalism provides
the framework for Refs. [E, F, G, H].

### 8.2 Numerical method

Using the finite differences approximation we have mapped Eq. ( 8.1 )
onto a lattice and also formulated how the spectral function can be
obtained by use of a simple numerical method. The resulting formula for
@xmath can be written as a trace over matrices and in the low
temperature regime we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is expressed in terms of the spectral function @xmath at
the Fermi level. Here, @xmath is the hopping element of the
tight-binding-like Hamiltonian (band-width is @xmath ). Eq. ( 8.2 ) is
very similar to existing trace formulas for the Landauer conductance
@xmath . The implementation is straight forward and the method provides
a very efficient tool for investigating drag in different geometries
and/or for different disorder configurations. In this work the method is
applied to ensembles of disordered wires.

### 8.3 Quantum wires

For one-dimensional quantum wires we have shown how in the ballistic
regime analytical progress can be made. For long wires, @xmath we find
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transformed interaction and @xmath the mean
free path. For quasi-ballistic wires the corrections to the mean-value
are small so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the fluctuations we apply perturbation theory and to leading order
in the disorder strength we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mean reflection probability of the wires. For
long-range interaction the relative magnitude

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.6)
  -- -- -- -------

can be of the order of unity because @xmath . The large fluctuations can
be understood from a combination of back-scattering in the disorder
channel and forward-scattering in the Coulomb channel — breaking the
translational invariance by disorder allows for transfered momenta
different from @xmath and this gives rise to large drag fluctuations
[E].

This we have also studied numerically and we found excellent agreement
with the perturbative results [E]. In addition to the statistical
properties the numerical studies have also given insight about the full
distribution of @xmath for different natures of the disorder [F, G, H].
If the disorder potentials of the two wires are mutually fully
correlated we diagrammatically find that mean value and fluctuations are
enhanced compared to the un-correlated case, for the latter by a factor
@xmath . These predictions are also confirmed numerically [F, G, H].

### 8.4 Quantum dots

For coupled chaotic quantum dots we have used random matrix theory to
calculate the statistical properties. For the mean value we find that
there is no drag on average, @xmath . The physical explanation is that
in the chaotic regime the induced current has no preferred direction and
electrons will with equal probabilities escape the dot through either of
its two leads. This implies finite fluctuations which is also what
random matrix theory predicts. The estimate that we get for the
fluctuations is of the form [E, F]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the screening length @xmath is of the order of the separation
@xmath , @xmath is the interaction area, and @xmath the number of modes.
Using realistic numbers we estimate that the drag fluctuations can be of
the order of @xmath Ohm.

### 8.5 Concluding remarks

Rojo ends his 1998 review on electron-drag rojo1999 by the sentence: “
The magnitude of the challenge seems to equal that of the progress made
so far in the field ”. Since then the study of the mesoscopic regime has
been initiated [ narozhny2000 , narozhny2001 , E] and though there has
been substantial theoretical progress I belive the major challenge is on
the experimental side. However, the results reported in this thesis and
attached publications [E, F, G, H] and by others narozhny2000 ,
narozhny2001 illustrate the potential reward of overcoming the
experimental challenges: Although the mesoscopic fluctuations of the
Coulomb drag conductance are non-universal they are an extreme example
of mesoscopic fluctuations — they can be of the order of, or even
exceed, the mean value! Probably other mesoscopic phenomena are to be
discovered and I hope that this work may serve as an inspiration for
experimentalists to conduct Coulomb drag measurements in the mesoscopic
regime.