# Notation

The characters from the middle of the Greek alphabet @xmath in general
run over space-time indices @xmath , while the Latin indices @xmath run
over spatial indices @xmath .
The metric used in the thesis is @xmath , where the indices @xmath run
over @xmath , with @xmath the temporal index.
The Levi-Civita tensor @xmath is defined as a totally antisymmetric
tensor with @xmath .
The Einstein summation over repeated indices is assumed unless stated
otherwise. The dot-product @xmath denotes @xmath .
The Dirac matrices are defined so that @xmath . Also, @xmath . The left
and right-chirality projection operators are @xmath and @xmath . The
matrix @xmath is @xmath . The slash on a character denotes @xmath .
The trace @xmath runs over the Dirac indices, while the lower case trace
@xmath runs over the @xmath flavor indices.
The complex conjugate and Hermitian adjoint of a vector or a matrix
@xmath are denoted @xmath and @xmath respectively. A hermitian adjoint
of an operator @xmath is denoted @xmath . A bar on a Dirac bispinor
@xmath denotes @xmath .
The imaginary and real part of a complex number @xmath are denoted
@xmath and @xmath respectively.
The Heaviside function @xmath is defined as @xmath for @xmath and zero
otherwise.
Natural units with @xmath and the speed of light taken to be unity are
used. The fine structure constant is thus @xmath .

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Particle physics has gone a long way from its beginnings in the first
half of the @xmath century. From the present perspective it is actually
hard to imagine, what the world was like without the ‘‘Standard Model’’
of elementary particle physics ¹ ¹ 1 The name was apparently bestowed by
Sam B. Treiman [ 1 ] . . The gauge-field theoretical description of
fundamental electromagnetic, weak, and strong interactions, that emerged
in the 1960’s, has completely dominated the field ever since.

The structure of the Standard Model is as follows. Its building blocks
are fermions, leptons and quarks [ 2 ] , that come in three families.
The Standard Model gauge group is @xmath , where the @xmath is the gauge
group of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) [ 3 ] , @xmath is the gauge group
of weak isospin, while @xmath is the gauge group of weak hypercharge [ 4
] . The classification of the leptons and quarks appearing in the
Standard Model according to the weak isospin is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the binomials with the subscript @xmath denote the weak isospin
doublets. Leptons are color singlets, while quarks are in the
fundamental representation of @xmath . The masses of leptons and quarks
are generated via Higgs mechanism [ 5 ] . This also gives masses to the
@xmath and @xmath bosons and breaks the electroweak gauge group @xmath
to the electromagnetic @xmath . Because there are no right-handed
partners of the left-handed neutrinos, these are left massless in the
Standard Model (SM), if only renormalizable terms are present.

It is customary to use the mass eigenbasis instead of the weak basis for
the quark fields. The rotation to the mass eigenbasis is conventionally
conveyed to the down-quark fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a unitary matrix, called the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
or CKM matrix [ 6 ] . It is described by three real mixing angles and a
@xmath violating phase. There are several equivalent parameterizations
of the CKM matrix, where a very informative one is the so called
Wolfenstein parametrization [ 7 ] , that takes into account the
hierarchical structure of the CKM matrix. Setting @xmath and then
expanding in terms of @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are real and are of order
one.

The successes of the Standard Model (SM) description are abundant. To
name just the recent few: electroweak precision tests are generally in
impressive agreement with the SM predictions [ 8 , 9 ] , the @xmath
violation experiments in @xmath and @xmath meson systems support the CKM
description of the Standard Model with one universal phase [ 10 , 11 ,
12 ] , the discovery of @xmath -quark in the mass range predicted from
the electroweak precision data was a triumph of the SM [ 13 , 14 ] . All
in all, there is just one missing building block, the discovery of Higgs
boson, that would make the picture complete. The direct searches at LEP
give the current lower limit @xmath GeV at the @xmath confidence level [
15 , 16 ] . The indirect experimental constraints are obtained from the
precision measurements of the electroweak parameters, which depend
logarithmically on the Higgs boson mass through radiative corrections.
Currently these measurements constrain the Standard Model Higgs boson
mass to @xmath GeV or to values smaller than @xmath GeV at the @xmath
confidence level [ 17 ] .

From a theoretical point of view, the Standard Model has also quite a
few very attractive features. First of all, it is a renormalizable
theory. This means that it is very predictive. Using a relatively small
set of parameters, masses of quarks and leptons, masses of gauge bosons
and the values of coupling constants, all in all of order @xmath ² ² 2
More precisely 3 lepton masses, 6 quark masses, 4 CKM parameters, 3
gauge coupling constants, mass of the Higgs boson and the quartic
coupling @xmath give altogether 18 parameters. Counting in also the
strong @xmath parameter @xmath this amounts to 19 parameters of the
renormalizable Standard Model. , one is able, at least in principle, to
predict a myriad of processes. Because of renormalizability no
additional infinite terms are generated by quantum effects, so that in
principle the validity of the SM can be extended to arbitrary high
scales.

However, we know from the observations, that the SM cannot be the end of
story. First of all, gravity is not included in the Standard Model. The
quantized description of gravity has proved to be a very challenging
subject, that has kept theorists busy for the past two decades with an
especially extensive work done in the field of string theories [ 18 ] .
No experimental insight is available in this area, though. Next, recent
data from Superkamiokande [ 19 ] and SNO [ 20 , 21 ] have provided a
solid experimental evidence for neutrino oscillations. These imply
nonzero neutrino masses, contrary to the SM description. Another
phenomenological indication of non-Standard Model physics is the
unification of strong, electromagnetic and weak couplings in the context
of supersymmetric grand unified theories (SUSY GUTs) at the scales of
@xmath GeV) [ 22 , 23 ] . Very solid experimental data suggesting non-SM
physics are coming from astrophysics and cosmology. The astrophysical
observations suggest that most of the matter in the Universe is not
luminous, but dark [ 24 ] . Most of the dark matter also is not
baryonic. The nonbaryonic dark matter can either be cold or hot, but the
general consensus is that most of it must be cold. The Standard Model
does not provide a candidate for nonbaryonic cold dark matter, while for
instance a very appealing candidate is provided by the lowest
supersymmetric candidate, the neutralino. Another evidence pointing
toward SM extensions is the generation of baryon-antibaryon asymmetry in
the early Universe. To generate it, the interactions between particles
should be @xmath violating. The @xmath violation is present in the SM,
but is not strong enough to account for the observed asymmetry [ 9 , 25
] .

There are also some conceptual problems with the structure of the
Standard Model. The running of coupling constants suggests the
unification scale at @xmath GeV. ³ ³ 3 Note that precise unification of
couplings does not occur with running of coupling constants given only
by the Standard Model fields [ 23 ] . In view of this large scale, the
weak scale @xmath GeV suddenly appears to be very small. The large
difference between the two scales cannot be explained “naturally” in the
context of the SM. This “ hierarchy problem” is connected to the fact
that the theory contains a fundamental scalar field, which receives
quadratically divergent loop contributions to the mass parameter. Taking
the cutoff in regularization prescription to represent the scale of new
physics, the values of the bare mass and the loop corrections to it have
to be fine-tuned to give the small physical mass. This is the case,
unless the scale of new physics is close to the weak scale. The
hierarchy problem can be solved in several different ways. If the
fundamental Higsses exist, the theory can be stabilized by TeV scale
supersymmetry [ 9 , 23 ] . The other option is that Higgs is a composite
object, that is either a bound state of fermions or a condensate.
Technicolor theories represent a class of proposals along the latter
lines [ 26 ] . Another solution to the hierarchy problem has been
suggested recently [ 27 , 28 ] . If additionally to the usual 3+1
space-time dimensions, ‘‘large’’ compact dimensions are assumed, the
scale of gravity is much lower than the Planck scale. For two sub-mm
extra dimensions the scale of gravity is in the TeV range.

Another challenging conceptual problem is coming from the cosmological
observations of distant supernovae type Ia explosions, that suggest a
nonzero cosmological constant [ 29 , 30 ] . The corresponding energy
density is of the order of present critical density of the Universe
@xmath . If this is to be explained by the vacuum expectation values and
the chiral condensates of the SM fields that correspond to energy scales
from a few @xmath MeV to a few @xmath GeV, one would need an incredibly
fine-tuned cancellation between various contributions to arrive at the
correct value of the cosmological constant. Note, that a number of
alternative explanations for the dimming of supernovae have also been
proposed [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] , some of them requiring new physics
beyond the SM.

Given the discussion above, the modern point of view is to consider the
Standard Model “merely” as an effective field theory. In the effective
field theory description one usually has two scales with a very distinct
hierarchy and the intermediate scale @xmath , that separates the two.
The physics at the lower scale can then be described by means of a
Wilsonian expansion @xmath , where the higher scale physics is hidden in
the coefficients @xmath , while operators @xmath incorporate the lower
scale physics. In the Standard Model only the renormalizable operators
appear. Operators of higher dimensions are suppressed by the high scale,
e.g., by the GUT scale, and can break the conservation laws of the SM
only weakly.

In the effective field theories, one can distinguish between two
approaches, the ‘‘bottom-up’’ or the ‘‘top-down’’ approach. In the
“top-down” approach, the high-scale physics is well understood and the
coefficients @xmath are calculable, for instance in the perturbative
framework. The prominent example of this approach is the operator
product expansion applied to the weak decays [ 35 ] . In this case the
“high scale theory”, the electroweak theory, is well understood. For
processes at energies @xmath GeV, the @xmath and @xmath bosons can be
integrated out. In this way one effectively gets the old Fermi theory of
weak interactions, but with calculable corrections to @xmath contact
interaction. Viewing the Standard Model as an effective theory, on the
other hand, represents the “bottom-up” approach, where little is known
about the high energy physics.

An example of the ‘‘bottom-up’’ approach is also the application of the
effective theory concepts to strong interactions. QCD is a well
understood theory, however, the low energy processes are in the
nonperturbative region, where an expansion in the coupling constant is
no longer applicable. Calculations ab initio, i.e., by starting with the
QCD Lagrangian and finishing up with the predictions for physical
observables, are still possible through the use of lattice QCD
techniques, but are computationally very challenging [ 36 ] . Lattice
methods also have their own limitations. To get meaningful results,
calculations have to be done in Euclidean space-time, which makes the
calculations of decay processes with more than one hadron in the final
state very hard. Also, in order to make the numerical difficulties
tractable, a number of approximations have to be made, e.g., by
neglecting sea-quark effects, or by working at relatively high pion
masses. Another option, that has been commonly used in the past, is to
use the symmetries of the QCD Lagrangian to construct effective
theories. Unknown couplings in the effective theory are then fixed from
experiment. If such an effective theory contains a small expansion
parameter, it can be predictable, with more experimental processes
predicted than there are parameters to be fixed from experiments. The
small expansion parameter for the chiral perturbation theory ( @xmath
PT) is provided by the small momenta of interacting Goldstone bosons and
by the small masses of @xmath quarks, with @xmath still significantly
smaller than the chiral scale @xmath GeV [ 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 ] . A
different approximate symmetry is used to construct the heavy quark
effective theory (HQET) [ 41 , 42 , 43 ] . This is obtained when masses
of @xmath and @xmath quarks are taken to be very large. Both chiral and
heavy-quark symmetries can be combined in processes involving single
heavy hadron, resulting in a heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory (HH
@xmath PT) [ 44 ] .

In this thesis several applications of the effective theory concepts
will be made [ 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 ] . The main focus will
be on the application of heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory to
@xmath meson decays. We use the leading terms in the @xmath expansion
and the expansion of momenta. Note, that in principle also higher order
terms in the expansion could be important. Keeping only the leading
order terms in the expansion has, however, several important advantages
as (i) the set of unknown parameters is relatively small, (ii) there are
enough experimental data to fix all of them, (iii) gauge invariance at
1-loop in HH @xmath PT is obvious. Neglecting higher order terms can
then be also viewed as a part of our model. The idea has been tested on
the example of @xmath , where good agreement with experiment has been
found [ 45 ] . To appreciate this fact, one has to keep in mind that the
commonly used factorization approximation predicts vanishing branching
ratio for this decay mode, in disagreement with experimental data.

The same theoretical framework is then applied to the rare @xmath ,
@xmath decays [ 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 ] . The area of rare heavy meson
decays has received a boost with the onset of B-factories. One of the
goals of Belle and BaBar has been to pinpoint the @xmath violating
mechanism and to further constrain the CKM matrix elements. But a
considerable part of experimental efforts constitute the searches for
rare decays [ 52 ] . Rare decays are especially interesting, if they are
connected to a conservation law. Several such selection rules are
present in the SM, with @xmath and proton decay for instance completely
forbidden at perturbative level in the renormalizable SM, while they can
occur in scenarios beyond the SM. But also processes that are not
completely forbidden in the Standard Model can be extremely useful as
probes of new physics. For instance, the flavor changing neutral
currents (FCNCs), i.e., transitions of type @xmath , do not occur in the
SM at tree level. They do, however, occur at the loop level, but are
suppressed because of the Glashow-Iliopoulos-Maiani (GIM) mechanism and
because of the hierarchical structure of the CKM matrix elements. The
FCNCs can be significantly affected by the possible new physics effects,
that either contribute at tree level or in the loops. Note that new
physics could affect the FCNCs in a substantially different manner than
the @xmath and the charged currents, from which the constraints on CKM
matrix elements are obtained at present.

Phenomenologically very exciting are the so-called golden-plated modes.
For the decay mode to be golden-plated, it has to fulfill several
requirements: (i) the SM amplitude has to be either very small or
completely forbidden, (ii) it has to be theoretically clean, with small
or virtually no uncertainties due to the nonperturbative strong
interaction physics, (iii) it has to receive potentially large
contributions from new physics scenarios. Examples of such golden modes
are @xmath and @xmath , where theoretical uncertainties due to the
nonperturbative physics are very small [ 52 ] . No such golden modes are
present in the charm physics. In rare @xmath decays the nonperturbative
physics of light quarks is expected to dominate the decay rates.
Consider for instance the case of @xmath transition that occurs only at
the one loop level in the Standard Model. The contributions coming from
@xmath quarks running in the loop are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have tentatively set @xmath MeV instead of @xmath for the
@xmath quark contribution, anticipating the size of nonperturbative
effects. The expansion parameter @xmath is coming from Wolfenstein
parametrization of CKM matrix ( 1.2 ). The situation is quite different
compared to the @xmath or @xmath FCNCs. For instance in @xmath the same
CKM hierarchy is present as in ( 1.3 ), but with @xmath in ( 1.3 )
replaced by @xmath respectively. Since top quark is very heavy, this
outweighs the @xmath suppression. The @xmath transition is thus
dominated by the perturbatively calculable short distance contribution
of intermediate top quark. In @xmath on the other hand, the short
distance (SD) contribution comes from the intermediate @xmath quark.
Since @xmath quark is much lighter than the top quark, it cannot surpass
the @xmath suppression. Thus the contributions from the heaviest, @xmath
-quark, are expected to be the least important. One can then expect that
in rare @xmath decays the nonperturbative long distance (LD) effects
coming from the lighter two down quarks, @xmath , will give the dominant
contributions.

Because LD effects dominate in @xmath decays, no extraction or tests of
CKM matrix are possible in these decays. Also, in order to be able to
probe new physics, its effects, if present, have to be large. However,
there is an important sidepoint to the whole story. Namely, @xmath
physics probes the flavor structure of up-quark sector, in contrast to
@xmath and @xmath decays. The non-SM extensions of up and down-quark
sectors can be very different. In this sense rare @xmath meson decays
can prove as a valuable probe of new physics effects. In this thesis
possible effects of supersymmetric extensions of the SM to the @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath decays will be considered.

Finally, the use of effective theories can be made also in the lattice
QCD ab-initio calculations [ 53 ] . This is not surprising, given that
there are many different scales present in the problem, the masses of
quarks @xmath , the nonperturbative scale @xmath , as well as the UV and
IR cutoff scales set by the lattice spacing @xmath and the size of the
lattice @xmath . In the ideal case they exhibit a hierarchy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a real numerical simulation, the parameters @xmath are varied. If
these are not too far from the real world values, the numerical data can
be extrapolated to continuum values. Theoretical guidelines for this
extrapolation are provided by the effective field theories, that also
allow for the estimate of errors. In this thesis we will focus on a
particular approximation made in the lattice calculations, the omission
of sea-quark effects. This is called the quenched approximation and is
widely used in the calculations. Quenched chiral perturbation theory
together with heavy quark symmetry [ 54 , 55 ] will be used to point
toward the consequences of quenching in @xmath weak transition
calculations [ 51 ] .

The outline of the thesis is as follows. In the first three chapters we
introduce the prerequisites for the phenomenological studies in the
subsequent chapters. In chapter 2 we introduce the concept of effective
field theories with a focus on @xmath PT and HQET. Gauge invariance is
discussed as well. In chapter 3 we work out the technical details
connected with the integration of two-, three- and four-point functions
in HQET. Chapter 4 is devoted to operator product expansion and the
application to weak interactions. The factorization approximation is
discussed in the same chapter. In chapter 5 the theoretical framework is
applied to @xmath decay, while in chapter 6 rare @xmath decays @xmath
and @xmath are estimated both in the SM and in the supersymmetric
extensions. Finally, in chapter 7 quenching errors in @xmath transitions
are discussed. Further technicalities and explicit results of the
calculations are relegated to the appendices.

## Chapter 2 Heavy quark effective theory and chiral expansion

### 2.1 Effective theories

The persisting problem of the phenomenological calculations in hadronic
physics is the nonperturbative nature of strong interactions. In the
past three decades the approach of effective theories has proved to be
an extremely important tool in these considerations. As is usual in
contemporary physics, the hard problems are simplified or avoided
entirely by the use of approximate and/or exact symmetries. As will be
shown below, the use of symmetries is also the common feature of the
effective theories.

First let us introduce the notion of the effective quantum action. The
nonperturbative definition can be found e.g in chapter 16. of [ 56 ] ,
while we will discuss only the perturbative definition of the effective
action ¹ ¹ 1 The effective action has been first introduced
perturbatively in [ 57 ] , while a nonperturbative definition was first
given in [ 58 ] . . Let us consider a general quantum field theory with
a set of fields @xmath . The observables of the theory are deduced from
the appropriate Green’s functions. Perturbative calculations of these
consist of tree as well as of loop diagrams. The effective quantum
action @xmath is such an action, that reproduces the Green’s functions
of the original theory exactly, but that is used only at tree level in
the perturbative expansion. In terms of path integrals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the path integral measure and the integration on
the right-hand-side is only over the tree diagrams. Pictorially, using
the effective action @xmath instead of the original action @xmath means
that the parts of diagrams containing loops can be replaced with blobs
representing effective vertices (see Fig. 2.1 ). Only tree level
diagrams are then left in the calculation.

There is a very useful theorem connected with the effective action. It
states that if the original action @xmath and the integration measure
are invariant under the linear infinitesimal transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are c-number functions, then the effective
action @xmath is also invariant under the same transformations. Note
that this is not necessarily true for nonlinear infinitesimal
transformations, where effective action in general will not be invariant
under the same transformations as the original action. For proof and
further details see [ 56 ] .

Now we turn to the notion of effective Lagrangian, with the main idea
depicted on Fig. 2.2 for the case of QCD. Let us suppose that the
initial Lagrangian @xmath consists of a set of fields that transform
linearly under a group @xmath , and that the Lagrangian itself is
invariant under @xmath . For the case of QCD the fields will be the
light quarks transforming under @xmath . Since the realization of @xmath
is linear, also the effective action @xmath is invariant under @xmath .
The calculation leading from the initial Lagrangian @xmath to the
effective action @xmath can be highly nontrivial, with a possible
nonperturbative regime as is the case for the low-energy QCD. It is then
useful to construct from the relevant fields @xmath (for the case of
low-energy QCD, these are the pseudoscalar fields or any other fields
relevant for the processes considered) the most general Lagrangian
@xmath invariant under @xmath . In general this will consist of an
infinite number of terms with unknown couplings. The procedure will be
useful if we find a rationale to keep just a finite number of terms. In
the case of chiral perturbation theory this is provided by an expansion
in momenta, while in heavy quark effective theory the expansion is in
the inverse of the heavy-quark mass.

If the fields in the effective Lagrangian @xmath transform linearly
under @xmath , also the effective action @xmath following from the
effective Lagrangian @xmath will be invariant under @xmath . We can then
perform the perturbative calculation using the effective Lagrangian
@xmath to some fixed order and predict the effective action @xmath . At
each order a number of unknown couplings have to be determined from the
experiment. The number of couplings grows with the higher order
contributions, so that the effective Lagrangian approach becomes less
and less predictive when going to higher orders.

The method of effective Lagrangians has been very successfully applied
to the case of spontaneously broken global symmetries. In particular it
is very successful in the effective description of strong interactions
in the low energy regime. We thus illustrate the procedure for this
case. We start with the underlying “fundamental” Lagrangian @xmath . Let
us suppose that the fields @xmath transform linearly under some
continuous transformation group @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , while we have introduced the column @xmath containing all
the fields. If the initial Lagrangian @xmath is invariant under @xmath ,
so is the effective action @xmath . This is the case also if @xmath is
spontaneously broken down to some subgroup @xmath . The important
artifact of the spontaneously broken global symmetries are the massless
Goldstone boson fields that parametrize the @xmath right coset space.
Since they are massless, it is useful to factor them out of the other
fields appearing in the problem. We introduce

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Goldstone boson fields. It is always possible to
choose the function @xmath such that @xmath do not contain Goldstone
boson fields (for details see chapter 19 of [ 56 ] , or [ 59 , 60 ] ).
Since the subgroup @xmath is unbroken, it is always possible to redefine
@xmath , @xmath , without changing the effective action. As already
stated, the @xmath is then a representative of the right coset, with
@xmath being equivalent for all @xmath . A very common parametrization
of the right coset space @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the generators of broken symmetries (the independent vectors
in the Lie algebra of @xmath that do not belong to the Lie algebra of
@xmath ). The fields @xmath , @xmath transform under @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is also an element of @xmath , it must be in some right
coset with the representative @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some element of @xmath that depends both on @xmath and
@xmath , with @xmath . From ( 2.7 ) the transformation properties of
@xmath follow trivially

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The transformation properties of @xmath and @xmath under @xmath are in
general very complicated and far from linear. It is thus of great use if
one is able to construct functions of Goldstone boson fields and/or
other fields that do transform linearly under @xmath . These fields will
be constructed explicitly for the case of @xmath in the next section.

Let us now discuss the construction of the effective Lagrangian @xmath
from fields @xmath and @xmath . The effective Lagrangian is assumed to
be invariant under @xmath . Since in general neither @xmath nor @xmath
transform linearly under @xmath , one could expect that the symmetry
properties of the effective Lagrangian @xmath could be somewhat
distorted in the transition to the description with the corresponding
effective action @xmath . This is not the case as can be shown by the
following argument. We start with the element of the Lie algebra of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denote the generators of Lie algebra of @xmath , while
@xmath denote the other generators in Lie algebra of @xmath , as before.
It is then fairly easy to show (see chapter 19 of [ 56 ] ) that @xmath
and @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the adjoint representation of @xmath . Note that @xmath , so
that @xmath , @xmath in ( 2.11 ), ( 2.12 ) transform linearly under
@xmath . Note also, that @xmath cannot appear explicitly in the
effective Lagrangian @xmath , because this is assumed to be invariant
under the global @xmath transformations and the @xmath factors can be
rotated away. Consider for instance the derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath on the right-hand side can then be rotated away. In
the effective Lagrangian @xmath only terms with at least one derivative
on the Goldstone boson fields or with no Goldstone boson fields will
remain. The most general effective Lagrangian @xmath invariant under
@xmath can then be constructed from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
,…. by constructing the most general expression invariant under @xmath .
Such Lagrangian will then be invariant under the full group G also.
Since these combinations of fields transform linearly under @xmath , the
effective action @xmath will be invariant under @xmath as well. Chiral
counting ² ² 2 This is explained at the end of section 2.3 . prohibits
the terms with no derivative on Goldstone fields to appear in the
effective action @xmath . The effective action @xmath will then be an
expression constructed from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,….,
invariant under @xmath and thus under @xmath .

Incidentally, the argument presented above insures also the
renormalizability (as understood in the general sense of the word) of
the effective Lagrangian approach. No terms that are not already present
in the effective Lagrangian @xmath can appear in the effective action
@xmath . All divergences that appear in the course of the calculation
can be reabsorbed into the definitions of the couplings appearing in the
effective Lagrangian @xmath .

### 2.2 Chiral perturbation theory

One of the earliest and also one of the most successful examples of
effective theories is the chiral perturbation theory ( @xmath PT) which
we will briefly review in this section. The expansion parameter in the
chiral perturbation theory is the momentum exchange in the process,
@xmath . Argument for the validity of this expansion will be given at
the end of the next section.

To start with, let us write down the QCD Lagrangian (we neglect the weak
interactions in the following)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the summation is over different quark flavors, @xmath are quark
fields and the covariant derivative is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the gluon field, @xmath the strong coupling and @xmath with
@xmath the Gell-Mann @xmath matrices, for which @xmath . The gauge field
strength tensor (curvature tensor) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now focus only on the three light quark flavors @xmath . As these
quarks are relatively light (with quark masses small compared to the
chiral scale as we will see below) the Lagrangian ( 2.14 ) is
approximately invariant under the left and right chiral rotations @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axial @xmath is anomalous and is broken by nonperturbative effects.
The vector @xmath is the global symmetry group of the baryon number and
is not needed for further discussion. In the following we then focus on
the @xmath global transformation group that is assumed to be
spontaneously broken down to the vector subgroup @xmath . Following the
general procedure outlined in the previous section we define the quark
fields with the Goldstone bosons factored out

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Goldstone boson fields @xmath then transform under the @xmath
according to (cf. ( 2.7 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix of transformed Goldstone boson fields,
while the dependence of @xmath on the parameters of global @xmath
transformations, @xmath , has not been denoted explicitly in ( 2.19 ).
Multiplying with projectors @xmath one arrives at

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Following [ 38 ] we introduce @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The
transformation properties of @xmath are then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath field thus transforms linearly under the global
transformations. The quark fields with Goldstone fields factored out
transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

To make contact with the previous section we introduce also @xmath and
vector and axial vector fields @xmath and @xmath given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

They transform according to ( 2.20 ), ( 2.21 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axial vector @xmath and vector @xmath currents are (apart from the
constant factor) exactly the @xmath and @xmath parts of ( 2.9 )
respectively. In other words, the axial vector current @xmath is the
@xmath of ( 2.11 ), while the covariant derivative of ( 2.12 ) is @xmath
.

Up to this point we have been assuming that the @xmath is an exact
symmetry of the QCD Lagrangian. However, this symmetry is broken by the
mass term in ( 2.14 ). To introduce the breaking in the effective
Lagrangian it is useful to introduce an external field @xmath that in
the end is set equal to the value of the mass matrix @xmath . We make
the replacement [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the external field @xmath is assumed to transform according to @xmath
, the “corrected” QCD Lagrangian is then invariant under the @xmath .
This will then be true also for the effective Lagrangian.

Before we write down the final expression for the leading order
Lagrangian in the chiral expansion, we rescale the Goldstone boson
fields @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath traceless matrix of light
pseudoscalar fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a dimensionful parameter that is determined from
experiment. At the leading order it is equal to the pion decay constant
@xmath MeV. Later on, in section 2.5 , we will also use the notation
@xmath , with @xmath , where @xmath are the @xmath Gell-Mann matrices.

Since @xmath are Goldstone boson fields, the effective Lagrangian does
not contain terms without derivatives on @xmath , as explained at the
end of the previous section (see the discussion below Eq. ( 2.13 )). For
the low energy processes the momentum exchange @xmath can then be used
as an expansion parameter. In the leading order chiral Lagrangian only
the terms with the smallest number of derivatives are kept. Using the
counting @xmath , one arrives at the usual @xmath chiral Lagrangian for
the light pseudoscalar mesons [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath given in ( 2.27 ), while the trace @xmath runs
over flavor indices. The external field @xmath is set in the calculation
equal to the current quark mass matrix @xmath . The coefficient of the
first term in ( 2.28 ) is fixed by the requirement that the kinetic term
of pseudoscalar mesons is properly normalized. The second term on the
other hand contains an additional unknown constant @xmath . This terms
leads at the leading order to the Gell-Mann–Oakes–Renner relations [ 61
] @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The order @xmath Lagrangian contains ten additional terms [ 38 ] , which
we refer to as counterterms. We will write down explicitly only the
terms that contribute to the @xmath and @xmath wave function
renormalization factors and to the @xmath , @xmath decays constants (cf.
section 2.5 ). Other counterterms will not enter our analysis. The
relevant terms are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the complete @xmath Lagrangian can be found in [ 38 ] .

From the chiral Lagrangian one can also deduce the form of the light
weak current (see e.g. [ 62 ] ). At the order @xmath this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the quark current @xmath , with @xmath an SU(3) flavor
matrix.

### 2.3 Heavy Quark Effective Theory and Chiral Expansion

Since its early applications [ 41 ] the heavy quark symmetry has been
one of the key ingredients in the theoretical investigations of hadrons
containing a heavy quark. It has been successfully applied to the heavy
hadron spectroscopy, to the inclusive as well as to a number of
exclusive decays (for reviews of the heavy quark effective theory and
related issues see [ 42 ] or [ 43 ] ). To describe interactions with not
too energetic light mesons, the heavy quark symmetry has been combined
with chiral symmetries leading to the heavy hadron chiral perturbation
theory (HH @xmath PT) [ 44 ] .

The important observation in the heavy quark expansion is that the
mesons containing an infinitely heavy quark @xmath exhibit a set of
simple properties. Since a heavy quark is very massive its Compton
wavelength is much smaller than the size of the meson. The latter is
determined by the wave function corresponding to the light degrees of
freedom, the light quarks and the soft gluons. In the limit of an
infinitely heavy quark, the wave function of the light degrees of
freedom is the solution of QCD field equations for a static triplet
color source. It is thus independent of the spin of the heavy quark as
well as of its flavor. That is, the solution for the light degrees of
freedom does not change if we replace @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath denote velocity and spin of the heavy quark respectively.

To get more quantitative, let us consider a hadron with a heavy quark.
The major part of the momentum is carried by the heavy quark. This
propagates almost unperturbed and interacts with light degrees of
freedom only through small exchanges of momenta. In words of Neubert:
“The heavy quark flies like a rock!” [ 63 ] . It is thus useful to
separate the heavy quark momentum @xmath into the momentum due to the
movement of the meson @xmath and the perturbations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the four-velocity of the hadron. The heavy quark
propagator is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last step the limit @xmath has been taken and the
projectors @xmath have been introduced. Since @xmath also the couplings
of the heavy quark to gluons @xmath ( 2.14 ) can be simplified to @xmath
at the leading order in @xmath . The Lagrangian corresponding to these
Feynman rules is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath satisfies @xmath , @xmath . This Lagrangian can be obtained
from the QCD Lagrangian ( 2.14 ) by projecting to the “large Dirac
components” and factoring out the trivial phase change due to the hadron
movement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neglecting terms suppressed by additional powers of @xmath this
replacement leads to the Lagrangian ( 2.33 ). The heavy quark Lagrangian
exhibits the heavy quark spin symmetry. Intuitively this can be expected
from the fact that no Dirac gamma matrices appear in ( 2.33 ). Formally,
it is easy to show that the Lagrangian ( 2.33 ) is invariant under the
generators of @xmath transformations @xmath , where @xmath , while
@xmath are three vectors orthogonal to the heavy quark velocity @xmath ,
@xmath . For @xmath then ³ ³ 3 To prove these relations it is best to go
to the heavy hadron rest frame [ 42 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , from which it trivially follows that the Lagrangian ( 2.33
) does not change under the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with both @xmath and @xmath satisfying @xmath .

To be able to construct the effective Lagrangian on the meson level, we
have to consider the transformation properties of the heavy mesons under
Lorentz, heavy quark spin and flavor symmetries. We will follow the
elegant tensor representation formalism [ 64 , 65 ] , but constrain
ourselves only to the case of @xmath mesons.

The mesons consist of the heavy quark Q and a light antiquark @xmath .
These are described by the Dirac spinor field @xmath for which @xmath
and the light quark field @xmath for which @xmath . The minus sign in
the last equation is necessary in order to project out predominantly the
antiquark degrees of freedom. The meson field will then be represented
by a Dirac spinor-antispinor field @xmath that in general has 16
components. However the requirements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

reduce the 16 components to only 4 independent components (each of the
projectors reduces a Dirac bispinor to a two-component spinor). The four
components will then describe the heavy pseudoscalar meson with one
entry and the vector meson with three independent degrees of freedom.

The most general field satisfying requirements ( 2.37 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected the @xmath is the pseudoscalar field and @xmath the vector
meson field. The transformation of the heavy meson field ( 2.38 ) under
the heavy quark spin transformations ( 2.36 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

To take into considerations also the interactions with the Goldstone
bosons these are factored out from @xmath as outlined in sections 2.1 ,
2.2 (i.e. the @xmath is replaced by @xmath , that transforms according
to ( 2.23 )). Under the chiral @xmath transformations thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we did not write the tilde on the @xmath field. Finally, under
Lorentz transformations @xmath , the @xmath field transforms as @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the @xmath representation of the Lorentz group @xmath .

The most general effective Lagrangian to order @xmath in the chiral
expansion, that is invariant under the transformations ( 2.40 ), ( 2.41
), taking into account the restrictions ( 2.37 ), and is a Lorentz
scalar, is [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while the trace @xmath runs over Dirac indices. Note that
in ( 2.43 ) and the rest of this section @xmath and @xmath are flavor
indices.

The vector and axial vector fields @xmath and @xmath in ( 2.43 ) are the
same as in ( 2.24 ) and are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , with @xmath defined in ( 2.27 ). The @xmath field is
@xmath , with @xmath defined in ( 2.38 ).

The higher order terms (referred to as counterterms) in the expansion in
@xmath and @xmath are then up to the order @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given in ( 2.46 ). Dots denote terms that were
not written out, as they do not contribute to the @xmath , @xmath wave
function renormalization factors and the @xmath , @xmath decay constants
that will be discussed in section 2.5 nor to the decays @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath considered in chapters 5 and 6 . The effect of @xmath term is
to change the heavy meson propagator. In the case of @xmath quark the
shift is @xmath , where @xmath . The @xmath terms will contribute to the
wave function renormalization of the heavy mesons. Note that we did not
include in the analysis the terms suppressed by @xmath . These are
considered to be of higher order in the expansion.

The @xmath part of the Lagrangian ( 2.45 ) will contribute a correction
to the @xmath coupling from which the value of @xmath will be obtained.
Neglecting @xmath terms, one gets [ 66 , 67 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for @xmath transition only the @xmath term will be
proportional to @xmath , while the others will be proportional to @xmath
and thus negligible. On the other hand @xmath is @xmath suppressed in
the large @xmath expansion, where @xmath denotes the number of colors
(for more details see [ 38 , 68 ] ). In the numerical evaluation the
counterterms in ( 2.46 ) will be thus set to zero. The error due to this
procedure will be estimated by using two renormalization prescriptions
as explained in detail in section 2.5 .

Next we consider bosonization of currents that appear in weak decays. At
the leading order in @xmath and at the next-to-leading order in chiral
expansion this is [ 69 , 66 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Beside the leading order @xmath current in the chiral counting, given in
the first line of ( 2.47 ), we display also two @xmath terms. These will
be relevant for the discussion of the @xmath , @xmath decay constants
given later on in section 2.5 . Other @xmath terms are not written out
explicitly. They can be found in [ 66 ] .

In the same way as the heavy-light current ( 2.47 ), operators of more
general structure @xmath , with @xmath an arbitrary product of Dirac
matrices, can be translated into an operator containing meson fields
only [ 70 ] . At the leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

For instance the operator @xmath proportional to @xmath operator (cf.
section ( 4.2 )) is then translated into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, let us give the Weinberg’s counting rule [ 37 ] for the case of
heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory. This counting rule establishes
the relative importance of loop contributions. Consider a general
diagram with @xmath loops, for which we do the counting in terms of
momenta @xmath that flow in the internal lines. The Goldstone boson
propagators are of the form @xmath and contribute a factor of @xmath for
each propagator. Similarly the heavy meson propagators @xmath contribute
a factor of @xmath . Each loop contributes an integration factor @xmath
, so that finally the dimension of the diagram in terms of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the numbers of internal bosonic and
heavy-field lines respectively, while @xmath is the number of vertices
in the diagram with the dimension @xmath . The dimension of the vertex
@xmath is obtained by counting the number of derivatives and quark
masses in the corresponding interaction term, where each derivative is
counted as @xmath and each @xmath as @xmath . The dimension of the
diagram ( 2.50 ), can be rewritten in a more convenient form. To do so,
notice that the number of loops is connected to the number of internal
lines @xmath and the number of vertices @xmath . Each internal line
contributes an integration over momenta, while each vertex contributes a
delta function in the momenta. At the end one overall delta function due
to translation invariance is left, connecting incoming and outgoing
momenta, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, the sum over the numbers @xmath of incoming heavy field legs
attached to a vertex of type @xmath is connected to the number @xmath of
external heavy field legs in the diagram and to the number of internal
lines @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the relations ( 2.52 ), ( 2.53 ) in ( 2.50 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number of external heavy legs @xmath in a particular process is
constant. Also the reduced dimension of interaction vertex @xmath is
always nonnegative as can be easily verified from Lagrangians ( 2.28 ),
( 2.29 ), ( 2.43 ), ( 2.45 ). The reason is that the pure Goldstone
boson Lagrangian contains at least two derivatives or one quark mass.
Once the heavy fields are introduced, they always come in pairs and
there is also at least one derivative in the interaction. Since reduced
dimension is nonnegative, @xmath , adding more vertices will only
increase the dimension of the diagram, and thus reducing its importance.
The same is true of the loops. Adding one more loop to the diagram makes
it of a @xmath higher order. Leading order diagrams are thus the tree
level ones, as usual in the perturbation theory.

### 2.4 Photon couplings and gauge invariance

The photon couplings are obtained by gauging the Lagrangians ( 2.28 ), (
2.43 ) and the light current ( 2.30 ) with the @xmath photon field
@xmath . The covariant derivatives are then @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath the heavy quark charge ( @xmath for the case of @xmath
and @xmath quarks respectively). The vector and axial vector fields (
2.24 ) change after gauging and are @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, the
light weak current ( 2.30 ) contains after gauging the covariant
derivative @xmath instead of @xmath . However, the gauging procedure
alone does not introduce a coupling of the form @xmath without emission
of additional Goldstone bosons. To describe this electromagnetic
interaction we follow [ 67 ] introducing an additional gauge invariant
contact term with an unknown coupling @xmath of dimension -1.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The first term concerns the contribution of
the light quarks in the heavy meson and the second term describes
emission of a photon from the heavy quark. Its coefficient is fixed by
the heavy quark symmetry. From ( 2.55 ) both @xmath and @xmath
interaction terms arise. Even though the Lagrangian ( 2.55 ) is formally
of higher order in @xmath or chiral expansion, we do not neglect it, as
it has been found that it gives a sizable contribution to @xmath decays
[ 71 ] . In chapter 6 we will find, that in the @xmath decay the
Lagrangian terms ( 2.55 ) give the largest contribution to the parity
conserving part of the amplitude. However, they do not contribute to the
decay rate by more than @xmath . The Lagrangian ( 2.55 ) in principle
receives a number of other contributions at the order @xmath , but these
can be absorbed in the definition of @xmath for the processes @xmath ,
@xmath , that will be considered in chapter 6 [ 67 ] .

In the following we present two proofs that such gauging procedure of
the effective Lagrangian does indeed lead to a gauge invariant effective
action and thus to a gauge invariant amplitude. The general proof is
just a special case of the proof given in chapter 16 of [ 56 ] , that
has already been cited in section 2.1 (cf. Eq. ( 2.2 )). The
electromagnetic @xmath transformations of fields appearing in the
effective Lagrangians ( 2.28 ), ( 2.43 ) are linear

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the @xmath component of @xmath and no summation over @xmath
. The cited proof then states that as long as the effective Lagrangian
is gauge invariant under the linear transformations ( 2.56 )-( 2.58 ),
so is the effective action, which is what we wanted to show.

The general proof does not help us in the calculation, where one wishes
to find finite sets of diagrams, that are already gauge invariant. Here
a very useful tool is a diagrammatic proof of gauge invariance, which we
state next. Consider an arbitrary off-shell initial Feynman diagram with
arbitrary number of loops, heavy lines and photon lines. The sum of the
diagrams obtained by inserting an additional photon line everywhere in
the initial diagram, where this is permitted by the gauged Lagrangians (
2.28 ), ( 2.43 ) and ( 2.55 ), is gauge invariant. Finding gauge
invariant sets of diagrams in the actual calculation is then
straightforward. One starts from an appropriate initial diagram, inserts
photon vertices everywhere and ends up with a gauge invariant set.

The proof of the above statement follows closely the proof of gauge
invariance of QED amplitudes as presented in the textbook of Peskin and
Schroeder [ 76 ] . The complication is, that we have to deal with two
sorts of charged particles, the heavy mesons and light-pseudoscalars,
and with an in principle infinite number of couplings between them. We
shall prove the statement about gauge invariance only for the vertices
with up to three pseudoscalar and/or heavy meson fields, as this will be
needed further on in the calculations done in the thesis. At the end we
shall present also a discussion concerning more general vertices.

The expressions for the vertices follow from the effective Lagrangians (
2.28 ), ( 2.43 ). For the coupling of photon(s) to the light
pseudoscalars, the coupling is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the pion field. For the kaons the expression is the same
as in ( 2.59 ), but with @xmath replaced with @xmath field. The coupling
of the photon to the heavy meson is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the coupling of the photon to heavy mesons with one pseudoscalar
emitted is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given in ( 2.27 ) and @xmath . To the set of couplings (
2.59 )-( 2.61 ) one should add the couplings ( 2.55 ). However, these
are manifestly gauge invariant due to the presence of @xmath term and
need not be considered in the following.

Let us now consider an arbitrary Feynman diagram with incoming and
outgoing legs off-shell, where we limit ourselves to the case of
couplings ( 2.59 )-( 2.61 ). Since there are only up to three mesons per
each vertex, only two of the meson fields can be charged. To each vertex
we can thus associate a charged line with one ingoing and one outgoing
charged meson leg and thus with a well defined direction of charge flow.
The initial diagram is interlaced with such charged lines. Since to each
vertex only one charged line is associated, the charged lines never
cross. In other words, to a given charged line only neutral lines
attach. Because charged lines are connected only by neutral lines, each
charged line can be considered separately.

Charged line can either form a loop or connect to two external charged
legs. To begin with we consider the charged line that begins and ends on
the external off-shell charged legs. Such a line of charge flow has a
general structure

[]

with double lines representing the heavy mesons, and the solid lines
denoting the light pseudoscalars. Lines are arranged so that the charged
lines are horizontal with neutral lines attached to it (i.e. the heavy
meson carrying momentum @xmath is neutral).

To simplify the problem even further, we shall first consider the
charged line of only light pseudoscalar mesons, with coupling to photons
given by ( 2.59 ). For simplicity we also assume, that to this initial
charged light pseudoscalar line only single photon lines attach

[]

The part of the amplitude corresponding to this initial charged line is
then of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the uncontracted Lorentz indices corresponding to
photon lines carrying incoming momenta @xmath . To obtain the complete
expression for the off-shell initial diagram, the Lorentz indices @xmath
would be contracted by photon propagators.

In the next step we attach an additional external photon line to the
initial charged line, wherever this is possible. The Lorentz index
@xmath of the additional external photon line carrying incoming momentum
@xmath is contracted by the polarization vector @xmath , when the photon
line is put on-shell. A gauge invariant amplitude has to be invariant
under the change @xmath . To test gauge invariance we thus contract the
Lorentz index @xmath of the additional external photon line with @xmath
. This should then give vanishing result for the corresponding
amplitude, when external legs are put on-shell.

The additional photon line can be either attached to the pseudoscalar
propagator or to the vertex already containing one photon leg ( 2.59 ).
When we attach the photon to the @xmath th propagator, all the momenta
in the propagators after it get shifted by @xmath

[]

The invariant amplitude corresponding to the above diagram is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last equality we have used @xmath and @xmath . We then add
a photon line also to the @xmath th photon vertex

[]

The amplitude corresponding to this diagram is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum of the two insertions, Eq. ( 2.64 ) and Eq. ( 2.63 ), gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

After we sum over all such insertions we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 2.62 ). Now let us consider the case, where the
initial and the final leg of the charged line are external legs. The
on-shell amplitude is then obtained by subtracting the ingoing and
outgoing propagators and multiplying with appropriate wave-function
coefficients, according to the Lehmann-Symanzik-Zymmermann (LSZ)
reduction formula (see, e.g., [ 76 ] ). However, the sum of the
amplitudes @xmath ( 2.66 ) does not have the double-poles of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

that are required to obtain nonzero on-shell amplitudes after the
application of LSZ formula. In other words, the on-shell amplitude
corresponding to the sum of charged line diagrams with an additional
photon attached where possible (and contracted with @xmath ), is zero.
The on-shell amplitude is thus gauge invariant.

Similar reasoning applies if the line is closed, i.e., if the charged
line forms a loop. Then the final amplitude involves also the
integration over loop variable, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

After the shift of the integration variable in the second term, @xmath ,
the amplitude is seen to be equal to zero. If this shift is justified
(as is the case in nonanomalous diagrams) the gauge invariance is
guaranteed once again.

In the reasoning outlined above there were two crucial steps. First, the
propagator identity

[]

has to hold for any charged particle. And second, for each amputated
vertex multiplied only by the propagator next to it to the right, the
following identity has to be true

[]

where an arbitrary number of neutral lines (shown as dashed lines)
attach to the vertex. The first identity is needed so that also the
photon attached to the last leg in the charged line can be represented
as a difference of two propagators.

Let us first prove that the propagator identity holds for the mesons
involved in the problem. For the light pseudoscalars we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the result needed. To obtain ( 2.69 ) we have used the identity
@xmath . For the heavy pseudoscalar mesons

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the identity @xmath , while for the heavy vector
mesons

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the vertex identities, we shall consider them all at once.
Consider the two diagrams

[]

where again an arbitrary number of neutral lines, shown as dashed lines,
can attach to the vertex. The first diagram can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the charged meson propagator (either light or heavy),
while @xmath is the photon-emission vertex, but with the replacement
@xmath for gauge invariance considerations. The vertex with neutral
lines in the diagram 1) is denoted @xmath , with @xmath the sum of
ingoing neutral line momenta. The neutral lines can be either only
mesonic or contain additional photons beside the one carrying momentum
@xmath . If additional photons are present, the @xmath vertex is assumed
to represent only one of the possible permutations of photon legs.

The diagram 2) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the photon coupling to the neutral lines vertex.
This is obtained through gauging, i.e the derivative @xmath in the
relevant term in the Lagrangian is replaced by @xmath . For the gauge
invariance considerations, we further replace @xmath . Effectively this
means, that @xmath is obtained from @xmath by replacing in @xmath the
momentum of charged incoming meson with @xmath , and for the charged
outgoing mesons @xmath . In other words, if @xmath is of the form @xmath
, the @xmath is @xmath , where the replacement is never done on @xmath
’s, the momenta of neutral lines.

We would like to show, that the sum of ( 2.72 ) and ( 2.73 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have already shown that @xmath in Eqs. ( 2.69 )-( 2.71 ), so that in
order to show ( 2.74 ), it suffices to show that @xmath equals @xmath .
This is straightforward for the case of vertices listed in Eqs. ( 2.59
)-( 2.61 ). The important thing to note is, that these terms come from
Lagrangians ( 2.28 ), ( 2.43 ) that have only one derivative per each
field. The vertex @xmath can thus contain not more than one of each
charged meson momenta. In general they will be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have written out only the relevant (i.e. charged) momenta, and
( 2.76 ) has been obtained according to the replacements described in
text below Eq. ( 2.73 ). The sum of ( 2.75 ) and ( 2.76 ) then gives
@xmath as was to be shown. These completes the proof of the statement
about gauge invariance for the effective theory couplings with up to two
charged fields and up to one derivate acting on any of these fields.

For the vertices with more than two charged lines and more than one
derivative on some of the charged fields, additional complications
arise. First of all the charge flow lines can now cross each other.
Because of the crossing, charged lines are not uniquely defined. In
fact, to prove gauge invariance, one has to consider all possible ways
of defining charge flow lines. To deal with this, one focuses on one
charged line only, defining also which fields in the Lagrangian
destroy/create legs of this line and regard other charged lines attached
to the chosen charge flow as we did the neutral legs before. If there
are not more than one derivative acting on each meson field, everything
proceeds as it did above.

Extension of the arguments given above to the case of more than one
derivative acting on the charged fields in the Lagrangian is not
straightforward. In this case also the propagator identities
(counterparts of the Eqs. ( 2.69 )-( 2.71 )) change and become more
complex. The theorem is then easiest to prove on a case by case basis.

### 2.5 Determination of the parameters

The unknown couplings appearing in the Lagrangians ( 2.28 ), ( 2.43 )
are obtained from experiment. In the following we shall present the
determination of the couplings first at tree level and then also at the
one loop level.

##### Tree level

At tree level @xmath ( 2.47 ) is trivially related to the heavy meson
decay constant @xmath , where the decay constant is defined through an
axial current matrix element. For e.g @xmath this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

From [ 72 , 73 ] one deduces @xmath , from which @xmath . Note that this
value has been extracted from a system with a valence @xmath -quark and
one expects a sizable 1-loop correction.

From the CLEO measurement of the @xmath partial decay width [ 74 , 75 ]
, the value of @xmath can be deduced, with @xmath being the @xmath
coupling constant (cf. Eq. ( 2.43 )). The pion decay constant is taken
to be @xmath [ 72 ] .

In order to obtain the value of @xmath we use the available experimental
data from @xmath and @xmath decays. For instance, one can use the
recently determined @xmath decay width @xmath [ 74 , 75 ] together with
the branching ratio @xmath [ 72 ] . At tree level one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the momentum of the outgoing photon. Using @xmath one
arrives at @xmath ^(§) ^(§) § There is also a solution of ( 2.78 )
@xmath that, however, does not agree with the determination of @xmath
from the @xmath decay. , where the errors reflect the experimental
errors.

On the other hand one can also use the ratio of partial decay width in
@xmath system @xmath , where the experimental errors are considerably
smaller than in the previous case. At tree level one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath the momenta of the outgoing photon and pion
respectively. Using @xmath , @xmath , @xmath one arrives at @xmath ,
^(¶) ^(¶) ¶ The other solution is @xmath that does not agree with @xmath
data. where the quoted errors again reflect only the errors on the input
parameters coming from experiment. The @xmath coupling coming from from
@xmath ( 2.78 ) and @xmath ( 2.79 ) are in fair agreement, but not
equal. This signals that other contributions coming from chiral loops
and higher order terms that would alter our determination of @xmath
might be important. Since the contribution of chiral loops to @xmath are
approximately @xmath , while for @xmath they are about @xmath [ 67 ] ,
we use in our numerical calculations the value of @xmath obtained from
@xmath .

##### Wave function renormalization

The values of couplings at the 1-loop depend on the regularization and
renormalization prescriptions. Values for two renormalization
prescriptions will be given, for the @xmath scheme and for the
renormalization prescription @xmath as used by Gasser and Leutwyler in
their analysis [ 38 ] . We will first discuss the calculation of wave
function renormalization factors and then move on to the values of
couplings @xmath at one loop.

The wave function renormalization factors are defined as follows. We
discuss first the case of light pseudoscalars. Let us define the sum of
all one particle irreducible diagrams (1PI) ^(∥) ^(∥) ∥ 1PI diagram is a
diagram that does not become disconnected, if any of the internal lines
is cut. contributing to the light pseudoscalar propagator

[]

where the amputated 1PI on the right-hand side is understood, while
@xmath is the momentum running through the diagram. An infinite sum of
1PI diagrams represents the full light pseudoscalar propagator

[]

The full light pseudoscalar propagator is thus a geometric sum of 1PI
amputated diagrams and the intermediate bare propagators. After
resummation this gives for the full propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the bare light pseudoscalar mass that is renormalized by
the 1PI @xmath term to give the physical mass

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Close to the physical mass pole, the full pseudoscalar propagator can be
approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where dots represent regular terms, while @xmath is the pseudoscalar
wave function renormalization factor (see, e.g., [ 76 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a very similar way also the heavy meson wave function renormalization
is defined, the only difference being that the heavy meson propagator
has only one power of momenta in the denominator ( 2.32 ). If we denote
the sum of amputated 1PI diagrams contributing to the heavy meson
propagator by @xmath , where @xmath is the propagator momentum, then the
heavy meson wave function renormalization factor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The wave function renormalization factors @xmath enter the LSZ formula
for the scattering matrix. The scattering matrix is calculated using
amputated diagrams, that are multiplied by @xmath for each external leg
(see, e.g., [ 76 ] ).

Contributions to the wave function renormalizations for the light
pseudoscalars @xmath , @xmath at the @xmath order in the chiral counting
are shown on Figure 2.4 . Explicitly they are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (2.85)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath function defined in appendix A , Eq. ( A.1 ), while @xmath
are quark masses with @xmath . The counterterm contributions @xmath come
from the insertions of terms given in Eq. ( 2.29 ).

The one chiral loop contributions to the heavy meson wave function
renormalizations are shown on Figure 2.5 . Explicit expressions for the
heavy pseudoscalar and vector mesons @xmath , containing @xmath light
valence antiquark, are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.87)
     @xmath               (2.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the summation over @xmath is suspended, while @xmath , @xmath are
the quark masses, and @xmath , where @xmath can be found in appendix A ,
Eq. ( A.12 ). The @xmath matrices @xmath are defined through @xmath ,
Eq. ( 2.27 ). In the heavy quark limit @xmath we have @xmath and the two
renormalizations are equal.

##### The decay constants

The light pseudoscalar decay constants receive contributions at one
chiral loop level from diagrams on Fig. 2.6 . For @xmath they are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (2.89)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the wave-function renormalizations are given in ( 2.85 ), ( 2.86
). We use the expression for the pion decay constant, together with the
experimental value @xmath MeV [ 72 ] , from which at one loop @xmath [
38 ] both in @xmath and Gasser-Leutwyler prescriptions. The error is due
to the poorly known @xmath counterterm, that will be discussed latter on
in this section in somewhat more detail (cf. Eqs. ( 2.95 ), ( 2.96 )).

The decay constants @xmath , @xmath receive contributions from diagrams
depicted on Fig. 2.7 . For @xmath these have been calculated in [ 44 ,
66 ] , while the leading logs have been obtained already in [ 77 , 78 ]
. Taking into account the counterterms, the 1-loop expressions are

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              
              (2.91a)
              (2.91b)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath with @xmath the quark masses, while @xmath , and
@xmath , @xmath can be found in appendix A , Eqs. ( A.1 ), ( A.12 ). The
formulas ( 2.91 ) are valid at the leading order in @xmath [ 44 , 66 ] .
Evaluating expression for @xmath ( 2.91b ) using the tree level values
for @xmath and the experimental value of @xmath one arrives at @xmath in
@xmath scheme, and @xmath in the Gasser-Leutwyler prescription. The
error is equally distributed between experimental errors in @xmath ,
experimental error in @xmath and variation of unknown counterterms as
described below (cf. Eqs. ( 2.95 ), ( 2.96 ) and the text below them).
The variation of the counterterms introduces relatively large error as
they are proportional to @xmath . Estimated error is only approximate
also because @xmath correction have been neglected.

##### One loop corrections to the @xmath coupling

The contributions to the @xmath coupling at one chiral loop are shown on
Fig. 2.8 . They give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the 1-loop contributions for @xmath , @xmath , transition calculated
at @xmath , where @xmath as before, while @xmath are the @xmath
matrices, corresponding to the pseudoscalars @xmath in ( 2.27 ), @xmath
. The sum in ( 2.93 ) runs over the light pseudoscalars @xmath with
masses @xmath , while no summation over @xmath and @xmath is assumed.
For brevity we have also defined the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the limit @xmath . The @xmath term in ( 2.92 ) denotes the
contribution coming from counterterms ( 2.46 ). For @xmath transition
the counterterms are either proportional to @xmath or are @xmath
suppressed as discussed below Eq. ( 2.46 ). These counterterms will be
thus set to zero in the numerical evaluation. The rough size of @xmath
can be estimated by comparing the @xmath and values of g as given below
and in Table 2.1 .

Comparing with the experimental value [ 74 , 75 ] @xmath , we arrive at
@xmath , @xmath , where the values of @xmath have been used as given in
Table 2.1 , while other counterterms have been set to zero as discussed
above. The error in @xmath , @xmath is experimental and from the
uncertainty on the @xmath counterterm (this is proportional to @xmath ,
see ( 2.86 )). The error from the other unknown counterterms can be
estimated to be of the same order.

##### Counterterms

The values of the counterterms @xmath and @xmath in ( 2.29 ) are taken
from [ 38 ] and are scaled to @xmath using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath . This yields @xmath and @xmath . To get values in
@xmath scheme we use the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives @xmath and @xmath .

There are no experimental data regarding the sizes of the @xmath and
@xmath counterterms in ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.47 ). From large @xmath
considerations we can conclude that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
suppressed, i.e., the following relations are expected @xmath , @xmath .
In the numerical estimates we then set @xmath . The approximate size of
@xmath is determined by observing that @xmath term in ( 2.29 ) and
@xmath term in ( 2.45 ) have similar structure compared to the kinetic
term in ( 2.28 ) and ( 2.43 ) respectively. It is thus reasonable to
expect that roughly @xmath . Similar reasoning applies for @xmath , so
that in the numerical evaluation we vary @xmath and @xmath in the range
@xmath .

At the end let us summarize the approximations that were made in
obtaining the 1-loop values of couplings @xmath given in Table 2.1

-   The @xmath contributions have been neglected. These are expected to
    be more important in the determination of @xmath , as in it
    contributions of order @xmath might arise. The @xmath corrections
    are expected to be less important in the determination of g, where
    they are proportional to @xmath .

-   In the determination of @xmath a number of unknown counterterms have
    been set to zero. Except for the @xmath they are proportional to
    @xmath which justifies this procedure. The @xmath contribution is
    proportional to @xmath , while @xmath itself is of order @xmath and
    is expected to be suppressed ( 2.46 ). The situation is very similar
    to the case of @xmath contribution, which is proportional to @xmath
    , while @xmath is @xmath suppressed. Note also that the change of
    scale and/or renormalization prescription can invalidate the @xmath
    argument as can be seen from the relatively large value of @xmath .

-   The uncertainties connected with the couplings in the heavy meson
    sector do not influence determination of @xmath at one loop.

## Chapter 3 One loop scalar and tensor functions

In the following we shall present the calculation of the dimensionally
regularized one loop scalar functions with one heavy meson propagator,
that has been published in [ 79 ] . These will be needed in the
evaluation of radiative @xmath meson decays discussed in chapter 6 . The
expressions for the dimensionally regularized one loop scalar functions
within full theory have been know for a long time [ 80 ] . The full
expressions for scalar functions with one heavy meson propagator, on the
other hand, have not been calculated until recently [ 79 , 66 , 67 , 81
, 82 , 83 ] .

The one loop calculations within the heavy quark effective theory are
considerably simplified if the light-quark masses are neglected. Very
common in the heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory (HH @xmath PT) is
a similar approximation, with the finite contributions omitted, while
only the leading logs are retained [ 78 , 70 ] . To go beyond the
leading log approximation and/or take into account the counterterms
appearing at the next order in the chiral expansion, the general
solutions for the one loop scalar functions need to be considered. In
the context of the HH @xmath PT a general solution for the one loop
scalar two-point function with one heavy quark propagator has been found
in [ 66 , 67 ] . We extend this calculation and find solutions for the
scalar three-point and four-point functions with one heavy quark
propagator.

The vector and tensor one loop functions can then be expressed in terms
of the scalar one loop functions using the algebraic reduction [ 84 ] .
Also, the one loop scalar functions with two or more heavy quark
propagators can be expressed in terms of the one loop scalar functions
with just one heavy quark propagator. For the case of the equal
heavy-quark velocities this can be accomplished using the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For unequal heavy quark velocities techniques developed in [ 81 ] can be
used.

The scalar one-loop functions with heavy quark propagators can be
derived also directly from the scalar functions of the full theory by
using the threshold expansion [ 85 ] (see also appendix B of [ 86 ] ).
This technique has recently been used for the calculation of the scalar
and tensor three-point functions with one and two heavy quark
propagators [ 82 , 83 ] . We will not, however, follow the approach of
Bouzas et al. [ 81 , 82 , 83 ] but rather do the calculation from
scratch.

This chapter is organized as follows: first we will introduce the
notation for scalar and tensor functions that will be used further on.
Then we shall proceed to the evaluation of scalar functions. At the
beginning we will make some general remarks and list useful relations
that will be used further on in the calculation. Then we will review the
calculation of one and two point functions. We will continue with the
calculation of the three-point and four-point functions in the final
sections.

### 3.1 Notational conventions for loop integrals

In this section we list the definitions of the dimensionally regularized
integrals commonly encountered in the evaluation of the @xmath PT and HH
@xmath PT one-loop diagrams. The integrals containing a heavy quark
propagator are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
                          (3.4)
                          (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The dependence of scalar and tensor functions on @xmath
is not shown explicitly and also in Eqs. ( 3.4 ), ( 3.5 ) the @xmath
prescription is not shown. The scalar integrals @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
have been calculated in [ 79 ] . We use the expressions of Ref. [ 79 ]
in the numerical evaluation of the scalar integrals @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The tensor integrals can be expressed in terms of
Lorentz-covariant tensors. The notation we use for the tensor functions
resembles closely the notation used in Ref. [ 87 ] for the
Veltman-Passarino functions [ 84 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath               (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The tensor functions are calculated using the algebraic reduction [ 84 ]
, i.e., the tensor functions ( 3.6 )-( 3.11 ) are multiplied by the
four-momenta @xmath or contracted using @xmath . Then the identities
such as @xmath and/or @xmath are used to reduce tensor integrals to a
sum of scalar integrals. The result of this procedure has been given
explicitly in [ 45 ] for the case of two point functions @xmath ^(*)
^(*) * Note that different notation is used in Ref. [ 45 ] , with @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . . For the case of the three and four-point
functions @xmath , @xmath we do not write out explicitly the analytic
results of algebraic reductions as the expressions are relatively
cumbersome. For instance in the case of @xmath the final expression
involves the inverse of a @xmath matrix that corresponds to seven
functions @xmath appearing in the expression of the four-point tensor
function ( 3.11 ). Note as well that in this particular case there are
ten possible relations between @xmath and the scalar functions @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath that one gets from algebraic reductions (three equations
from each multiplication by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath plus one relation
from contraction by @xmath ). Obviously not all ten equations can be
linearly independent. Using different sets of seven independent
equations have to lead to the same results for @xmath coefficient
functions. This fact can then be used as a very useful check in the
numerical implementation.

The loophole of the aforementioned procedure is, if the set of equations
provided by the algebraic reduction is not invertible. This happens for
instance in the calculation of @xmath (see section 6.4 ). Namely, for
@xmath and @xmath appearing in the calculation of @xmath (with @xmath
the four-momentum of the lepton pair and @xmath the photon momentum, see
section 6.4 or appendix B , Eqs. ( B.21 ), ( B.22 )) only six out of ten
relations following from algebraic reduction are linearly independent.
This problem is connected to the special kinematics of @xmath decays and
has been circumvented by first calculating the tensor four-point
functions with the prescription @xmath , where @xmath is some arbitrary
four-momentum, and then taking the limit @xmath numerically. Similarly,
in the calculation of @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , see Eqs. ( B.23
), ( B.24 ), the prescription @xmath has been used. Because @xmath are
continuous functions of @xmath and @xmath , the outlined limiting
procedure leads to an unambiguous result. This has been also checked
numerically.

To make the listing of notational conventions self-contained we give in
the following also the notation for the Veltman-Passarino functions
employed by the LoopTools package [ 87 ] , that has been used for their
numerical evaluation. A general integral is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.12)
  -- -- -- --------

with two-point functions @xmath generally denoted by the letter @xmath ,
the three-point functions @xmath by the letter @xmath and the four-point
functions @xmath by the letter @xmath . Thus, e.g., @xmath and @xmath
are two-point and three-point scalar functions respectively. The
decomposition of the tensor integrals in terms of the Lorentz-covariant
tensors reads explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the tensor-coefficient functions are totally symmetric in
their indices.

### 3.2 General remarks and useful relations

Let us now turn to the evaluation of the one loop scalar functions, with
one heavy quark propagator ( 3.2 )-( 3.5 ). Before we start with the
actual calculation, let us, however, first list some useful relations
and the conventions that are going to be used further on. The greater
part of this section is a review of the relations and the conventions
used in [ 80 ] with certain modifications. The major difference between
the conventional one loop scalar functions and the one loop scalar
functions with one heavy quark propagator is the appearance of the
propagator linear in the integration variable @xmath . Therefore, a
modified version of the standard Feynman parameterization is used

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.18)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the Heaviside function @xmath for @xmath and zero
otherwise. In the calculation @xmath are going to be “full” (inverse)
propagators @xmath and @xmath the heavy quark propagator @xmath . Note
also, that the leading power of @xmath in the denominator has increased
from the left-hand side’s @xmath to the right-hand side’s @xmath . The
integration over @xmath has been made more convergent, but then another
integration over infinite range (integration over @xmath ) has been
introduced through the parameterization.

A very useful identity used in the calculation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath can then be chosen at will. It is useful to keep it
real, though. Then there are no ambiguities connected with the shift of
the integration variable @xmath , that is performed, as usual, before
the Wick rotation. For instance @xmath can be chosen such that @xmath .
If @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath is real. If one of the masses is made
to be zero, the integration is simplified considerably (as will be seen
in the calculation of the four-point function ( 3.66 )). The other
option used below is to set @xmath such that @xmath . This can be done
for real @xmath if (but not only if) one of @xmath , @xmath or @xmath is
timelike. This shows, that in general product of propagators at least
one internal or one external mass can always be set to zero, even with
@xmath restricted to be real.

In doing the integrals the following procedure proves to be very useful.
Consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integration over @xmath can be simplified by the change of the
integration variables @xmath , where @xmath is chosen such, that the
coefficient in front of @xmath vanishes, i.e., @xmath has to solve the
equation @xmath . Then the integrand is linear in @xmath , so the
integration over @xmath is trivial. The integration bounds are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the results of the integration, the functions such as logarithms,
dilogarithms (Spence functions) and hypergeometric functions will
appear. Since the arguments of the functions will in general lie in the
complex plane it is necessary to discuss the conventions used. The
convention used for the logarithms is that they have a cut along the
negative real axis. For @xmath exactly negative real we use the
prescription @xmath , where @xmath is a positive infinitesimal
parameter. In other words, @xmath for @xmath negative real ^(†) ^(†) †
Note that this prescription does not change the calculation of the
logarithms away from the negative real axis. In particular it does not
change the value of a logarithm with an argument that already has an
infinitesimal but nonzero imaginary part. For more discussion on this
point see text after Eq. ( 3.106 ). . In particular @xmath is defined to
be @xmath . Of course this choice is completely arbitrary and at the end
of the calculation one has to check that results are independent of this
choice. Using this definition for the logs of the negative real
arguments the logarithm of an inverse is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the change from the usual rule for the logarithm of an inverse
is just on the negative real axis. For the arguments away from the
negative real axis the function @xmath is exactly zero and everything is
as usual. The logarithm of a product is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath function is ^(‡) ^(‡) ‡ Note, that in comparison with [ 80
] , the @xmath function has been extended also to the negative real
arguments (cf. discussion after Eq. ( 3.75 ) and Eq. ( 3.88 )). For
arguments away from the negative real axis (also if by an infinitesimal
amount) it is the same as in [ 80 ] .

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.27)
  -- -- -- --------

The normal rule for the logarithm of a product applies for these
important cases

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath not negative real.

A very illuminative example of what kind of problems are encountered
when doing the integrals of functions with branch cuts in the complex
plane is the following simple calculation taken from [ 80 ] . Consider
for instance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary complex numbers. The indefinite
integral would be @xmath , but then one has to take care whether for
@xmath the argument of the logarithm crosses the negative real axis or
not. It is easier to first divide out @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the argument of the logarithm does not cross the negative real axis
as it has the same imaginary part regardless of the value of (real)
@xmath . So

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the arguments of the logarithms have the imaginary parts of the
same sign, the usual rule ( 3.28 ) applies and one can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is actually the standard result. The problem with the careless
derivation would be, that it would give @xmath , which is not correct
for all choices of @xmath and @xmath . For instance, for @xmath
infinitesimally below the negative real axis and @xmath infinitesimally
above the negative real axis, the integration path lies infinitesimally
close to the negative real axis with the starting point below and ending
point above the negative real axis. Since the integration path does not
cross the pole of the integrand in ( 3.29 ), the result of integration
should be almost real. The naive result @xmath , however, gives
incorrectly @xmath , while the use of Eq. ( 3.32 ) leads to the correct
result @xmath .

### 3.3 Dilogarithm and hypergeometric function

In this section we list some properties of the dilogarithm and the
hypergeometric function used in the rest of this chapter (for other
properties consult, e.g., [ 80 , 88 ] ).

The dilogarithm or Spence function is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The cut for the logarithm along the negative real axis translates into
the cut for the dilogarithm along the positive real axis for @xmath .
For @xmath on the positive real axis, @xmath , dilogarithm is calculated
using the following prescription @xmath . Note as well that @xmath .

Useful identities valid also for the complex arguments (not equal to
zero) are [ 88 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The hypergeometric function for complex argument @xmath is defined in
terms of the series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath not equal to zero or negative integer. Note that the series
terminates if @xmath or @xmath are equal to negative integer or zero. If
either of them is zero then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath outside the unit circle the values of the hypergeometric
function can be obtained through analytic continuation. We make a cut in
the @xmath plane along the real axis from @xmath to @xmath . Then the
series ( 3.36 ) will yield, in the cut plain, a single valued analytic
continuation that can be obtained using the following identity (other
similar transformation formulas can be found in, e.g., [ 88 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral representations of the hypergeometric function include

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where Eq. ( 3.39a ) is valid for @xmath , while Eq. ( 3.39b ) is valid
for the case, when @xmath and @xmath .

### 3.4 One- and two-point functions

In this section we will concentrate on the calculation of the
dimensionally regularized one-point and two-point functions in the heavy
quark effective theory

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive infinitesimal parameter, @xmath , while
@xmath and @xmath are real. The general solution for the two-point
function has been found by Stewart in Ref. [ 67 ] (see also [ 44 ] and
references therein). In this section we will derive Stewart’s result.

We start with the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Feynman parameterization [ 43 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral can be expressed in terms of the hypergeometric function.
Introducing the new variable @xmath and then splitting the integration
interval for negative @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we write @xmath for short. Another change of variables @xmath
leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

These integrals can be expressed in terms of the hypergeometric
functions @xmath through the identities ( 3.39a ), ( 3.39b ) listed in
section 3.3 . Using the transformation formula ( 3.38 ) together with
@xmath we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Let us first discuss the case when @xmath is equal to zero or negative
integer, i.e., when the integrand, apart from the heavy quark
propagator, is a polynomial. The integrals for the physical case @xmath
are divergent, but we can make sense of it through the analytic
continuation. At fixed @xmath the integral @xmath is taken to be an
analytic function of the complex dimension @xmath . For @xmath equal to
zero or negative integer and @xmath all functions appearing in ( 3.47 )
are finite, apart from @xmath that is infinitely large. Thus @xmath
vanishes for @xmath zero or negative integer everywhere in the @xmath
complex plane apart from the points on the real axis with integer @xmath
. Analytic continuation of @xmath ( 3.47 ) is then equal to zero in the
whole @xmath plane. Integrals over polynomials (and one heavy quark
propagator) are in the dimensional regularization thus equal to zero. In
particular, the one-point scalar function @xmath .

For the two-point function we have @xmath and therefore @xmath . So the
two point function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath we have to expand hypergeometric function around @xmath in
order to get the finite terms correctly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partial derivative can be found using the series expansion ( 3.36 )
and is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads us to the final result for the two-point function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where F(x) is a function as defined in [ 67 ] valid for both positive
and negative @xmath (while @xmath is always taken to be positive real)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath an infinitesimal positive parameter. Note that for @xmath ,
@xmath has an imaginary part that corresponds to the particle creation.
Also, the two point function has to be a continuous function of @xmath ,
as can be seen from ( 3.41 ) or ( 3.46 ). It is easy to check that for
@xmath the two-point function is continuous as then @xmath . The
two-point function is also continuous for @xmath . Even though @xmath
diverges as @xmath , the two point function ( 3.51 ) is finite and equal
to @xmath .

Finally, for @xmath both @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.47 ) are finite in the
limit @xmath , so that Eq. ( 3.47 ) can be used directly, with @xmath
set to @xmath .

### 3.5 Three-point scalar function

The one loop scalar three-point function with one heavy quark propagator
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This integral is finite in 4 dimensions, so that @xmath can be set to
zero. Using the Feynman parameterization ( 3.18 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integration over @xmath can be made trivial through the change of
variables @xmath . We choose @xmath to be the solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

as then the term quadratic in @xmath is zero. The solution is @xmath and
is real for any real four-vector @xmath (this can be easily seen by
going in the frame, where @xmath with the square root then equal to
@xmath ). Changing the integration order as in ( 3.23 ), and then
integrating over @xmath , we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.56)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath one of the solutions @xmath of the quadratic equation ( 3.55
). In ( 3.56 ) we have used the fact that D is the only complex
parameter and split the logarithm in the second integrand. The
integrands of both the first and the second integral have vanishing
residues. In the second integral we then add and subtract the values of
the logarithms for @xmath and write

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.57)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath . Note, that all three integrals in ( 3.57 ) have integrands
with vanishing residues. These integrals can be reduced into the sums of
the dilogarithms, where care has to be taken regarding the imaginary
parts of the arguments of the logarithms. The solutions of the integrals
can be found in section 3.7 . The solution of the first integral can be
found in ( 3.105 ), ( 3.107 ), with the definitions ( 3.96 ), ( 3.98 )
(where @xmath , note also the minus sign), while the solutions to the
last two integrals can be found in ( 3.89 ), ( 3.91 ). Using the
functions @xmath and @xmath defined in section 3.7 the three-point
function ( 3.53 ) finally reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the value of the three-point function in ( 3.58 ) does not
depend on which of the solutions @xmath of the equation ( 3.55 ) is
used. This can be used as a useful check in the numerical
implementation.

The solution is simplified considerably if @xmath . Then the @xmath
integration in ( 3.54 ) is trivial. Proceeding similarly as above we
arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while @xmath are the solutions of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath .

The solution is even further simplified if besides @xmath also @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given in ( 3.60 ). The three point function in
this limit has been calculated before and is given explicitly in [ 47 ]
(see Eq. (A10) of [ 47 ] ). The two expressions agree completely. A
number of numerical checks between numerically integrated expression (
3.56 ) and final expression ( 3.58 ) have been performed as well.

### 3.6 Four-point function

The scalar four-point function with one heavy quark propagator is
defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.62)
  -- -- -- --------

where the @xmath prescription has been omitted in the notation. Again,
the integral is convergent and @xmath can be set to zero. Since the
Feynman parameterization ( 3.18 ) is not symmetric in @xmath and @xmath
, the elegant transformation used in the calculation of the conventional
four-point function [ 80 ] and further improved in [ 89 ] unfortunately
cannot be applied. Instead, one repeatedly uses the propagator identity
( 3.19 ) to solve the integral ( 3.62 ). Since the parameter @xmath in
the propagator identity ( 3.19 ) has to be real, the calculation differs
depending on the values of the external momenta @xmath and @xmath .

First we take up the case, when one of the following inequalities is
true @xmath or @xmath . If necessary, we renumber the momenta and
reshuffle the propagators in ( 3.62 ) in such a way that either @xmath
or @xmath in order to simplify the discussion. Then we use the
propagator identity ( 3.19 ) on the second and the third propagators of
( 3.62 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose @xmath such that @xmath . This is satisfied by real @xmath if
either @xmath or @xmath as has been assumed above. The scalar four point
function is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

To calculate the two integrals in ( 3.66 ) it suffices to consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath prescription has not been written out explicitly in the
first three propagators.

Using the Feynman parameterization ( 3.18 ) and integrating over @xmath
we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

To simplify the integration we introduce new variables @xmath and @xmath
. The integration limits are then @xmath . Since @xmath is positive and
@xmath an infinitesimal parameter of which only the sign matters, the
extra factor of @xmath in the numerator can be canceled against the
similar factor in the denominator. After the cancellation the
denominator is linear in @xmath . The integration over @xmath is now
trivial and yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

To cancel the @xmath term in the integral above a new variable @xmath is
introduced, with @xmath chosen to solve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions are real, if @xmath is real (cf. Eq. ( 3.70 )). Since both
@xmath and @xmath are taken to be real four-vectors, this is always the
case. We then get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

After @xmath integration we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the solutions of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the integrands above have vanishing residues, i.e., arguments
of the two logarithms in the integrands are the same for @xmath . Note
as well, that the infinitesimal imaginary parts of @xmath and @xmath ,
the @xmath in ( 3.74 ), have to be equal. They originate from the same
infinitesimal parameter in ( 3.69 ) that after the integration over
@xmath appears twice in ( 3.71 ). The size of the infinitesimal parts of
@xmath compared to @xmath are thus unambiguously defined and have to be
kept track of until the end of the calculation.

The integrals ( 3.75 ) can be expressed in terms of the dilogarithms.
This has been done in section 3.7 . The solution for the first two
integrals can be found in ( 3.105 ), with the definitions in ( 3.96 ), (
3.98 ), while the solution for the last two integrals can be found in (
3.94 ), ( 3.95 ). Together with Eqs. ( 3.66 ), ( 3.68 ) and the cascade
of abbreviations ( 3.74 ), ( 3.72 ), ( 3.70 ) this gives the complete
solution of the four point function with at least one external momentum
@xmath , @xmath satisfying @xmath or @xmath . Collecting the terms and
rearranging the last two propagators in ( 3.62 ) if necessary, the four
point function for @xmath or @xmath finally reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath the solution of @xmath , while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 3.74 ), @xmath defined in ( 3.72 ), @xmath ,
@xmath defined in ( 3.70 ) and @xmath solutions of ( 3.76 ). Note that
parameters @xmath and @xmath are solutions of quadratic equations ( 3.67
) and ( 3.72 ) that in general have two real solutions each. The value
of the four point function @xmath does not depend on which of the
solutions are chosen in the evaluation of ( 3.77 ), ( 3.78 ). This fact
can be used as a useful test in the numerical implementation of the
expressions given above.

Now we take up the special case of @xmath on the light-cone, i.e.,
@xmath . From ( 3.67 ) it follows that @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath is
finite and the calculation proceeds as before, ( 3.62 )-( 3.75 ). For
equal masses @xmath and @xmath , we evaluate the integrals by first
taking @xmath and then performing the limit @xmath and thus @xmath . The
external momenta in the last propagators of ( 3.66 ) are both equal to
@xmath . Thus the last external momentum in @xmath of ( 3.68 ) is going
to be @xmath for both of the integrals in ( 3.66 ). In the limit @xmath
the following leading order values ( 3.74 ) are obtained: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , where we have used also the fact that @xmath . The
other coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath do not depend on
@xmath . The first term in the denominator of the integrand in ( 3.73 )
is then proportional to @xmath , while the second term in the
denominator does not depend on @xmath at all. The @xmath in the
denominator cancels against the @xmath in the numerator of ( 3.66 ). For
the case of equal masses @xmath and @xmath , the solution is then the
same as for the case @xmath except that (i) one has to replace @xmath
and @xmath in ( 3.66 ) with @xmath and @xmath respectively, and that
(ii) @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in ( 3.74 ), ( 3.75 ) have to be replaced
by their limiting values (divided by @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the solution to ( 3.72 ) (with @xmath defined in ( 3.70
)), and is different for the two integrals in ( 3.66 ). In the limiting
value of @xmath coefficient given in ( 3.79 ) an additional @xmath
prescription has been added. As will be shown in the next paragraph,
this does not have any effect on the value of the four-point function.
It does make possible, however, to express the integrals in ( 3.75 ) in
terms of the functions @xmath and @xmath as in ( 3.78 ).

It is easy to see, that the limiting procedure as explained above does
lead to an unambiguous result. One might in principle worry that limits
@xmath taken from above and below, corresponding to the limits @xmath
and @xmath respectively, would lead to different results. The question
is most conveniently settled if the @xmath functions in Eq. ( 3.77 ) are
replaced by the expressions given in Eq. ( 3.71 ). Once the limit @xmath
is taken, the first factors of the integrands have the same limiting
value. For @xmath large, thus the leading term is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . After collecting the two integrands in ( 3.80 ) the first
factor in the integrands cancels and one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result exhibits clearly the fact that (i) the limit @xmath is
independent of whether it is taken from above or below and (ii) the
limit is independent of the size (or even the sign) of the infinitesimal
parameter in the first terms of the integrands in ( 3.80 ).

When the momenta @xmath , @xmath satisfy @xmath , rendering a complex
@xmath , the procedure outlined above in ( 3.62 )-( 3.77 ) cannot be
applied directly. Starting from ( 3.62 ), we then use the propagator
identity ( 3.19 ) on the last two propagators in ( 3.62 ), where we set
@xmath such that @xmath . This has a real solution for @xmath since
@xmath and @xmath are timelike as has been assumed at the beginning of
this paragraph. Changing the notation slightly we then have for the
scalar four point function (omitting the @xmath prescription in the
notation)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the (real) solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.84a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.84b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The integrals in ( 3.82 ) can now be solved using the procedure outlined
above ( 3.62 )-( 3.79 ), once we permute the last two propagators with
@xmath taking the role of @xmath in ( 3.62 ). Note also, that @xmath
solves quadratic equation ( 3.83 ) that in general has two solutions.
The final result for the four point function @xmath does not depend on
which of the two solutions is taken in ( 3.82 ). This fact can be
exploited in the numerical implementation as a useful check.

The four point function has already been calculated before for a special
case of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see Eq. (A11) of [ 47 ] ). It has
been checked numerically that the two solutions, the one given here and
the solution of [ 47 ] , agree for this special case. A number of other
numerical tests have been performed. The direct numerical integration of
( 3.69 ) and the evaluation of analytical result given above have been
found to agree numerically. It has been also checked that the results do
not depend on which of the two solutions for @xmath , @xmath or @xmath
is taken. The solution for the four-point function calculated above has
also been checked numerically to have the branch cuts as required by
analyticity and unitarity.

The five-point as well as the higher-point functions can be expressed in
terms of the scalar functions given above using the standard procedure [
80 , 90 ] . Consider for instance the case of five-point scalar
function. This is a function of four vectors, @xmath and @xmath . The
five-point function is first multiplied by @xmath and then
antisymmetrized in all five indices. The resulting tensor is zero,
because there is no antisymmetrical tensor with five indices in four
dimensions. Then the tensor is multiplied first with @xmath and finally
with @xmath . Using the decomposition of the product of two Levi-Civita
tensors in terms of the Kronecker delta functions and expressing the
scalar products @xmath in terms of the propagators @xmath and @xmath ,
the five-point function can be expressed in terms of the four point
functions. The tensor functions can also be expressed in terms of the
scalar functions using the algebraic reduction [ 84 ] .

In the numerical implementation of the expressions as given here,
further care has to be taken regarding the numerical instabilities. Such
numerical instabilities can for instance arise, if one of the solutions
of the quadratic equation is much smaller than its coefficients. There
is also a possibility of a cancellation between the dilogarithmic
functions, when the values of the dilogarithms separately are much
larger then their sum. These difficulties can be dealt with along the
lines of Ref. [ 91 ] .

### 3.7 Reduction to dilogarithms

In this section we will express the integrals appearing in ( 3.57 ), (
3.75 ) in terms of the dilogarithms. First we review the derivations
given in [ 80 ] . Consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath may be complex. The residue of the pole of the integrand is
zero. The cut of the logarithm is along the negative real axis, so for
@xmath not real, the cut is outside the triangle @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The integration path can thus be deformed to (for @xmath real,
this statement is trivial)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Making the substitutions @xmath and @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is positive real, none of the arguments of the logarithms
crosses the negative real axis. After integration per parts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be further simplified using ( 3.34b )

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.88)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 3.27 ) and @xmath defined in ( 3.25 ). Note
that this result differs slightly from the one in [ 80 ] as it is
defined also for the arguments lying on the negative real axis. The
extension to negative real arguments was not necessary in [ 80 ] as then
the @xmath was always real. This is not the case in the calculation of
the four point function with one heavy quark propagator, as the @xmath
and @xmath in ( 3.75 ) can have nonzero imaginary parts. The momenta and
the masses in the calculation can then be chosen such, that one of the
arguments appearing in ( 3.88 ) can lie on the negative real axis.

Next we turn to the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath real, while @xmath , @xmath , @xmath may be complex but
such, that the imaginary part of the argument of the logarithm does not
change sign for @xmath (also @xmath ).

Let @xmath and @xmath be infinitesimal quantities that have the opposite
sign from the imaginary part of first and second argument of the
logarithm respectively. That is, the signs of the arguments are as given
by @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the solutions of @xmath . Next we split up the logarithms,
use the fact that the imaginary part of @xmath has the same sign as the
imaginary part of @xmath and use the definitions of @xmath ( 3.85 ) to
get

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.91)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath defined before Eq. ( 3.90 ).

For future reference we also define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath real and @xmath , @xmath possibly complex ( @xmath ).
Defining as above infinitesimal parameters @xmath and @xmath to have
signs opposite to the imaginary parts of the first and the second
argument of the logarithms respectively, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we turn to the integrals appearing in the calculations of the
three-point and four-point functions with one heavy quark propagator.
Consider first

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath real, while @xmath , @xmath may be complex but
such that @xmath and @xmath . Also, the coefficients are such, that for
@xmath the two logarithms are equal, so that the residue of the
integrand is equal to zero. Such an integral appears in the calculation
of the four-point scalar function ( 3.75 ). To reduce the integral
@xmath to the integrals @xmath , @xmath we add and subtract the values
of the logarithms at the pole. Since the numerators and the denominators
of the logarithms in ( 3.94 ) have imaginary parts of the same sign, we
can split the logarithms. Additional @xmath terms appear, however, when
we split the logarithms with @xmath set to @xmath . As the result we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 3.27 ) and @xmath in ( 3.25 ).

Next consider the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath real, while @xmath , @xmath , @xmath may be complex with the
restriction @xmath , @xmath . Then the logarithms can be split without
introducing @xmath terms, independent of the value of @xmath as long as
this is real. Also the arguments of the logarithms in ( 3.96 ) are taken
to be the same for @xmath , so that the residue of the integrand is
zero. Such integrals appear in the calculation of the three-point
function ( 3.57 ) and in the calculation of the four-point function (
3.75 ). We rewrite the integral ( 3.96 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as can be seen from the constraints on
@xmath , @xmath . Then the logarithms can be split up in the sum of the
logarithms with arguments linear in @xmath .

To the integral ( 3.97 ) we add logarithms with @xmath set to @xmath and
then split the logarithms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . There is also a sum of @xmath terms
that we do not write out explicitly, but just denote by @xmath , as it
will be reabsorbed in the final result. Note also, that in the case of
@xmath real and negative the logarithm is calculated using the
prescription @xmath , with @xmath a positive infinitesimal parameter
(see also ( 3.24 )-( 3.28 )). The integral is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The separate integrals are divergent so they have to be regulated. We
use the cutoff @xmath that is sent to infinity at the end of the
calculation. Note also, that there is no problem with the pole in the
last term even if @xmath is real, as then @xmath is zero.

The regulated integrals are then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us from here on first assume, that @xmath is not negative real.
Changing the variable @xmath and using the calculation of @xmath ( 3.85
), ( 3.88 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath big enough the last term is zero. The @xmath dependent
dilogarithm can be transformed using relation ( 3.34a )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The argument of the dilogarithm on the right-hand side goes toward zero
as @xmath , so that in that limit the dilogarithm vanishes. Next we
split the logarithm in the last term and write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first term gives zero once summed over in ( 3.100 ), while the
second term cancels against the @xmath term in ( 3.100 ). Leaving the
case of @xmath negative real to the reader, the final result is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this solution applies also for the case encountered in the
calculation of the three point function ( 3.57 ), when @xmath . Then the
terms containing @xmath cancel each other, so they can be dropped
altogether for the case of Eq. ( 3.57 ).

There is one more point worth mentioning regarding the expression (
3.105 ). One might think that problems could arise for @xmath negative
real or @xmath real as then one has to deal with the cuts in the
logarithm and the dilogarithmic function ^(§) ^(§) § Note that there
exists such a combination of parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in ( 3.62 ) that @xmath in ( 3.105 ) is negative real for some
@xmath , as can be seen from definition of @xmath ( 3.74 ), definition
of @xmath ( 3.76 ) and the expression for the four-point function ( 3.78
). . We use the prescription for the arguments lying exactly on the cuts
of the functions as described before Eq. ( 3.24 ) and after Eq. ( 3.33
). One could as well use a different prescription, with infinitesimal
parameter @xmath in ( 3.24 ), ( 3.33 ) taken to be negative, and with
appropriately adjusted @xmath and @xmath functions. It has been checked
numerically, that the result ( 3.105 ) does not change, if the
alternative prescription is used. Thus the result ( 3.105 ) is valid for
any complex @xmath , @xmath independent of the prescription used for the
arguments lying on the cut.

For the special case of @xmath real the result ( 3.105 ) simplifies
considerably. The @xmath term is then zero. Also the last term in (
3.105 ), that arises from the @xmath term in ( 3.100 ), then sums up to
zero. For @xmath real we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath as in ( 3.106 ).

Of special interest is the case of @xmath almost real, i.e., @xmath ,
where @xmath is the real part of @xmath and @xmath an infinitesimal (not
necessarily positive) parameter. One can of course still use the
solution ( 3.105 ). The problem is, however, that for both @xmath and
@xmath almost real one has to keep track of the relative sizes of the
infinitesimal imaginary parts. This complication can be avoided by the
following procedure. First we set @xmath in the second line of ( 3.99 )
equal to its real part. By doing this, the arguments of the logarithms
can cross the negative real axis, which is compensated by a new sum of
@xmath functions, @xmath . Then instead of ( 3.100 ) we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the first integral @xmath can be safely put equal to zero as the
resulting integrand has vanishing residue, with the logarithm in the
numerator being an analytic function in some neighbourhood of the pole
(since @xmath . The integral thus does not depend on how we avoid the
pole (i.e. @xmath can be positive, negative or zero). In the second
integral one has to keep the imaginary part of @xmath .

The final result for almost real @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where in the last logarithm @xmath is kept together with its
infinitesimal imaginary part.

## Chapter 4 Weak interactions in the effective theory approach

In this chapter we will briefly review the standard methods used in the
phenomenology of weak interactions, the operator product expansion (OPE)
and the renormalization group (RG) equations. These are used to arrive
at a set of local operators describing weak interactions at low
energies. At the end the factorization approximation, that is used to
evaluate hadronic matrix elements of the current-current local
operators, is described.

### 4.1 Operator Product Expansion

In this section we will briefly review the ideas behind the Operator
Product Expansion (OPE) and its application to weak interactions. The
original idea dates back to Wilson [ 92 ] , who conjectured that the
divergent part of a product of two operators could be described by a sum
of local operators @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coefficients @xmath contain the divergences. There are two
major advantages to the expansion as written above. From simple
dimensional analysis it immediately follows that if operators @xmath and
@xmath have dimensions @xmath and @xmath respectively (in terms of
mass), then @xmath with @xmath the dimension of operator @xmath . We
then expect the highest divergence in @xmath to be of the form @xmath to
the power @xmath . So only those operators @xmath with a small enough
dimensions @xmath are expected to have divergent coefficients and be
relevant in the @xmath limit. Since dimensions of operators grow with
the number of fields and with the number of derivatives on the fields
that they are constructed from, only a finite number of terms in ( 4.1 )
have to be retained. This discussion will be changed only slightly by
quantum effects, where anomalous dimensions come into play. The other
surprising thing about the OPE ( 4.1 ) is, that it is an operator
identity. It holds regardless of what the states it acts on are.

Let us note on passing that the perturbative proof of OPE has been given
by Zimmerman [ 93 ] , while a nonperturbative proof can be found in [ 56
] . The operator product expansion in general reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the time ordering operator.

The application of the OPE to weak interactions comes from the
observation that the distances at which weak interactions occur are set
by the mass of the intermediate @xmath and @xmath bosons, i.e., @xmath .
If one is interested in the processes at energy scales @xmath much
smaller than the weak scale, @xmath , or, in other words, in the
processes, that effectively occur at typical distances @xmath that are
much larger than @xmath , we can take the limit @xmath (or equivalently
@xmath ) and use the operator product expansion.

Let us formulate this in some more detail. We start from the charged
current part of the weak Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath are the rotated weak states, while @xmath , @xmath
are the @xmath vector boson fields, and @xmath is the weak isospin
coupling constant.

The scattering matrix @xmath to the first nonzero order in perturbation
theory for a process involving four quarks is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking as an example @xmath scattering process shown on Fig. 4.1 , the
tree level amplitude is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this process, there are two relevant scales. One is determined by the
momentum exchange @xmath , the other by the @xmath boson mass @xmath .
The effective size of the weak interaction region @xmath in ( 4.5 ) is
of the order @xmath and shrinks to a point when the limit @xmath is
taken. This limit corresponds to the limit @xmath , so that the @xmath
dependence in ( 4.6 ) can be neglected. It then follows immediately,
that the amplitude ( 4.6 ) can be obtained with an effective Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the definition of the Fermi constant @xmath has been used and
tentatively a local four-quark operator @xmath with a Wilson coefficient
@xmath has been defined. The important feature of the effective weak
Lagrangian ( 4.7 ) is that it is valid also for other final states,
mesons, baryons,... and not only for the free quarks for which it has
been calculated. As advertised before, this is one of the salient
features of the operator product expansion. The expansion in a series of
local operators is calculated using quark initial and final states, but
is then valid also for hadron initial and final states.

Actually, the effective Lagrangian ( 4.7 ) is valid only in the absence
of QCD interactions. Once these are taken into account, as shown on Fig.
4.1 , another four-quark operator appears in the OPE, @xmath , where
summation over color indices @xmath is understood. To arrive at this
operator, the following identity for the @xmath generators is used

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of colors, while @xmath , with @xmath the
Gell-Mann @xmath matrices, for which @xmath . The effective weak
Lagrangian for @xmath , @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient @xmath is proportional to @xmath , while @xmath is
nonzero already at tree level in the perturbative QCD expansion, as
discussed above.

If one is interested in the processes involving a slightly different
change of flavors, other operators can appear as well. For instance, if
the @xmath -quark in ( 4.9 ), ( 4.10 ) is replaced by a @xmath quark (or
vice versa), an additional set of diagrams, shown on Fig. 4.2 , is
possible at @xmath order and gives rise to the “penguin” operators
@xmath . The complete set of operators for @xmath , @xmath (neglecting
electroweak penguins) is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have suppressed the color indices in the currents of the form
@xmath , while the sum over @xmath runs over the active quark-flavors.
At the scale @xmath these are @xmath . In the following chapters, we
will be interested also in the final states involving photons and lepton
pairs. For these decays the set of the relevant operators is enlarged by
the magnetic penguins (corresponding to the diagrams on Figure 4.2 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the strong coupling constant, and the semileptonic operators
(corresponding to the diagrams on Fig. 4.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the chirality projection operators.

### 4.2 Renormalization Group and OPE

In the calculation of the Wilson coefficients typically expressions of
the form @xmath appear. Here @xmath is a typical scale at which the
processes occur. For processes involving the decay of @xmath -quark a
typical scale is of order @xmath GeV. The ratio of scales in the
argument of the logarithm is thus very large, of order @xmath , and
consequentially the factor @xmath is of order @xmath . Even though the
QCD coupling @xmath is not terribly large at the scales of around @xmath
GeV and could be used as a perturbative expansion parameter, the
appearance of large logarithms prevents the straightforward application
of perturbation theory. All large logarithms of the form @xmath have to
be summed up using renormalization group equations, if one wants to get
the correct leading order expression for the Wilson coefficients at
lower energy scales.

The RG evolution is done in several steps [ 35 ] . First the Wilson
coefficients @xmath are calculated at the weak scale @xmath to some
given order in the perturbative QCD expansion. For instance, at the
leading order @xmath , while @xmath (the coefficients @xmath will be
discussed later on). Then to the same order anomalous dimensions of the
four-quark operators in the effective theory are calculated (at the
leading order this is to the order @xmath ). These are then used to
evolve the Wilson coefficients to lower energy scales.

Let us first introduce the notion of the anomalous dimensions ^(*) ^(*)
* We will follow closely the introduction given in [ 35 ] . . To do so,
consider first an invariant amplitude @xmath for a given process. Assume
that the calculation of the invariant amplitude @xmath in the full
theory is known. This has to be the same to the value of @xmath obtained
in the effective theory, i.e., by using the operator product expanded
effective Lagrangian. Using LSZ theorem the amplitude for the four-quark
scattering is proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the
renormalization constant for the quark field @xmath , while @xmath is
the amputated Green function of the unrenormalized operator. However,
@xmath is still divergent, so that additional multiplicative operator
renormalization has to be introduced

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with operator @xmath a function of renormalized quark fields @xmath .
The renormalization constants @xmath are scale dependent, and so are the
renormalized operators @xmath . This dependence cancels in the product,
so that the bare operators @xmath are scale independent, as they should
be. The unrenormalized amputated Green function @xmath and renormalized
one @xmath are connected by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The renormalized amputated Green functions @xmath are now finite and can
be used to define the Wilson coefficients @xmath by matching the
calculation in the effective theory to the full theory calculation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dependence on the CKM matrix elements has not been written out
explicitly for the sake of simplicity. With @xmath known from the full
theory calculation, Eq. ( 4.16 ) then defines the values of the Wilson
coefficients @xmath .

It is illuminating to consider also a different point of view, closer to
the conventional renormalization in terms of the coupling constants.
Instead of absorbing the divergences in the renormalizations of
operators, these can be absorbed in the “coupling constants”, the Wilson
coefficients @xmath . The renormalized Wilson coefficients are thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the effective Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes that the four-quark operator is constructed from
the bare quark fields. The amplitude is then using Lagrangian ( 4.18 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality in ( 4.19 ) has been obtained using the
effective Lagrangian in the last line of ( 4.18 ) [ 35 ] . Note that the
divergences are absorbed by the @xmath part of the effective Lagrangian
( 4.18 ). Using ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.17 ) in ( 4.19 ) it immediately follows
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The renormalization constants of the operators are directly connected to
the renormalization constants of the Wilson coefficients.

The evolution of the Wilson coefficient is now easily determined.
Following the usual notation [ 35 ] , first the anomalous dimensions
matrix @xmath is introduced

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The RG equations for Wilson coefficients then immediately follow from
Eqs. ( 4.17 ), ( 4.20 ) and the fact that the bare Wilson coefficients
@xmath are scale independent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the evolution of the QCD coupling constant @xmath (in the @xmath
renormalization scheme)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the expansion of the beta functions @xmath and the
anomalous dimension matrix @xmath in terms of the strong coupling
constant

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while for the @xmath active flavors and @xmath colors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

the evolution equation ( 4.22 ) can be solved to any given order. Below
we will consider the solutions @xmath of ( 4.22 ) for the evolution
@xmath at the NLO. The form of the evolution matrices will, however, not
be written out explicitly. They can be found in [ 35 , 94 ] (see, e.g.,
Eqs. (3.92)-(3.98) of [ 35 ] ), where also the expressions for the
anomalous dimension matrices to next-to-leading order for a number of
processes can be found.

To get some flavor for the effects of the RGE, we show the leading order
RG evolution of a single operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strong coupling constant @xmath appearing in ( 4.27 ) is at the
two-loop order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the QCD scale (the value of which depends on the number
of active flavors). Using the precisely measured value of the strong
coupling constant at the @xmath boson mass, @xmath [ 72 ] one arrives at
@xmath MeV, while for @xmath with four active flavors the matching at
@xmath GeV gives @xmath MeV. The important observation about Eq. ( 4.27
) is that it contains all the terms of the form @xmath as has been
announced at the beginning of this section.

In general, the Wilson coefficients at lower scale are calculated
through the following steps [ 35 ] . First the Wilson coefficients
@xmath at weak scale are calculated by matching the effective theory
with five active flavors @xmath onto the full theory. Then the anomalous
dimensions @xmath are calculated in the effective theory with five
flavors. Using @xmath , Wilson coefficients are evolved down to the
scale of b-quark, obtaining @xmath . If one is interested in the
processes at lower scales, e.g at the charm quark scale, @xmath -quark
is integrated out as an effective degree of freedom. This is
accomplished by matching the effective theory with five flavors onto the
effective theory with four flavors. The remaining Wilson coefficients
are then evolved down to the charm scale using the anomalous dimension
matrices of the four-flavor effective theory. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the evolution matrices from the scale @xmath to the
scale @xmath in four and five-flavor effective theories respectively,
while @xmath is the threshold matrix that matches the two effective
theories at the scale @xmath .

Let us be more specific and discuss the case of @xmath , @xmath charm
decays in some more detail. The effective Lagrangian at the weak scale
@xmath is

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.30)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath are defined in ( 4.11 ), while @xmath are obtained through
the replacement @xmath from @xmath . The penguin and electromagnetic
operators @xmath , @xmath are defined in Eqs. ( 4.12 ), ( 4.13 ), while
the contributions of the electromagnetic penguins have been neglected as
they are suppressed by additional powers of @xmath in the processes
considered. In the last line of ( 4.30 ) the unitarity of the CKM matrix
has been used @xmath . Above, also the masses of @xmath quarks have been
neglected compared to the weak scale, so that the Wilson coefficients
@xmath are the same regardless of the flavor of down quark flowing in
the loop in the full theory (i.e. regardless of the CKM structure in
front of the parenthesis in ( 4.30 )). Thus the penguin operators do not
appear in the effective Lagrangian at the weak scale as long as the mass
of the @xmath -quark can be neglected compared to @xmath . This is in
contrast to the case of @xmath decays, where the up-type quarks flow in
the loops in the full theory. Since the top quark is very heavy, its
mass cannot be neglected in the loops. This induces penguin operators
already at the weak scale.

Regarding the RG evolution of the operators @xmath there are several
important things to note. First of all @xmath does not mix with other
operators due to chirality. Furthermore, it has vanishing anomalous
dimension, so that @xmath . Next, the dimension five operators @xmath do
not mix into the dimension six operators @xmath and @xmath . If one is
interested in these operators solely, the dimension five operators can
be dropped from the RG analysis. We will follow this procedure and
evaluate @xmath separately. Note also, that (i) @xmath operator does not
mix into the operators @xmath and (ii) the penguin operators @xmath do
not mix into the operators @xmath . One can thus consider the RG
evolution of the reduced operator basis @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , if
one is interested in smaller sets of the Wilson coefficients @xmath ,
@xmath , or @xmath , without introducing any error in the calculation.
Finally, it is convenient to introduce a rescaled operator @xmath , as
then the anomalous dimension depends only on the strong coupling, and
can be expanded as in ( 4.25 ). The calculation of the Wilson
coefficients then proceed as outlined above.

It is instructive to do the @xmath counting. At the leading order the RG
evolution sums terms of the form @xmath , which are numerically of the
order @xmath . At the leading order one thus has to start with the
initial values @xmath calculated at @xmath , and then evolve them using
the 1 loop anomalous dimensions (i.e. of order @xmath ) to get the order
@xmath values @xmath at lower scales. Going to higher orders, an
additional power of @xmath is added at each step. We thus have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expansion is valid also for @xmath multiplying the rescaled
operator @xmath . Since @xmath , then @xmath , so that the expansion is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus it is only the NLO term, that is of the order @xmath in the
calculation of the @xmath Wilson coefficient. It is then consistent in
the @xmath counting to work with @xmath determined at the NNLO and with
the other Wilson coefficients at the NLO (if one wishes to work to
@xmath ). Partial calculations at the NNLO became available in the
literature recently [ 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 ] , however, the three-loop
calculation of the NNLO dimensional matrix has still not been performed.
For this reason we will work in the following with both @xmath and
@xmath determined at the NLO.

We start a more quantitative discussion with the values of the Wilson
coefficients to the order @xmath at the weak scale. These are known for
quite some time and are in the naive dimensional regularization scheme
(NDR) ^(†) ^(†) † In the naive dimensional regularization the Dirac
matrices are assumed to obey @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath
dimensional metric tensor. The @xmath matrix is assumed to commute with
the Dirac matrices @xmath [ 94 ] . [ 100 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while @xmath . Since above @xmath the penguin operators do not enter the
effective Lagrangian due to the unitarity of the CKM matrix, the Wilson
coefficients @xmath in ( 4.30 ) can be evolved down to @xmath using the
@xmath anomalous dimension matrix (which can be found in [ 100 ] or in
Eq. (5.12) of [ 35 ] ). At the scale @xmath the @xmath -quark is
integrated out, i.e., the five-flavor effective theory ( 4.30 ) is
matched onto the four-flavor theory given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.34)
  -- -- -- --------

The penguin operator Wilson coefficients @xmath arise from the matching
procedure. This is the only nontrivial step in the application of the
formulas from the literature, as these were calculated for the down-type
quark transitions. We use the expressions for the @xmath decay [ 101 ] ,
where a similar procedure has to be done at the charm mass, with the
@xmath -quark being integrated out. For the gluonic penguins there are
no changes, when going to the case of @xmath -quark being integrated
out, while the semileptonic Wilson coefficient has to be multiplied by
@xmath . We then have (see Eqs. (6.20), (8.9) of [ 35 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined as in Eq. (8.9) of [ 35 ] , while the functions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

are again calculated in the NDR.

The sets of operators @xmath and @xmath from the first line of ( 4.34 )
are then evolved to the charm scale @xmath using the @xmath anomalous
dimension matrices @xmath for the four quark effective theory. The
@xmath LO and NLO submatrices involving the gluonic penguins are listed
in Eqs. (6.25), (6.26) of Ref. [ 35 ] and have been calculated in [ 102
, 103 ] . The remaining entries are listed in Eqs (8.11), (8.12) of Ref.
[ 35 ] and have been calculated in [ 101 ] .

In summary, the RG evolution from @xmath to @xmath for the @xmath
transitions is described by the following procedure

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath the @xmath and @xmath evolution matrices for five
and four active flavors respectively. They can be found in Eqs.
(3.93)-(3.98) of [ 35 ] . The @xmath are given in ( 4.35 )-( 4.38 ). The
values of the Wilson coefficients are listed in Table 4.1 . For a
comparison the values of the Wilson coefficients at the leading order
are given as well, but calculated with the two-loop evolution of the
strong coupling constant ( 4.28 ). The values are given for the central
value of @xmath MeV and @xmath GeV. The one sigma change in @xmath
corresponds to a change of about 10% in @xmath . We find a pronounced
scale dependence for the @xmath coefficient below 1.5 GeV, as a
consequence of the large cancelations in the RG evolution equations. The
situation is very similar to the case of the coefficient @xmath in
@xmath [ 35 ] . The LO value of @xmath even changes sign near @xmath
GeV, being positive for @xmath GeV.

Note, however, that the penguin operators are proportional to the @xmath
matrix elements ( 4.34 ). In the Wolfenstein parametrization ( 1.2 )
this is @xmath , which has to be compared to the CKM suppression of the
@xmath operators, @xmath , where @xmath . Penguin operators are thus
suppressed by @xmath in the @xmath transitions, even more so because the
penguin Wilson coefficients are of the order @xmath as shown in Table
4.1 (see also [ 104 , 105 ] ). The penguin operators in the @xmath
transitions are not relevant numerically, except in special observables
such as @xmath asymmetries [ 104 ] . They are thus neglected in the
following.

Note, that also the @xmath , @xmath operators are suppressed by a factor
@xmath compared to the @xmath operators. They will, however, be kept in
the analysis, because of possibly large non-SM contributions that will
be discussed in more detail in chapter 6 . In the SM they are, however,
negligible. Incidentally this also means, that the uncertainties in the
value of the @xmath coefficient, observed above, will not propagate into
the decay rates.

It is interesting to compare the @xmath transition discussed above with
the @xmath , @xmath transition. The relevant effective Lagrangian at the
@xmath scale is [ 35 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The CKM factors are here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Because of this CKM
structure, the penguin operators are the dominant operators in the
charmless @xmath decays, quite contrary to the case of the @xmath
transition discussed above.

Let us now conclude the discussion of the @xmath transitions by turning
to the magnetic penguin operator @xmath and the semileptonic operator
@xmath . The value of the @xmath Wilson coefficient is obtained
following the same procedure as outlined in Eqs. ( 4.41 )-( 4.43 ),
using the operator basis @xmath . The major difference compared to the
case of RG evolution with the @xmath operator is, that the leading order
mixing of the operators @xmath with the operators @xmath vanishes. It is
only at the two-loop level, that the anomalous dimension matrix has
nonzero values mixing @xmath into @xmath . The expansion of @xmath in
powers of @xmath then begins at the order @xmath , contrary to the case
of @xmath ( 4.32 ). The factor @xmath in @xmath also insures that the
expansion of @xmath in ( 4.25 ) is unchanged, with the difference, that
@xmath receive contributions from the two-loop calculation. Since the
two-loop results are scheme dependent, so is @xmath . It is then
customary to introduce the effective anomalous dimension matrix @xmath [
106 ] , which is scheme independent, as is the case for the leading
order results. Using the LO anomalous dimension matrix @xmath , the NLO
evolution for @xmath , @xmath GeV, the result is (see also [ 107 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is instructive to compare the values of @xmath Wilson coefficients
obtained from the RG analysis with the invariant amplitudes that one
would get from the full electroweak theory, but by neglecting the QCD
interactions (i.e. by evaluating the diagrams of Fig. 4.3 ). The
invariant amplitudes of the QCD neglected calculation have the same
structure as is obtained from the effective Lagrangian ( 4.54 ) when
used at tree level . The parameters of the invariant amplitudes obtained
by neglecting the QCD contributions will be denoted by @xmath (with IL
standing for Inami, Lim [ 108 ] ). It is important to stress that these
are not the Wilson coefficients , as they only parametrize the invariant
amplitudes. However, based on the (unproved) expectations, that @xmath
is not much changed by the QCD corrections, @xmath has been often used
in the literature as an estimate for @xmath [ 109 , 110 ] .

The values of the parameters @xmath are easily obtained from the
calculation of Ref. [ 108 ] for the @xmath transitions. Following [ 111
] we find, that the coefficients are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while @xmath is connected to the weak isospin of the
quarks in the loops of Fig. 4.3 and @xmath is their charge. For the
up-type quarks in the loops, as is the case in the @xmath transition, we
have @xmath , @xmath . For the case of the @xmath transition, that we
are interested in, @xmath , @xmath , as then the down-type quarks appear
as the intermediate states in the loops. @xmath and @xmath are functions
of the CKM matrix elements and the masses of the quarks running in the
loops, @xmath . The functions @xmath and @xmath have been determined by
Inami and Lim [ 108 ] . Using their definitions one arrives at

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , the function @xmath is defined in Eq. (2.14) of Ref. [
108 ] , the function @xmath in Eq. (2.7) of Ref. [ 108 ] , while @xmath
is defined in Eq. (B.2) of Ref. [ 108 ] (note also the errata), the
latter function being changed slightly, as now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

(i.e. the last two lines of Eq. (B.2) in Ref. [ 108 ] are to be
multiplied with @xmath ).

The important thing to note is, that the variable @xmath is very small
for @xmath . The functions @xmath and @xmath are proportional to @xmath
and are thus very small. The function @xmath , on the other hand, is to
the leading order @xmath which is of the order @xmath . We thus arrive
at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the value @xmath [ 72 ] has been used. The value @xmath should be
compared with @xmath . The value of the Wilson coefficient is four
magnitudes smaller than the corresponding parameter obtained without RG
resummation and by neglecting QCD interactions! The reason for this
discrepancy lies in the appearance of large logarithms @xmath in the
perturbative calculation. These have to be resummed using RG. Also, in
the calculation very small scales @xmath appear. Neglecting QCD effects,
as in the calculation outlined above, is thus not justified. Let us
note, however, that the logarithm appearing in ( 4.51 ) will be
reproduced in the calculation of the inclusive modes @xmath (cf. section
6.3 ), as is expected, if one uses mass-independent renormalization (see
appendix C of [ 102 ] ). In the calculation of the inclusive mode at the
quark level, the logarithm appears from the application of the @xmath
operators at the one-loop level. This contribution then dominates the
rate due to the @xmath suppression of the @xmath operator. A similar
situation occurs in the calculation of the exclusive modes, where
inclusions of the @xmath operators also dominate the rate as will be
discussed in more detail in the following chapters.

Similarly one could determine the value of @xmath at the weak scale,
arriving at the leading order expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath this leads to the value @xmath , which is an order of
magnitude smaller than the RG improved Wilson coefficient @xmath .
Namely, the RG evolution lifts the hard GIM mechanism of @xmath and
replaces it with the logarithmic dependence on the scales @xmath
involved in the RG evolution. Since in the RGE the masses @xmath in the
QCD loops are neglected, the suppression due to the small value of
@xmath is still present. Again, the inclusive rate @xmath is dominated
by the inclusion of operators @xmath at one-loop level.

Finally, the leading order expression in terms of @xmath for the @xmath
coefficient ( 4.48 ), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Wolfenstein CKM parameters @xmath and the quark masses @xmath
MeV, @xmath MeV, @xmath GeV, we arrive at @xmath . Note that (i) if the
masses of @xmath quarks can be neglected compared to @xmath , then
@xmath and, that then (ii) the low energy QCD and QED interactions
cannot induce a nonzero value of the @xmath Wilson coefficient. It is
thus consistent with the assumptions of the OPE to set @xmath , which
will be done in the following.

For the sake of completeness we write down at the end the effective
Lagrangian of the weak interactions induced at the scales @xmath ,
containing the operators relevant for the processes, that will be
considered in chapters 5 , 6

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath the color indices written out explicitly in @xmath
, while the summation over the repeated indices is understood. In ( 4.54
) also the operators @xmath have been introduced. The @xmath operator is
@xmath suppressed compared to the @xmath operator in the SM and is
usually neglected. The @xmath operators do not arise from the SM
interactions. They will be relevant, however, for the discussion of the
SM extensions. In the SM calculation we set @xmath , while the other
Wilson coefficients are listed in Table 4.1 and Eq. ( 4.45 ).

### 4.3 Factorization approximation

As discussed in the previous section, the weak interactions can be
described at low energies by means of an effective Lagrangian obtained
through the operator product expansion and the renormalization group
evolution. The effective Lagrangian for the Cabibbo allowed transitions
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second line has been obtained using the Fierz transformation,
@xmath denote color indices as before, and are written out explicitly
only in the first term of ( 4.56 ). The Wilson coefficients contain
contributions from hard gluon exchanges and can be calculated
perturbatively as described in the previous section. They are scale and
at the NLO also renormalization scheme dependent. This dependence is
canceled by the scale and renormalization scheme dependence of the local
four-quark operators @xmath . The matrix elements in the hadronic weak
transitions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

are thus scale and scheme independent, as they should be. The
nonperturbative nature of these transitions is hidden in the matrix
elements @xmath between hadronic final and initial states. Evaluation of
these elements is a very hard problem and lies at the core of all the
difficulties connected with the weak transitions between hadronic
states. In principle the only exact way to estimate them is to calculate
them on lattice. However the problem is so involved, especially for the
heavy-to-light hadron transitions, that even the “exact” calculations on
lattice have to resort to a number of approximations. One of them, the
quenching approximation, will be discussed later on, in chapter 7 . The
other option is to try to use some phenomenologically or theoretically
motivated approximation to calculate the weak elements in question.

The factorization approximation is a very simple but extremely useful
and quite successful approximation [ 112 ] . In this approach the
currents appearing in the operators @xmath are assumed to factor. Each
of the currents is proportional to interpolating stable or quasistable
hadronic fields. The approximation comes in, when these interpolating
full hadronic fields are approximated in one or both of the currents by
an asymptotically free hadronic field, i.e., by the “in” and “out”
fields. The effective interaction ( 4.56 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the hadronized @xmath currents. For instance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the dots representing other hadronic fields with the same quantum
numbers. In the approach adopted here, the hadronized current containing
charm quark is obtained using the heavy quark symmetry and is given in (
2.47 ) plus terms coming from fields with the same quantum numbers. The
effective Wilson coefficients @xmath in ( 4.58 ) are in principle
unknown coefficients that have to be estimated from the experimental
data. For instance, for the case of the @xmath meson two-body
nonleptonic decays @xmath , the decay amplitudes in the (naive)
factorization approximation read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is then compared with the experimental data on the Cabibbo allowed
decays @xmath , arriving at the values @xmath , @xmath [ 112 , 113 ] .
In this analysis the final state interactions have to be taken into
account. The naive factorization approximation as explained above, is
taken to be valid only in the weak vertex, for the so called bare
amplitudes. The outgoing hadronic states then interact strongly, which
can lead to elastic and inelastic rescattering effects. Because @xmath
mesons lie close to the resonance region, a number of @xmath and @xmath
channel resonances can in principle contribute. These effects are
especially important for the @xmath , @xmath states because of the
presence of @xmath scalar meson resonance @xmath (for more details see [
104 , 114 , 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 ] , for the
final state interactions in the @xmath decays see also [ 123 , 124 , 125
] and for the doubly Cabibbo suppressed @xmath decays [ 126 ] ).

On the other hand, starting from the weak Lagrangian ( 4.56 ) one can
expect that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see this, consider for instance the @xmath operator in ( 4.56 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where first Fierz transformation and then the @xmath completeness
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

have been used (cf. ( 4.8 )). The weak Lagrangian 4.56 can thus be
written in two equivalent ways

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

the products of two colored currents. In the factorization approximation
these are then expected to give vanishing contributions between the
colorless hadronic states, leading to the naive estimates for the @xmath
effective Wilson coefficients as given in ( 4.61 ). Using the NLO values
for the Wilson coefficients @xmath , @xmath (see Table 4.1 and also Ref.
[ 127 ] ), where the naive dimensional regularization has been used, one
arrives at @xmath and @xmath . The value of @xmath is phenomenologically
unacceptable. One gets a phenomenologically much more satisfactory
description in the @xmath limit, where the @xmath terms are dropped.
Then @xmath and @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Some arguments for this modified approach to the factorization can be
given on the theoretical side, either in the @xmath expansion [ 128 ] or
by using the QCD sum rules [ 129 , 130 , 131 ] , however the situation
is not yet completely clear. Nevertheless, given the simplicity of the
approach and its relative phenomenological success, we will use in the
following the factorized weak Lagrangian with the effective Wilson
coefficients given in ( 4.66 ). The effective Lagrangian for the Cabibbo
once suppressed decays is thus

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.67)
  -- -- -- --------

with the effective Wilson coefficients @xmath given in ( 4.66 ).
Possible penguin contributions have been neglected as explained in the
previous section. Note also, that the @xmath effective Wilson
coefficients obtained from @xmath in ( 4.61 ) (with @xmath terms
dropped) are scale and scheme dependent. The hadronized operators
appearing in ( 4.67 ) on the other hand are not. At the end one thus
ends up with the matrix elements, and consequentially observables such
as decay widths, that are scale and scheme dependent, which is a serious
theoretical downsize of the approach. This problem has been discussed in
detail in Ref. [ 127 ] . It can be, however, circumvented entirely, if
one views the effective coefficients ( 4.66 ) as phenomenologically
determined parameters, which are then of course scale and scheme
independent.

The idea of factorization has recently received a lot of attention due
to the theoretical work of two groups, the approach of the QCD
factorization [ 132 , 133 , 134 ] and the pQCD approach [ 135 , 136 ,
137 , 138 , 139 ] . The underlying physical picture of these approaches
is the idea of color transparency [ 140 , 141 , 142 ] , which is
effective in the heavy meson decays with energetic final decay products.
As an example consider the case of @xmath . The fast moving final mesons
produced by the point-like source (the local operators in the OPE
expansion) decouple from the soft QCD interactions. Contributions of the
soft gluons are suppressed by @xmath . The QCD factorization approach
gives rigorous results valid in the heavy quark limit to the leading
power in @xmath , but to all orders in the perturbation theory. These
ideas have been further developed for the heavy-to-heavy transitions in
[ 143 ] . The application of the above formalism is, however, not
possible for the @xmath meson nonleptonic decays as here the energy
release is much smaller than in the case of @xmath mesons. Nevertheless,
the factorization procedure has been applied to the nonleptonic @xmath
decays in a phenomenologically successful way as discussed above. In
this sense nonleptonic @xmath decays are halfway between @xmath and
@xmath nonleptonic decays. Namely, it is well known that the
factorization does not work in the nonleptonic @xmath decays [ 144 , 145
, 146 , 147 ] .

## Chapter 5 Nonfactorizable contributions to the decay mode @xmath

The decay mechanism of the weak nonleptonic @xmath decays has motivated
numerous studies, e.g., [ 112 , 148 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 , 154
] . For the nonleptonic decays of @xmath mesons, as well as for @xmath
’s and @xmath ’s, the factorization hypothesis explained in section 4.3
has commonly been used. In this section we discuss nonfactorizable
contributions to @xmath decays, in particular in the decay mode @xmath .
This decay mode has been advertised as an interesting probe of the
nonperturbative physics in weak decays long time ago [ 148 ] .
Additional motivation to consider this decay mode comes from the recent
experimental searches for the CP violating asymmetry in @xmath [ 155 ] .

In @xmath decays the factorization hypothesis works reasonably well, if
one is interested in an order of magnitude estimate, but it does not
reproduce experimental data completely. For example, a naive application
of the factorization in the charm decays leads to the rates for the
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath decays which are too strongly
suppressed (see, e.g., [ 124 , 156 , 157 , 104 ] ). Consideration of
either the final state interactions through resonant or nonresonant
rescattering and/or of other nonfactorizable mechanisms is thus
mandatory. Moreover, and this is the important point of the present
chapter, in @xmath a naive application of factorization misses
completely, predicting a vanishing branching ratio, in contrast with the
experimental situation.

To see this, note that at tree level the @xmath decay might occur
through two annihilation diagrams [ 112 ] with either @xmath or @xmath
transition. However, they cancel each other by the GIM mechanism.
Moreover, in the factorization limit, the amplitude is proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In many of the studies (e.g. [ 148 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 153 ] ) this
decay has been understood as a result of the final state interactions
(FSI). In the analysis of Ref. [ 148 ] the rescattering mechanism
included @xmath and @xmath states leading to a branching ratio @xmath
@xmath . Experimental data on the other hand are [ 72 ] @xmath and
@xmath . A recent investigation of the @xmath decay mode performed in [
149 ] has focused on the @xmath channel and @xmath channel one particle
exchange contributions. The @xmath channel contribution has been taken
into account through a poorly known scalar meson @xmath and was found to
be very small, while the one particle @xmath -exchanges yielded higher
contributions, with pion exchange being the highest. In the approach of
[ 154 ] the @xmath decay was realized through the scalar glueball or
glue-rich scalar meson.

We will adopt the approach of the effective Lagrangians as explained in
chapter 2 . The subsequent analysis has been published in [ 46 , 45 ] .
Because the @xmath (factorizable) contribution is zero ( 5.1 ), we will
try to approach to the @xmath decay systematically to @xmath . We do
this by including first the nonfactorizable contributions coming from
the chiral loops. In the weak vertex the factorization hypothesis will
be used, leading to the weak transitions of the type @xmath and @xmath
(see Figs. 5.1 - 5.4 ). In this sense the approach is similar to the
factorization hypothesis as put forward in Ref. [ 112 ] for the Cabibbo
allowed @xmath decays. In Ref. [ 112 ] factorization was assumed for the
weak vertex, leading to the bare amplitudes, that are then modified by
the FSI. The final state interactions correspond to the diagram @xmath
on Figure 5.4 . A number of additional chiral loop diagrams will be
considered in this approach. In addition, we consider the gluon
condensate contributions, also of @xmath , which we calculate within the
Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Model (HL @xmath QM) framework. The HL @xmath
QM is an extension of the effective Lagrangian approach of chapter 2 ,
as it models also the interactions of light pseudoscalars and heavy
mesons with quarks. By integrating out the quark degrees of freedom one
is able to reproduce the effective Lagrangians of chapter 2 . A brief
introduction to the HL @xmath QM will be given in section 5.2 , while a
more detailed description can be found in [ 158 ] .

We emphasize that one cannot a priori expect for the chiral expansion to
work to a good precision in the process @xmath , because the energy
release is @xmath MeV and hence @xmath (for @xmath GeV) is close to
unity. However, the leading contributions, that we will consider, do
turn out to describe the data reasonably well. The next to leading
@xmath terms might be almost of the same order of magnitude compared to
the @xmath terms, with a weak suppression of the order @xmath . On the
other hand, the inclusion of @xmath order in this framework is not
straightforward. Before doing loop calculations at that order, one has
to find a reliable framework to include light resonances @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , etc. Usually the light resonances are treated using
hidden gauge symmetry (see, e.g., [ 44 ] ). This is not easily
reconciled with the chiral perturbation theory. Even if the light
resonances were included in the effective Lagrangian, one would face the
problem of determining their couplings to the rest of the heavy and
light states. The poorly known scalar resonances would introduce a
rather large uncertainty [ 149 ] . Right now, the consistent calculation
of this or higher orders does not seem to be possible. Still, the
amplitude of the @xmath decay, calculated within our framework to the
order @xmath turns out to be in agreement with the experimental result.
Note also, that @xmath terms have been omitted in the calculation.

### 5.1 Chiral loop contributions

As discussed above, in the factorization limit there are no
contributions to the @xmath decay at tree level ( 5.1 ). The observation
of a partial decay width @xmath on the other hand implies, that we can
expect sizable contributions at the one loop level. Calculations to one
loop in the framework of combined chiral perturbation theory and heavy
quark symmetry, the Heavy Hadron Chiral Perturbation Theory (HH @xmath
PT), involve a construction of the most general effective Lagrangian,
that has the correct symmetry properties, in order to make the
renormalization work. This construction together with the chiral
counting has been explained in chapter 2 .

The weak Lagrangian relevant for the @xmath decay is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

while @xmath and @xmath are defined in ( 4.55a ), and consist of a
product of two color-singlet currents. The operators @xmath in the weak
vertex will be evaluated using factorization. The nonfactorizable
contributions will then arise from the chiral loops shown on Figs. 5.1 -
5.4 . The other nonfactorizable contributions come from the operators
with the colored currents @xmath , which will be evaluated in the next
section using chiral quark model. For convenience we define @xmath and
@xmath , with @xmath the number of colors, while the numerical values
are given using @xmath calculated at @xmath in the NDR (cf. footnote to
the text above ( 4.33 )). Note, that these are not the same as the
phenomenologically motivated values of @xmath ( 4.66 ) of the
factorization approximation, where the contributions of the @xmath
operators in the weak vertex are then neglected. On the contrary, we do
take the contributions of colored currents into account, and therefore
use the @xmath values of Eq. ( 4.61 ).

The loop diagrams are divergent and have to be regulated. We work both
in the strict @xmath renormalization scheme, where we put @xmath in the
loop calculations as well as in the Gasser-Leutwyler (GL)
renormalization scheme @xmath . The first choice is the same as the one
made by Stewart in [ 67 ] , while the other was made by the authors of
Ref. [ 44 ] . The renormalization prescription determines the
appropriate renormalization of couplings in the @xmath effective
Lagrangian as discussed in section 2.5 . Using two prescriptions makes
possible to estimate the size of the counterterms, that are otherwise
neglected. Further, we consider only contributions coming from the
@xmath part of the weak Lagrangian, as @xmath is suppressed compared to
@xmath ( 4.66 )(see also [ 127 ] ).

Writing down the most general one loop graphs with two outgoing
Goldstone bosons, @xmath and @xmath , one arrives at 26 Feynman
diagrams. A number of these give zero contributions or are suppressed
and are shown on Figures 5.1 , 5.2 , 5.3 . The graphs that do contribute
to the @xmath decay are shown on Fig. 5.4 . Note that the factorizable
loops, which renormalize vertices are omitted, as they contribute only
at higher order in the chiral expansion (they do appear, however, in the
loop determination of the @xmath coupling related to @xmath . For more
details see section 2.5 .)

To shorten the notation, the common factors in the @xmath matrix have
been factored out, so that the amplitude is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the sum of the amplitudes corresponding to the graphs on
Fig. 5.4 . In ( 5.4 ) we have also neglected the contributions of order
@xmath , so that we use @xmath . The partial decay width for the decay
@xmath is then

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath three-momentum in the @xmath rest frame

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The nonzero amplitudes corresponding to the graphs on Fig. 5.4 are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7)
     @xmath               (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
     @xmath               (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Note that @xmath are of the order
@xmath , a consequence of relatively high momenta flowing in the loops
of graphs @xmath . The one and two point functions @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath appearing in the amplitudes ( 5.7 )-( 5.10 ) were defined in
section 3.1 . Explicit expressions can be found in section 3.4 and in
appendix A .

It should be noted that in Eqs. ( 5.7 )-( 5.10 ) all the expressions
vanish in the exact @xmath limit, where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .
This shows explicitly, that the @xmath decay mode is a manifestation of
the @xmath breaking effects (as already noted by H. Lipkin [ 150 ] , if
@xmath symmetry is exact, then @xmath ).

The amplitudes shown on Figs. 5.1 , 5.2 , 5.3 are either exactly zero or
are suppressed by powers of @xmath and @xmath . The amplitudes
corresponding to the diagrams on Figs. 5.1 , 5.2 are zero due to
symmetry reasons (because there are no such couplings in the heavy
sector chiral Lagrangian ( 2.43 ), or because of Lorentz covariance),
while the amplitudes @xmath , @xmath and @xmath shown on Fig. 5.3 are
power suppressed. An analysis of the loop integrals leads to the
conclusion that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is a typical
loop momentum less than @xmath , so that the suppression need not be
substantial. However, a direct evaluation of the amplitude @xmath shows,
that it is about 10 times smaller than @xmath . Therefore, in our
numerical calculation we neglect contributions of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Numerical results are listed in Table 5.1 , section 5.3 .

### 5.2 The nonfactorizable color-current contributions

In this section we will estimate the contributions of @xmath operators
in the weak Lagrangian ( 5.2 ). In the factorization limit the product
of colored currents does not contribute at the meson level, as mesons
are color singlet objects. At quark level, however, the colored currents
can contribute through the gluon condensate. In order to estimate this
contribution, we have to establish the connection between the underlying
quark-gluon dynamics and the meson level picture. This is done through
the use of the Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Model (HL @xmath QM).

#### 5.2.1 The Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Model

In the @xmath QM [ 37 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 163 ] , the light quarks
( @xmath ) couple to the would-be Goldstone octet mesons ( @xmath ) in a
chiral invariant way. All effects are in principle calculable in terms
of physical quantities and a few model dependent parameters, the quark
condensate, the gluon condensate and the constituent quark mass [ 146 ,
164 , 165 ] . Among many approaches the Chiral Quark Model ( @xmath QM)
[ 164 ] was shown to be able to accommodate the intriguing @xmath rule
in the @xmath decays, as well as the CP violating parameters, by
systematic involvement of the soft gluon emission forming gluon
condensates and chiral loops at the order @xmath [ 146 ] . Also, in the
“generalized factorization” it was shown [ 147 ] , that the inclusion of
gluon condensates is important in order to understand the @xmath rule in
the @xmath decays.

As the @xmath QM approach successfully indicated the main mechanisms in
the @xmath decays, it seems worthwhile to investigate the decays of
charm mesons within a similar framework. In the case of @xmath meson
decays one has to extend the ideas of the @xmath QM to the sector
involving a heavy quark ( @xmath ) using the chiral symmetry of the
light degrees of freedom as well as the heavy quark symmetry. This leads
to the formulation of the Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Models (HL @xmath QM)
[ 158 , 166 , 167 , 168 , 169 ] .

The Lagrangian of the HL @xmath QM is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the leading order Lagrangian of the heavy quark effective theory [ 42
] (cf. Eq. ( 2.33 )), with @xmath the heavy quark velocity and @xmath
the covariant derivative containing gluon field. The chiral quark model
Lagrangian @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In comparison to the usual QCD Lagrangian ( 2.14 ), the chiral quark
model has an additional term proportional to the constituent quark mass
@xmath . This is taken to be of the order @xmath MeV. As in the
discussion of the chiral perturbation theory in section 2.2 , the
Goldstone boson degrees of freedom are factored out from the quark
fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a vector of quark fields. The @xmath QM Lagrangian is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the diagonal matrix of quark masses and @xmath the chiral
projection operators. The vector and the axial vector currents @xmath
and @xmath are defined in ( 2.24 ).

In the heavy-light case, the generalization of the meson-quark
interactions in the pure light sector @xmath QM is given by the
following @xmath invariant Lagrangian [ 158 , 166 , 167 , 168 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the heavy meson field ( 2.38 ). The dependence on
heavy-quark velocity @xmath is denoted explicitly, while @xmath is the
flavor index. The unknown constant @xmath can be related to constants
@xmath , @xmath of HH @xmath PT as described below (cf. Eqs. ( 5.23 )-(
5.27 )).

The weak currents have the usual form, except that the Goldstone bosons
are factored out. The weak current with two light quarks is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The weak current with one heavy quark is as given by HQET [ 42 ] ,
except that as before, the Goldstone bosons are factored out

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath are determined from the QCD renormalization for
@xmath . However, for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . When quark fields
will be integrated out, this will lead to the leading order term of the
current ( 2.47 ).

#### 5.2.2 Estimate of the color-current contributions

We are now able to outline the strategy used in [ 45 ] to estimate the
contribution of the nonfactorizable colored currents to @xmath . We will
not discuss all the details, for which we refer the reader to [ 45 , 158
] . The key observation is, that once the quark degrees of freedom are
integrated out, one has to end up with the most general effective
Lagrangian containing the meson fields, i.e., the HH @xmath PT
Lagrangian ( 5.11 ). By integrating out the quark fields one can thus
(i) connect the unknown couplings @xmath , @xmath in ( 5.11 ) to the
constants of the HH @xmath PT, that are fixed from the experiment, (ii)
calculate (in a model dependent way) the higher order constants of the
HH @xmath PT, (iii) relate the constants of the HH @xmath PT to each
other. For instance, the lowest order chiral Lagrangian in the light
pseudoscalar sector ( 2.28 ) can be obtained by coupling two axial
fields to a quark loop using the Lagrangian in Eq. ( 5.15 ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.20)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , and the trace is both in flavor and Dirac spaces. The
result on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 5.20 ) is the standard form of
the lowest order chiral Lagrangian ( 2.28 ), as can easily be seen by
using the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly one obtains the lowest order @xmath strong chiral Lagrangian (
2.43 ) in the heavy sector.

In a similar way, i.e., by integrating out the quark fields, we can
dress-up the quark weak currents with mesonic fields. This has been
called the process of bosonization in [ 45 ] . Let us consider the
bosonization of the light weak current. The lowest order term @xmath is
obtained, when the vertex @xmath from ( 5.18 ) and the axial vertex (
@xmath ) from ( 5.15 ) are combined with the quark loops (see Fig. 5.6
):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This coincides with ( 2.30 ) when ( 5.21 ) is used.

Note that the proportionality factors in ( 5.20 ), ( 5.22 ) contain
divergent integrals. These can be regulated in different ways, but in
this context they are treated as free parameters. They are used to
relate different model parameters and chiral Lagrangian constants to
each other. For instance to get a leading order estimate of coupling
@xmath , one uses the self-energy diagrams of heavy mesons and
light-pseudoscalars. A logarithmically divergent integral is contained
in both calculations and is used to relate @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the quadratic divergence contained in the loop integral of
the diagram in Fig. 5.8 (left) is related to the quark condensate of the
light quark, which is also quadratically divergent. To the leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.24 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which for the values @xmath = 200 MeV, @xmath = 131 MeV and @xmath =
(-240MeV @xmath gives @xmath in agreement with the values for @xmath
cited in section 2.5 . The fact that ( 5.25 ) works well numerically,
gives some support to the leading order estimates in ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.24
). These relations are slightly modified, when other contributions such
as soft gluon emission are taken into account [ 158 ] . In the following
we will, however, use the simple relations ( 5.23 ) - ( 5.25 ). For the
future reference we define the ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.25 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This then gives the approximate value of the unknown coupling @xmath (
5.17 ), ( 5.26 ), that will be needed in Eqs. ( 5.30 ) and ( 5.31 )
below.

Finally, we switch to the estimation of the nonfactorizable contribution
of the colored currents in ( 5.25 ). First the light and heavy-to-light
colored currents are bosonized in a very similar way to the light
current ( 5.22 ). To get a nonzero contribution one has to work in a
gluonic background. The bosonization of the colored light current is
depicted on Fig. 5.7 , while the bosonization of the heavy-light colored
current is shown on Fig. 5.8 (right). In the calculation gluons are
first treated as external fields. When the product of the two colored
currents is taken at the end (see Fig. 5.9 ), the external gluons are
assumed to contribute to the gluon condensate

Details of the calculation can be found in [ 45 ] , while here we write
down only the final results. We find for the nonfactorizable gluon
condensate contribution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are numerical factors that come from integration, @xmath ,
@xmath are functions of the light-pseudoscalar field and correspond to
the light current Eq. ( 5.18 ), @xmath is the @xmath meson field, with
the last term corresponding to the heavy current ( 2.47 ), while @xmath
is the gluon condensate, obtained by the prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding functions @xmath , @xmath to the lowest order to get the
@xmath amplitude, one finds that they contain terms proportional to
@xmath . Unlike in the factorization approximation ( 5.1 ), the
effective Lagrangian ( 5.28 ) contains terms that do not vanish once
they are contracted with @xmath , where @xmath . They will give a
nonfactorizable contribution to the @xmath decay, proportional to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath is defined in ( 5.26 ) and is estimated to be @xmath .

It should be noted, that in principle other terms than the one in ( 5.28
) could contribute. There is one possible term where the field @xmath
inserted in Fig. 5.7 may instead be attached to the light quark line in
the diagram of Fig. 5.8 (right). However, this term will not give
contributions to @xmath . Another possible term could arise by attaching
the field @xmath to the light quark line in Fig. 5.8 (right) instead of
attaching it to the quark lines on Fig. 5.7 . This term is identically
zero.

In the language of the chiral perturbation theory, the term ( 5.28 ) can
be interpreted as a counterterm. To be more specific, the (divergent
part of the) counterterm has the Lorentz and flavor structure of the
second line of ( 5.28 ) and is multiplied with a (divergent) coefficient
adjusted to cancel the loop divergences obtained in section 5.1 .

### 5.3 Results

In the numerical evaluation of the chiral loop contributions we use the
values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that were obtained in section 2.5
and are given in Table 2.1 . We present results both for the @xmath (
@xmath ) and for the ( @xmath ) renormalization prescriptions. The
difference between the two predictions reflects the relative importance
of the counterterms, that were neglected in our approach. We put
everywhere @xmath @xmath . For the effective Wilson coefficients @xmath
, we use the value @xmath calculated at the scale @xmath , while @xmath
is neglected as discussed at the beginning of section 5.1 . ^(*) ^(*) *
Even if the “new factorization” values ( 4.66 ) had been used, the
@xmath part of weak interaction would be suppressed by a factor of
@xmath compared to the @xmath one. We present the numerical results ^(†)
^(†) † Note that the numerical results differ somewhat from [ 46 , 45 ]
, as slightly different values for @xmath , @xmath couplings have been
used. for the nonzero one chiral loop amplitudes in Table 5.1 .

The imaginary part of the amplitude comes from the @xmath graph, when
the @xmath ’s or the @xmath ’s in the loops are on-shell. All other
graphs contribute only to the real part of the amplitude. The imaginary
part of the amplitude is scale and scheme independent to the first order
in the chiral expansion ^(‡) ^(‡) ‡ The imaginary parts given in Table
5.1 are not the same because of slightly different values of @xmath
couplings in the two schemes. The difference is obviously of higher
order in the chiral expansion . This amplitude is also obtainable from
unitarity considerations, and is valid beyond the chiral loop expansion.
We also mention, that the rescattering contribution, considered in [ 104
, 114 , 148 ] , is the same contribution, as the one we calculate from
graphs on Fig. 5.5 .

In order to cancel the divergences one has to construct counterterms. In
the framework of the HL @xmath QM they can be calculated model
dependently, as discussed at the end of section 5.2 . In the effective
Lagrangian approach they are taken to be free parameters, while the form
of the terms is determined by the symmetry arguments. We estimated the
size of the counterterms by using two renormalization prescriptions. The
difference between the two indicates that the contributions coming from
the counterterms can be substantial. However, the values one obtains by
considering the chiral loop contributions solely, are in fair agreement
with the experimental data.

The final expression for the nonfactorizable contribution of the
color-currents is given in Eq. ( 5.30 ). Using the values [ 146 ] @xmath
, @xmath MeV, and @xmath 150  MeV, we obtain the numerical value:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is comparable in size to the chiral loop contributions in Table (
5.1 ).

Adding both the chiral loops and the gluon condensate ( 5.32 )
contributions, we obtain the total amplitude to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in terms of the branching ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the estimated uncertainties reflect the uncertainties in the
couplings @xmath . These results should be compared with the
experimental value [ 72 ] @xmath .

Note that, as described above, in the calculation of @xmath we have
neglected the order @xmath counterterms, as the entire set cannot be
fixed from experiment (see discussion in section 2.5 ). The counterterms
would absorb the leading scheme dependence of the final result ( 5.34 ).
In other words, the scheme dependence of the final result ( 5.34 )
indicates the sizes of counterterm contributions to the decay. These are
as large as the chiral-loop contributions. This is not surprising and is
similar to the case of the chiral corrections to the @xmath decay
constant. Nonetheless, the important notion is, that the chiral loop
contributions do lie in the right ballpark.

There are also other possible contributions to the decay mode @xmath ,
apart from the ones discussed above. For instance, around the charm
mesons mass region there are many resonances. One might think that their
contribution will appear in this decay mode, either as scalar resonance
exchange [ 149 ] or as @xmath exchanges [ 149 , 153 , 104 , 114 ] .
Within our framework they would appear as the next order contribution in
the chiral expansion. This is, however, beyond the present scope of our
investigations. It is interesting to point out that the effects we
calculate, both from chiral loops and from the gluon condensate, are
results of the @xmath flavor symmetry breaking. In the limit of exact
symmetry both contributions will disappear.

We can summarize that we indicate the leading nonfactorizable
contributions to @xmath . Even though the use of the chiral perturbation
theory in this decay mode could be questioned, some of the calculated
chiral loops can be considered as part of the final state interactions.
Although the next to leading @xmath order terms might give sizable
contributions to this decay, we have demonstrated that contributions due
to the chiral loops and gluon condensates are of the same order of
magnitude as the amplitude extracted from the experimental result.

## Chapter 6 Rare @xmath decays

### 6.1 Why rare @xmath decays?

Why should one be interested in the rare decays in the first place? It
takes an incredible amount of hard work to do the rare-event
experiments, so one better be sure it is worth the effort. First of all,
rare decays are interesting if they are associated with a conservation
law. Prominent examples of such decays are the proton decay and @xmath .
These processes are completely forbidden within the Standard Model.
Their observation would thus signal new physics, for instance the Grand
Unified Theories.

But also processes, that are not completely forbidden in the Standard
Model, can be extremely useful probes of New Physics. For instance,
precision measurements of the rare @xmath meson decays offer studies of
the flavor changing neutral currents (FCNCs), i.e., transitions of the
following type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are quarks of different flavor (but of the same
electromagnetic charge). In the SM these transition are forbidden at
tree level because of the unitarity of the CKM matrix (this is the so
called Glashow-Iliopoulos-Maiani (GIM) mechanism). They can, however,
occur at the 1-loop level. They are additionally suppressed because of
the hierarchical structure of the CKM matrix. FCNCs are naturally suited
as probes of the quark-flavor mixing dynamics in the SM and beyond.
Actually, some of these processes (e.g., @xmath ) were very important in
the historical construction of the SM [ 52 ] .

Note also, that the information used at present to constrain the
parameters of the CKM matrix, comes either from the charged currents
(that occur already at tree level) or from the @xmath amplitudes. These
data are in a very good agreement with the SM. However, new physics
could affect @xmath and @xmath processes in a substantially different
manner. The consideration of the FCNCs thus constitutes an invaluable
test of the SM in the quark sector.

Of special interest are the so-called golden modes . For the decay mode
to be golden-plated it has to fulfill the following requirements: (i)
the SM amplitude has to be small or forbidden entirely, (ii) it has to
be theoretically clean, i.e., contributions of long distance physics
(nonperturbative QCD effects) have to be well under control, (iii) it
has to allow for potentially large contributions from new physics. An
example of such a golden mode is @xmath . In the SM it proceeds at the
one loop level through the same diagrams as shown on Fig. 4.3 . The
quarks flowing in the loop are from the up sector, @xmath . As discussed
in section 4.1 (see Eq. ( 4.46 )), the amplitudes are proportional to
@xmath , with @xmath the mass of the up-type quark in the loop

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Wolfenstein parametrization of the CKM matrix has been used
with @xmath and with the standard CKM phase convention @xmath . In the
last line we have tacitly written the scale of QCD instead of the @xmath
-quark mass, indicating the size of the nonperturbative QCD effects.
Even though the top contribution is suppressed by the CKM hierarchy, it
still dominates the @xmath transition. This has two important
consequences (i) the @xmath transition is dominated by the short
distance physics, so that the QCD corrections are small and calculable
in the perturbation theory and (ii) the @xmath transition is very
suppressed within the SM and thus sensitive to new physics. Especially
clean theoretically is @xmath . Because of the CP structure only the
imaginary part of the CKM matrix contributes, so that the charm
contribution is completely negligible and thus the theoretical error is
below 3% [ 52 ] . The theoretical error in the @xmath decays, on the
other hand, is @xmath . One has to pay the price, however, on the
experimental side, where one has to search for the events with the
probability of @xmath . Recently the second event in the @xmath decay
channel has been observed, giving [ 170 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is to be compared with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

A very similar situation occurs in the @xmath physics, which is in many
respects even more favorable theoretically. For instance, the @xmath
transition is dominated completely by the top quark. Namely, in contrast
to @xmath transition discussed above, charm and @xmath -quark are not
CKM enhanced. At the moment the most significant information about the
@xmath FCNCs is, however, coming from the @xmath decay. Here QCD
corrections play an important role, but are well under control [ 52 ] .

In the case of @xmath transitions the situation is not so favorable.
Instead of the up-type quarks with a very distinct mass hierarchy, now
the down-type quarks run in the loops. One can thus in general expect
the following contributions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the @xmath quark is much lighter than the top quark, it cannot
surpass the @xmath suppression. In a sense the situation is just the
opposite to the @xmath FCNC, where now the contributions from the
heaviest, @xmath -quark, are expected to be the least important. One can
thus expect that in the rare @xmath decays, the nonperturbative long
distance (LD) effects coming from the lighter two down quarks, @xmath ,
will dominate. Thus, there are no golden modes in the rare @xmath
decays.

Because the LD effects dominate @xmath decays, no extraction or tests of
the CKM matrix are possible in these decays. Also, in order to be able
to probe new physics, new effects, if present, have to be large.
However, there is an important sidepoint to the whole story. Namely,
@xmath physics probes the flavor structure of the up-quark sector, in
contrast to the @xmath and @xmath decays discussed in the beginning of
this section. The potential new physics effects in the two sectors can
be very different. In this sense rare @xmath meson decays can prove a
valuable probe of the new physics effects. However, to be able to use
it, firm limits on the LD contributions are needed.

### 6.2 Rare radiative @xmath decays

As discussed in the previous section, FCNC rare @xmath decays are
dominated by the LD effects. Nevertheless they constitute an interesting
probe of the quark-flavor dynamics in the up-quark sector and have as
such received an ongoing theoretical and experimental attention. In this
section we will review recent theoretical work on the FCNCs in @xmath
decays and move on in the next sections to estimate @xmath and @xmath
decays in the framework of the effective Lagrangians discussed in
chapters 2 and 4 .

Since LD effect are difficult to control theoretically one would like to
either find the decay modes, where the LD effects are as small as
possible, and/or find observables where the LD effects cancel. Such an
observable was constructed in [ 171 ] , where @xmath decays were
considered. The important observation is that the @xmath final state
arises through the nonleptonic @xmath -exchange @xmath , and is thus LD
dominated, while the @xmath final state is mainly due to the
electromagnetic penguin @xmath transition. The LD contributions and thus
also decay amplitudes of @xmath , @xmath are then almost equal.
Subtracting the two one obtains a quantity which is small in the SM

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the decay width divided by the phase space. Since most
of the LD effects cancel in @xmath , it is sensitive to the SD
contributions that can be altered by the new physics effects. The SM
prediction is @xmath . A larger difference would be a smoking gun for
new physics. Note, that generic supersymmetric scenarios can lead to
@xmath .

Another interesting analysis is connected with the decay modes @xmath
estimated both in the SM and in the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard
Model (MSSM) [ 110 , 172 , 109 , 173 , 174 ] , where @xmath are the
light pseudoscalar mesons, @xmath are the light vector mesons and @xmath
is the electron or muon lepton pair. The decay widths are estimated
either by employing the vector meson dominance [ 109 ] or an effective
Lagrangian approach similar to the framework we follow, with the vector
mesons treated using hidden symmetry [ 110 , 172 ] . In Ref. [ 109 ]
analysis of @xmath decays in the @xmath parity violating MSSM was
performed. It was found, that using constraints on trilinear @xmath
parity violating couplings obtained prior to this analysis from
different decay modes, the predicted branching ratios for @xmath ,
@xmath already saturate the experimental bounds ^(*) ^(*) * In [ 109 ]
previous bound @xmath [ 175 , 176 ] has been used. @xmath [ 177 ] ,
@xmath [ 175 , 176 ] . Measurements of the rare @xmath meson decays can
thus already now constrain the new physics scenarios in the up-type
quark sector.

The radiative decay modes @xmath are dominated by the LD effects [ 178 ,
179 , 180 , 181 , 182 ] . They can be used as probes of new physics only
through observables such as @xmath ( 6.7 ), where the LD effects cancel.
A more direct possibility for probing @xmath is through at present
rather exotic @xmath decay [ 183 , 184 , 185 , 186 ] . In this decay the
SM long distance and short distance contributions are found to be of
comparable size [ 183 ] , giving a branching ratio @xmath .

The leptonic decays @xmath , @xmath are very rare in the SM as they are
helicity suppressed. This suppression is lifted slightly by the LD
effects, mainly through the two-photon unitarity contribution, giving
branching ratios of the order @xmath [ 109 ] . These decay modes can,
however, receive large contributions from the physics beyond the SM. For
instance, a modest improvement on the experimental upper limit @xmath
would already yield a new bound on the product of trilinear @xmath
parity violating couplings @xmath [ 109 , 187 ] . Note, that the @xmath
equivalents of the golden modes @xmath , the @xmath do receive
comparable contributions from the SD as from the nonperturbative LD
physics, but are of the order @xmath and are out of reach
experimentally.

The radiative decay @xmath has been considered in Ref. [ 47 ] and will
be discussed at length in section 6.4 . It is dominated by the LD
effects with a branching ratio of @xmath . A separate analysis of the
same decay mode has been performed by Ref. [ 109 ] , arriving at the
compatible result. Possible contributions to the @xmath decay coming
from the MSSM give results comparable to the SM branching ratio. More
sensitive to the possible new physics contributions is the decay mode
@xmath [ 49 ] , which will be discussed in section 6.5 .

Parallel to the theoretical work, there is also a considerable
experimental effort devoted to the charm physics. The high statistics
and an excellent quality of data at FOCUS experiment now allow, among
others, for high precision studies of charm semileptonic decays [ 188 ]
, determination of @xmath decay times below @xmath error level [ 189 ] ,
as well as for the searches of CP violation and rare @xmath decays [ 190
, 191 ] . There is a very rich potential for the charm physics at the
B-factories, with both Belle and Babar having an active program in the
charm studies [ 192 , 193 ] . For instance, more than 120 milion charm
pairs have already been produced at BaBar. This corresponds to more than
220 000 @xmath -tagged @xmath decays, which will allow for the precision
lifetime and @xmath mixing analyses as well as for the searches of rare
charm decays [ 193 ] . An exciting charm physics program is under way
also at CLEO, that was recently able to measure @xmath for the first
time [ 74 , 75 ] . Among the rare D decays, the decays @xmath and @xmath
are subjects of CLEO and FERMILAB searches [ 194 , 177 ] . In the
following years a great phenomenological impact is expected from
proposed CLEO-c physics programme. Next year more than 6 million tagged
@xmath decays are expected to be measured. This will allow for precision
charm branching ratio measurements and consequently improved
measurements of the CKM matrix elements also in the @xmath -sector, as
well as for extensive studies of @xmath -mixing, CP violation and rare
decays in the charm sector [ 195 ] .

### 6.3 Inclusive @xmath decay

Before we turn to the estimates of the experimentally more tractable
exclusive rare decays @xmath , @xmath , we will discuss the calculation
of the inclusive @xmath decay. By doing this exercise, we will further
clarify several points regarding the relative importance of Wilson
operators, that have been brought forward in section 4.2 .

The effective Lagrangian for the @xmath decay mode can be found in
Eqs. ( 4.34 ), ( 4.54 ), with the Wilson coefficients listed in Table
4.1 . Note that in the literature [ 109 , 110 , 196 ] as an estimate for
the @xmath Wilson coefficient, the result from electroweak theory
without QCD, @xmath , has been used. The leading order expression in
terms of @xmath is ^(†) ^(†) † For further details about the calculation
see section 4.2 , where also the discussion regarding @xmath is
presented.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Using @xmath [ 72 ] we arrive at the value @xmath , which
should be compared to the value obtained using the QCD corrected Wilson
coefficient @xmath in Table 4.1 . This gives @xmath , which is four
magnitudes smaller than the corresponding parameter obtained by
neglecting QCD interactions! The reason for this discrepancy lies in the
appearance of large logarithms @xmath , that avoid the GIM suppression
otherwise present in @xmath . It is exactly these large logarithms that
RG evolution sums correctly [ 35 ] . Since small scales of the order
@xmath lie in the nonperturbative region of QCD, the calculation leading
to ( 6.8 ) is not valid at all.

The logarithm appearing in ( 4.51 ) is exactly reproduced in the
calculation of the inclusive channel @xmath , if mass-independent
renormalization is used (see appendix C of [ 102 ] ). To show this
explicitly, we consider the calculation of @xmath in the naive
dimensional regularization (NDR). The amplitude can be parametrized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the tree level matrix elements of the operators. Note that
@xmath are not Wilson coefficients, but merely parametrize the invariant
amplitude. The @xmath coefficient is dominated by the 1-loop
contributions coming from insertion of the @xmath operators, @xmath .
The virtual photon is emitted from the intermediate @xmath quarks. Note
that this contribution is of order @xmath and proportional to @xmath ,
@xmath , and is thus only once Cabibbo suppressed. Using existing
results for @xmath at the NLO [ 197 , 198 , 199 ] we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath is the reduced mass of the lepton pair, while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In ( 6.10 ) the contributions suppressed by @xmath are
neglected. These include the tree level contribution from @xmath as well
as the 1-loop contributions coming from insertions of the QCD penguin
operators @xmath . From expression ( 6.10 ) one should reproduce
Inami-Lim result ( 4.51 ), when momenta and masses of the external
particles are set to zero. Taking the limit @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the values of the @xmath Wilson coefficients at the weak scale
@xmath , @xmath , one arrives at the Inami-Lim result ( 4.51 ), as
expected. Note, that the logarithm @xmath in ( 4.51 ) arises from
insertion of the @xmath operators. Phenomenologically more interesting
is the limit @xmath . In the limit @xmath the difference @xmath
vanishes, while for @xmath it is at a level of few percent! Using @xmath
( 4.51 ) instead of @xmath ( 6.10 ) as in [ 109 , 110 ] then
overestimates the @xmath .

Explicitly, the branching ratio is [ 110 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we write @xmath as before, while @xmath correspond to the tree
level matrix elements of the @xmath operators ( 4.55 ). For the value of
@xmath we use the two-loop result of Ref. [ 107 ] , @xmath , with @xmath
defined after Eq. ( 6.8 ). The dominant contribution to @xmath comes
from the insertion of @xmath operator, while the contributions from the
insertion of @xmath operators vanish because of the color structure. The
coefficient @xmath in the Standard Model.

Using @xmath GeV one arrives at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dominant contribution comes from the @xmath part of the
amplitude. This is in contrast to Refs. [ 109 , 110 ] , where @xmath was
estimated using @xmath . This lead to the branching ratios of one (for
@xmath ) to two (for @xmath ) orders of magnitude higher, with @xmath
contribution dominating the branching ratio.

The suppression of QCD corrected @xmath ( 6.10 ) compared to @xmath (
4.51 ) comes from two sources. The cancellation of @xmath and @xmath
quark contributions in ( 6.10 ) is very strong even at moderate values
of @xmath , with @xmath for @xmath . There is also a sizable cancelation
between @xmath and @xmath in ( 6.10 ). This cancelations could in
principle be modified by the two-loop QCD corrections to the @xmath
matrix elements ^(‡) ^(‡) ‡ The existing two-loop calculations of @xmath
matrix elements in @xmath [ 96 , 97 ] have been done for small @xmath ,
where no substantial increase in @xmath is expected. . If the
cancelations are completely lifted, one can estimate the possible effect
by @xmath . This leads to roughly the same prediction for @xmath , while
it can increase @xmath , as @xmath affects mostly the higher @xmath part
of the decay width distribution.

Note, that the calculation of @xmath is in many respects different than
the calculation of @xmath . The operators @xmath in @xmath are
equivalent to the @xmath operators in the @xmath transition, but with
different CKM factors multiplying the operators in the effective
Lagrangian. In @xmath then only the @xmath operators contribute, as
@xmath operators are @xmath suppressed. Hence, there is no approximate
cancellation of the type @xmath as found above. Note also, that in
@xmath the penguin operators @xmath are not CKM suppressed relative to
@xmath and have to be taken into account, contrary to the @xmath case,
where the penguin operators are @xmath suppressed.

The @xmath suppression of the penguin operators @xmath is present also
in the calculation of the exclusive charm decays, where the insertions
of @xmath operators again dominate the rate. This will be discussed in
more detail for the case of @xmath decay in section 6.5 . Before we
proceed with the calculation, let us mention the commonly used
terminology of long distance (LD) and short distance (SD) contributions.
These are usually separated in the discussion of weak radiative decays
@xmath or @xmath decays. The SD contribution in these transitions is a
result of the penguin-like transition induced by the operators @xmath ,
while the long distance contribution arises from the insertions of
@xmath operators, when the off- or on-shell photon is emitted from the
quark legs. We will follow this classification in the following.

Finally, we study possible enhancements of the @xmath transitions in the
extension beyond the Standard Model. At lower energies the contributions
of new physics show up as enhancements of the Wilson coefficients @xmath
, compared to the Standard Model values. The upper bounds on the
possible enhancements will be discussed in more detail in section 6.5.2
. Here we will only list the effects on inclusive modes. Taking the
largest possible effects due to the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard
Model, as given in Eq. ( 6.54 ) below, one arrives at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the largest contribution is due to the @xmath and @xmath operator
insertions, similarly to the SM case. If the assumption of @xmath parity
violation is relaxed, then the possible enhancement of inclusive modes
can be even more drastic(cf. Eq. ( 6.60 ) below), giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

On Fig. 6.1 we also show the decay width distribution for @xmath in the
SM and beyond. The @xmath decay width is similar to the @xmath one. In
the SM the largest contribution to the inclusive decay come from the low
@xmath region, as this is dominated by the @xmath operator. This feature
can be changed drastically in the SM extensions. For instance in the
MSSM with @xmath parity breaking the largest part of the transition
probability comes from the intermediate range of @xmath , i.e., with the
lepton pair mass of around @xmath GeV. Even though possible enhancements
due to the non-SM physics can completely dominate in @xmath , one has to
keep in mind, that inclusive modes are difficult to measure
experimentally. From the experimental point of view far more interesting
are exclusive rare decays, to which we turn in the next sections.

### 6.4 The rare @xmath decay

In this section we will present an update to the first detailed
calculation of the rare decay mode @xmath in the context of the Standard
Model, that has been published in [ 47 ] . At the end of section, we
will provide also an estimate of possible new physics effects in this
decay mode.

The decays which are of some relevance to the @xmath mode, like @xmath ,
@xmath , are expected to have the branching ratios in the @xmath range [
171 ] . It is then hard to believe, that the branching ratio of the
@xmath decay mode could be as high as @xmath in the Standard Model (SM),
as found by [ 200 ] . Apart from this estimation, there was no other
detailed work on @xmath in the literature prior to our analysis [ 47 ] ,
to the best of our knowledge. Recently a separate analysis of the same
decay mode appeared in Ref. [ 109 ] .

On the other hand, in the B and K meson systems there are numerous
studies of the two photon decays. For example, the @xmath decay has been
studied with various approaches within the SM and beyond. In the SM, the
short distance (SD) contribution [ 201 ] leads to a branching ratio
@xmath . The QCD corrections enhance this rate to @xmath [ 202 ] . On
the other hand, in some of the SM extensions the branching ratio can be
considerably larger. The two Higgs doublet scenario, for example, could
enhance this branching ratio by an order of magnitude [ 203 ] . Such
”new physics” effects could at least in principle be dwarfed by the long
distance (LD) effects. However, existing calculations show, that these
are not larger than the SD contribution [ 204 , 205 ] , which is typical
of the situation in the radiative B decays [ 206 ] . In the @xmath
system the situation is rather different. Here, the SD contribution is
too small to account for the observed rates of @xmath , @xmath by
factors of @xmath [ 207 ] , although it could be of relevance in the
mechanism of CP-violation. Many detailed calculations of these processes
have been performed over the years (see recent Refs. [ 207 , 208 , 209 ,
210 ] and Refs. therein), especially using the chiral approach to
account for the pole diagrams and the loops. These LD contributions lead
to rates which are compatible with existing measurements.

#### 6.4.1 The theoretical framework

Motivated by the experimental efforts to observe rare D meson decays
(cf. section 6.2 ), as well as by the lack of detailed theoretical
treatments, we undertook an investigation of the @xmath decay [ 47 ] .
The short distance contribution is expected to be rather small, as
already discussed in the introductory section to this chapter, hence the
main contribution would come from the long distance interactions. In
order to treat the long distance contributions, we use the heavy quark
effective theory combined with the chiral perturbation theory, HH @xmath
PT (see chapter 2 ). This approach was used before for @xmath strong and
electromagnetic decays [ 44 , 67 , 71 ] . The leptonic and semileptonic
decays of D meson were also treated within the same framework (see [ 44
] and references therein).

In the calculation we will use the following classification of the short
distance (SD) and long distance (LD) contributions. The SD contributions
arise from the insertion of penguin like operators that describe either
@xmath or @xmath FCNC transitions, that occur through weak-scale
interactions (exchanges of @xmath bosons). The seven dimensional Wilson
operators describing @xmath transition are expected to be suppressed by
additional powers of weak scale compared to the five dimensional @xmath
Wilson operator @xmath . For instance, for a very similar @xmath decay,
one obtains that without QCD corrections the ratio @xmath is about
@xmath [ 211 ] . The largest SD contribution to @xmath is thus expected
from the SD @xmath transition, i.e., from the insertion of @xmath
operator ( 4.54 ), while the other photon is emitted from initial meson
leg. The value of @xmath Wilson coefficient is given in ( 4.45 ), where
we use the scale @xmath GeV.

The LD contributions on the other hand arise from the processes, where
@xmath photons are emitted through purely electromagnetic transitions,
that occur at low scales. The main LD contribution will arise from the
insertion of @xmath operators. To estimate the matrix elements of these
operators, we use the factorization approximation (explained in section
4.3 ). The resulting effective four quark nonleptonic @xmath weak
Lagrangian is given in Eq. ( 4.67 ), with the effective Wilson
coefficients @xmath given in ( 4.66 ). The hadronic degrees of freedom
are described using the HH @xmath PT, explained in chapter 2 . The heavy
quark and chiral symmetries also provide us with the form of weak
currents, given in ( 2.30 ), ( 2.47 ). In a similar way, also the
hadronic matrix element of @xmath is determined ( 2.49 ).

The photon couplings are obtained by gauging the Lagrangians ( 2.28 ), (
2.43 ) and the light current ( 2.30 ) with the @xmath photon field
@xmath . Following [ 67 ] we add in addition the electromagnetic
interaction ( 2.55 ) with an unknown coupling @xmath of dimension -1,
which is needed to account, for example, for @xmath . Even though the
Lagrangian ( 2.55 ) is formally @xmath suppressed, we do not neglect it,
as it has been found that it gives a sizable contribution to @xmath
decays [ 71 ] . In the case of @xmath it gives largest contribution to
the parity conserving part of the amplitude, however, it does not
contribute to the decay rate by more than @xmath , as will be shown
later.

The approach of the HH @xmath PT introduces several coupling constants
that have to be determined from experiment. The recent measurement of
the @xmath decay width [ 74 , 75 ] has determined the @xmath coupling,
which is related to @xmath , the basic strong coupling of the
Lagrangian. Further discussion on this point can be found in section 2.5
. There is more ambiguity, however, concerning the value of the
anomalous electromagnetic coupling @xmath , which is responsible for the
@xmath decays [ 67 , 71 ] (see section 2.5 ).

Let us address now some issues concerning the theoretical framework used
in our treatment. The typical energy of the intermediate pseudoscalar
mesons is of order @xmath , so that the chiral expansion @xmath (for
@xmath GeV) is rather close to unity. Thus, for the decay under study
here, we extend the possible range of applicability of the chiral
expansion of HH @xmath PT, compared to the previous treatments like
@xmath , @xmath [ 67 ] or @xmath [ 71 ] , in which a heavy meson appears
in the final state, making the use of the chiral perturbation theory
rather natural. The suitability of our undertaking here must be
confronted with the experiment, and possibly other theoretical
approaches.

At this point we also remark that the contribution of the order @xmath
does not exist in the @xmath decay, and the amplitude starts with the
contribution of the order @xmath . At this order the amplitude receives
an annihilation type contribution proportional to the @xmath Wilson
coefficient, with the Wess-Zumino anomalous term coupling light
pseudoscalars to two photons. As we will show, the total amplitude is
dominated by terms proportional to @xmath that contribute only through
loops with Goldstone bosons. Loop contributions proportional to @xmath
vanish at this order. We point out that any other model which does not
involve intermediate charged states cannot give this kind of
contribution. Therefore, the chiral loops naturally include effects of
the intermediate meson exchange.

The chiral loops of order @xmath are finite, as they are in the similar
case of @xmath decays [ 207 , 208 , 209 , 210 ] . The next to leading
terms might be almost of the same order of magnitude compared to the
leading @xmath term, the expected suppression being approximately @xmath
. The inclusion of next order terms in the chiral expansion is not
straightforward in the present approach. As already mentioned earlier,
we do include, however, terms which contain the anomalous
electromagnetic coupling @xmath ( 2.55 ), and appear as next to leading
order terms in the chiral expansion, in view of their potentially large
contribution (as in @xmath decays considered in [ 71 ] ). As it turns
out, these terms are suppressed compared to the leading loop effects,
which at least partially justifies the use of HH @xmath PT for the decay
under consideration. Contributions of the same order could arise from
the light resonances like @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Such
resonances are sometimes treated with hidden gauge symmetry (see, e.g.,
[ 44 ] ), which is not compatible with the chiral perturbation symmetry.
Therefore, a consistent calculation of these terms is beyond our scheme
and we disregard their possible effect.

#### 6.4.2 Results

The invariant amplitude for the @xmath decay can be written using gauge
and Lorentz invariance in the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the parity violating and @xmath the parity conserving
part of the amplitude, while @xmath , @xmath are respectively the four
momenta and the polarization vectors of the outgoing photons.

Using the amplitude decomposition ( 6.17 ), the decay width for the
@xmath decay is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The short distance contribution to the @xmath decay width is estimated
using the @xmath transition induced by the @xmath operator in ( 4.54 ),
with one photon emitted from the @xmath leg via @xmath term ( 2.55 ), as
shown on Figure 6.2 . The parity violating part of the short distance
amplitude is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the parity conserving part of the amplitude is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Turning now to the long distance contributions, we depict
in Figs. 6.4 and 6.3 the loop diagrams arising to the leading order
@xmath by using Eqs. ( 2.28 ), ( 2.43 ), ( 2.30 ), ( 2.47 ). The circled
crosses indicate the currents in the weak interaction, with the left
circled cross representing the heavy current ( 2.47 ), and the right
circled cross indicating the light current ( 2.30 ). In Figure 6.4 we
grouped all the diagrams which vanish by the symmetry considerations.
All nonvanishing contributions are assembled in Fig. 6.3 ^(§) ^(§) §
Note that in [ 47 ] the diagram @xmath had been erroneously left out of
the figure. The results presented in [ 47 ] are, however, correct. . We
denote the gauge invariant sums corresponding to the nonvanishing
diagrams of Fig. 6.3 by @xmath (the gauge invariant sums are sums of the
diagrams in each row of Fig. 6.3 ), where @xmath denotes parity
conserving (violating) part of the amplitude, as in ( 6.18 ). Note that
the gauge invariant sets of diagrams satisfy the theorem given in
section 2.4 ^(¶) ^(¶) ¶ In each row actually a sum of two smaller gauge
invariant sets is given. This is done for the sake of convenience, as
otherwise the @xmath symmetry would not be present explicitly in the
results. Compare also with Figure 6.8 in the next section. . The parity
violating sums, which arise from the @xmath term in ( 4.67 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
     @xmath               (6.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parity conserving parts of the amplitude @xmath vanish for the
diagrams on Fig. 6.3 . We denoted @xmath , while the definitions of the
scalar integrals @xmath , @xmath can be found in section 3.1 , with the
explicit expressions given in ( 3.51 ), ( A.2 ) The abbreviations for
the tensor integrals @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
are presented in appendix A.3 .

Note that the sums of the amplitudes ( 6.21 )-( 6.23 ) are gauge
invariant and finite. This is expected, since one cannot generate
counterterms at this order. There is no @xmath dependence apart from the
one hidden in @xmath (cf. discussion after Eq. ( 4.67 )), even though
@xmath appears in the above functions, but it cancels out completely.
Note also, that the one loop chiral corrections vanish in the exact
@xmath limit, i.e., when @xmath , as it is expected. One should note
that taking the chiral limit (i.e. @xmath ) is not unambiguous. Namely,
in the combined heavy quark effective theory and the chiral perturbation
theory, beside chiral logarithms there are also functions of the form
@xmath ( 3.52 ) whose value depend on the way one takes the limit (see,
e.g., Ref. [ 66 ] ).

We remark that there exist additional diagrams of the same order in the
chiral expansion as the ones given on Fig. 6.3 , but proportional to the
@xmath part of the effective weak Lagrangian ( 4.67 ). In these
additional diagrams, the chiral loop is attached to the light current in
the factorized vertex, while the photons are emitted from the
pseudoscalars in the loop, or they come from the weak vertex. However,
the amplitudes of these diagrams vanish due to Lorentz symmetry.

The contribution coming from the anomalous coupling @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath (Fig. 6.5 ) is

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.25)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath mixing angle and we have set @xmath . This
choice of the parameters reproduces the experimental results for the
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath decay width [ 72 ] . In the numerical
evaluation we use the values of @xmath and @xmath obtained in the
beginning of section 2.5 and summarized in Table 2.1 . Note, that the
@xmath breaking effects in the form of chiral loops and the counterterms
can change the extracted value of @xmath . One chiral loop corrections
can amount to about @xmath when @xmath is taken to be @xmath . This
value might be changed by the finite part of the counterterms. However,
the contributions coming from the counterterms are not known and due to
the lack of experimental data they cannot be fixed yet. In our
calculation we take @xmath , keeping in mind that the chiral corrections
might be important. For the effective Wilson coefficients @xmath we take
@xmath ( 4.66 ). We present the numerical results ^(∥) ^(∥) ∥ Note, that
in [ 47 ] slightly different value of @xmath has been used. Also the
two-loop QCD improved @xmath from section 6.3 , instead of the Wilson
coefficient @xmath , has been used. for the one loop amplitudes in Table
6.1 . Short distance contribution is negligible as expected.

In the determination of @xmath and @xmath a sizable contribution from
@xmath -like electromagnetic terms ( 2.55 ) has been found [ 71 ] .
Therefore we have to investigate their effect in the @xmath decay
amplitude. The terms in Eq. ( 2.55 ) lead to an additional set of
diagrams, which is given in Figs. 6.6 and 6.7 , where the @xmath vertex
is indicated by @xmath . The nonzero parity violating parts of the one
loop diagrams containing @xmath coupling are (Fig. 6.7 )

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.26)
     @xmath         (6.27)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

while the parity conserving parts of the amplitudes arising from the one
loop diagrams with @xmath coupling are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath               (6.29)
     @xmath               (6.30)
     @xmath               (6.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.32)
     @xmath         (6.33)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The amplitudes with @xmath coupling are not finite and have to be
regularized. We use the strict @xmath prescription @xmath and take
@xmath @xmath as in [ 67 ] .

Results are gathered in Table 6.2 using @xmath and @xmath . Inspection
of Tables 6.1 and 6.2 reveals that for the real parts of the amplitudes,
the contributions of Figs. 6.3 , 6.5 and of Fig. 6.7 are comparable in
size. However, the decay rate is dominated by the contribution of the
imaginary part of the parity-violating amplitude, which arises from the
one loop diagrams of Fig. 6.3 . For the parity-conserving amplitude, the
contributions of anomaly and @xmath -like terms are comparable in
magnitude. Due to the suppression of @xmath in comparison to @xmath , we
do not include diagrams proportional to @xmath in the calculation of
terms with @xmath .

Using short distance contributions, the finite one loop diagrams and the
anomaly parts of the amplitudes (shown in Figs. 6.3 , 6.5 and with the
numerical values of the amplitudes listed in Table 6.1 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is slightly changed when one takes into account the terms
dependent on @xmath ( 2.55 ). The branching ratio obtained, when we sum
all the contributions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

By varying @xmath within @xmath and keeping @xmath , the branching ratio
is changed by at most 10%. On the other hand, one has to keep in mind
that the loop contributions involving beta are not finite and have to be
regulated. We have used @xmath scheme, with the divergent parts being
absorbed by the counterterms. The size of these is not known, so they
might influence the error in our prediction of the branching ratio.
Note, however, that the use of a different renormalization scheme, e.g.,
the GL renormalization scheme, would not change the result considerably.
Namely, the leading order results coming from the chiral loops on Fig.
6.3 are finite and scheme independent, while the contributions from
scheme dependent diagrams 6.7 are suppressed by an order of magnitude.
Note also, that changing @xmath would affect the predicted branching
ratio. For instance, if the chiral corrections do decrease the value of
@xmath by @xmath this would decrease the predicted branching ratio down
to @xmath .

#### 6.4.3 Summary of @xmath

We have presented a detailed calculation of the decay amplitude @xmath ,
which includes short distance and long distance contributions, by making
use of the theoretical tool of the HH @xmath PT. Within this framework,
the leading contributions are found to arise from the charged @xmath and
@xmath mesons running in the chiral loops, and are of the order @xmath .
These terms are finite and contribute only to the parity violating part
of the amplitude. The inclusion of higher order terms in the chiral
expansion is unfortunately plagued with the uncertainty caused by the
lack of knowledge of the counterterms. As to the parity conserving part
of the decay, it is given by the terms coming from the anomaly and from
the loop terms containing the beta coupling, the latter giving most of
the amplitude. The size of this part of the amplitude is approximately
one order of magnitude smaller than the parity violating amplitude, thus
contributing less than 20% to the decay rate. Therefore, our calculation
predicts that the @xmath decay is mostly a parity violating transition.

In addition to the uncertainties we have mentioned, there is the
question of the suitability of the chiral expansion for the energy
involved in this process; the size of the uncertainty related to this is
difficult to estimate. Altogether, our estimate is that the total
uncertainty is not larger than 50%. Accordingly, we conclude that the
predicted branching ratio is ^(**) ^(**) ** This result is higher then
the one published in [ 47 ] due to new experimental data on @xmath [ 73
] and consequently higher @xmath . The two results agree within
error-bars.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The reasonability of this result can be deduced also from a comparison
with the calculated decay rates for the @xmath , which are found to be
expected with a branching ratio of approximately @xmath [ 178 , 180 ,
171 ] .

Recently an independent analysis of the @xmath decay width has been
performed [ 109 ] . To estimate the LD effect, authors of Ref. [ 109 ]
use vector meson dominance (VMD) for the lightest vector meson
contributions as well as the single higher pseudoscalar resonance and
two light-pseudoscalar the intermediate states. The largest contribution
is found to come from the VMD estimate which gives @xmath . The higher
pseudoscalar resonances give negligible contribution. The contributions
from intermediate two light-pseudoscalar states are similar to the
contributions considered in our approach and give @xmath in good
agreement with our estimate.

Note, however, that both the approach presented here and the approach of
Ref. [ 109 ] include only the contributions of lowest lying bound states
and the resonances. Recent analysis [ 212 , 213 ] based on the QCD
factorization in the heavy-quark limit @xmath and on the quark-hadron
duality, suggests that large cancellations between LD contributions in
the duality sum could occur. Whether the quark-hadron duality as well as
the QCD factorization do take place in the charm decays, is however not
clear, so that the question of large cancellations between the LD
effects remains open.

It is interesting to estimate what sizes of new physics effects one can
expect in the @xmath decay mode [ 214 ] . In [ 110 , 217 , 218 ] it has
been found, that the @xmath short distance contribution (corresponding
to the insertion of @xmath operators) can get considerably enhanced, if
one takes into consideration the MSSM spectrum. The leading contribution
comes from the gluino exchange and can be at most as large as @xmath ,
@xmath ( 6.54 ). Making the replacements @xmath in ( 6.19 ) and @xmath
in ( 6.20 ) and using the values of @xmath on the upper bounds, one
finds that the MSSM contributions might increase the Standard Model
prediction for the branching ratio up to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where largest contribution is found for @xmath . Note, that no
additional contribution to the @xmath transition arises, if @xmath
parity conservation is lifted. Thus the @xmath branching ratio will not
be enhanced above ( 6.37 ), even if @xmath parity violating terms are
introduced in the construction of MSSM (cf. Eq. ( 6.60 )).

From the experimental side, CLEO has quite recently set the first
experimental upper limit on this decay mode with @xmath at the 90%
confidence level [ 215 ] . The upcoming CLEO-c experiment is expected to
be sensitive to this decay mode at the level of approximately @xmath [
216 ] .

### 6.5 The @xmath decays

In this section we study the rare decays @xmath , @xmath both in the
Standard Model and in the MSSM [ 49 ] . A Standard Model analysis of
@xmath branching ratios neglecting QCD and LD effects, has been made in
Ref. [ 196 ] , giving @xmath . However, LD effects are expected to
dominate the SM prediction similarly to the @xmath decays. To evaluate
the nonresonant LD effects, we use the heavy quark effective theory
combined with the chiral perturbation theory as explained in chapter 2 .
We also include the contributions of vector resonances in our analysis.

Another expectation based on the experience from the @xmath decays is,
that there are possibly large contributions in the @xmath decays coming
from the SM extensions such as the MSSM with R-parity violation. These
expectations make @xmath channels interesting from both experimental as
well as from theoretical side.

#### 6.5.1 Standard Model prediction

We will devote the first part of this section to the estimation of the
@xmath decay width in the context of the Standard Model. At the quark
level, this decay mode cannot proceed through tree diagrams and is thus
induced only at the one loop level in the Standard Model. Possible
diagrams at the quark level are shown on Fig. 4.3 . These than translate
into an effective weak Lagrangian at the scale of @xmath ( 4.54 ).

##### Nonresonant contributions

First we turn to estimating the nonresonant contributions in @xmath . As
we will see later on, it is in the nonresonant contributions that the
extensions of the Standard Model can show up.

The most general invariant amplitude for the @xmath decay, that one
obtains from the effective Lagrangian ( 4.54 ), can be written in the
following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the four-momenta of the lepton and antilepton respectively,
@xmath the momentum of lepton pair, @xmath the photon momentum and
@xmath its polarization vector. The form factors @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are functions of @xmath only and in particular do not depend on
@xmath or @xmath . The @xmath terms are parity violating, while @xmath ,
and the bremsstrahlung part of the amplitude, @xmath , are parity
conserving.

The partial decay width is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , with @xmath the lepton mass, @xmath , while @xmath . This
expression agrees with the expression for the partial decay width @xmath
as given in [ 219 , 220 ] , as well as with the @xmath decay width as
given in [ 221 ] .

The nonresonant LD contributions will arise from the chiral loop
contributions shown on Figure 6.8 . The weak vertices receive
contributions from the @xmath operators in the effective Lagrangian (
4.54 ). The sizes of these contributions are estimated using the
factorization approximation ( 4.67 ). We use the phenomenologically
motivated values @xmath , @xmath of the “new factorization” [ 127 ] . As
in the @xmath decay the long distance interactions will contribute only
if the @xmath flavor symmetry is broken, i.e., if @xmath . Note also
that in the diagrams of Fig. 6.8 only the term proportional to @xmath
contributes. The @xmath part of effective Lagrangian ( 4.67 ) gives rise
to the resonant LD contributions and will be discussed later on.

We will calculate the nonresonant LD contributions in the framework of
HH @xmath PT that has been explained in chapter 2 (see also section
6.4.1 ). The values of coupling constants are listed in Table 2.1 .
Note, that the @xmath coupling that describes @xmath transition will not
be taken into account in the chiral loop contributions of Fig. 6.8 , as
it has been found to give negligible contribution in a very similar case
of the @xmath analysis. The @xmath transition will be, however, needed
to estimate the short distance contributions shown on Fig. 6.10 . These
will give numerically irrelevant contributions for the SM predictions,
but will be important later on, when we extend the analysis to the MSSM
case.

Using HH @xmath PT one arrives at the set of nonzero @xmath diagrams
listed in Fig. 6.8 . Each row of diagrams on Fig. 6.8 is a gauge
invariant set. Note that each row actually represents the smallest gauge
invariant set of diagrams, that can be obtained using the theorem stated
in section 2.4 . The sum of the diagrams in each row is also finite.
Separate diagrams are in general divergent and are regulated using the
dimensional regularization. Further details on this subject can be found
in chapter 3 . The explicit expressions of the corresponding amplitudes
can be found in appendix B . Note that the chiral loop contributions of
Fig. 6.8 contribute only to the @xmath part of the invariant amplitude (
6.38 ). Namely, the @xmath pair couples to the charged mesons in the
loop only via electromagnetic current. This leads to the @xmath photon
pole in the amplitude ( @xmath being the momentum of the lepton pair).
The LD nonresonant contributions coming from Fig. 6.8 thus exhibit a
pole behaviour at small lepton momenta. This pole is either cut off by
the phase space because of the nonzero lepton masses ( @xmath ), or by
the experimental limitations due to Dalitz conversion [ 109 ] .

Note that there is no photon bremsstrahlung off the final lepton pair in
the chiral loop contributions. Namely, diagrams of the type shown on
Fig. 6.9 , with the initial meson being a (pseudo)scalar, and with a
photon connecting the two blobs, vanish due to gauge invariance.

The diagrams of Fig. 6.8 are evaluated in the minimal subtraction (
@xmath ) renormalization scheme. However, the sum of the diagrams is
finite and scheme independent. We use the values of coupling constants
listed in Table 2.1 . Integrating over the whole available phase space
one arrives at the estimates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to a photon pole, the larger part of the electron channel branching
ratio comes from the region of the phase space with @xmath . The phase
space is cut off by the muon masses at much higher @xmath , giving a
smaller contribution of nonresonant LD effects to this decay channel.

Note that the short distance (SD) contributions coming from the penguin
operators @xmath are indeed very small in the Standard Model due to the
CKM suppression ( 4.54 ). Evaluating the expectation values of the
operators @xmath using heavy quark symmetry as described in Eq. ( 2.48 )
(see also explicit expressions in appendix B.2 ) and using the values of
Wilson coefficients listed in Table 4.1 , one arrives at the
corresponding branching ratios of order @xmath . This is negligible
compared to the LD nonresonant contributions.

##### Resonant contributions

The mechanism of the decay @xmath through a resonant intermediate state
is depicted on Fig. 6.11 . The @xmath meson first decays into a vector
meson and a photon, @xmath . The vector meson than decays into a lepton
pair, completing the cascade @xmath . The decay width coming from this
mechanism can be written as [ 222 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum of the lepton pair, while @xmath and @xmath
are the mass and the decay width of the vector meson resonance. Several
assumptions go into the derivation of the simple, but physically well
motivated formula ( 6.42 ). First of all the interference with other
channels is neglected. Under this approximation the formula is generally
valid for the case of scalar resonances. Following the reasoning of Ref.
[ 222 ] it is easy to show, that Eq. ( 6.42 ) is valid also for the case
of the electromagnetic decay of vector resonance into a lepton pair.

Since vector resonances @xmath are relatively narrow Eq. ( 6.42 ) can be
further simplified using the narrow width approximation @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The narrow width approximation is valid at @xmath level for @xmath , and
below @xmath for @xmath mesons. To obtain numerical estimates, the
experimental data on the branching ratios @xmath [ 72 ] can be used. On
the other hand none of the decays @xmath have been measured yet. We thus
use the theoretical predictions of branching ratios @xmath . As the
central values we use the recent predictions of Ref. [ 223 ] , where a
reanalysis of Ref. [ 178 ] using the quark model to determine relative
phase uncertainties has been performed. As a comparison we also list in
Table 6.4 the predictions of Ref. [ 180 ] . Note that for the upper
limit predictions in [ 180 ] VMD model was used, with the main numerical
input the experimental value of @xmath . However, the central value of
this branching fraction as cited in [ 72 ] has decreased by a factor of
three between 1994-2002. Thus the upper limits on predictions of [ 180 ]
should be divided by three, bringing the values in fair agreement with [
223 ] .

Using the values compiled in Tables 6.3 , 6.4 together with Eq. ( 6.43 )
one immediately arrives at

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Above we have used the fact, that the differences between
@xmath and @xmath decay modes in the Standard Model come from the phase
space differences only. These are relatively small compared to other
theoretical and experimental uncertainties entering predictions ( 6.44
)-( 6.46 ), and are as such neglected.

As seen from the estimates ( 6.44 )-( 6.46 ) the largest contribution to
@xmath comes from the intermediate @xmath resonance, being approximately
one order of magnitude larger than the other two contributions. Note
also, that in the region of @xmath , where vector resonances are
important, the nonresonant contribution calculated in the previous
section is several orders of magnitude smaller. We can thus safely
neglect possible interference between the nonresonant and the resonant
contributions and simply add the resonant contributions ( 6.44 )-( 6.46
) to the nonresonant ones ( 6.41 ). The decay width distribution is
plotted on Fig. 6.12 , while the predicted branching ratios are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, if the values of Ref. [ 109 ] had been used, the predicted
branching ratios could be utmost a factor of three higher.

Incidentally Fig. 6.12 also explains, why the @xmath cascade could be
neglected in the @xmath decay rate calculation. Namely, for @xmath
almost on-shell the decay width is dominated by the nonresonant
contributions. These are described using the HH @xmath PT as in the
calculation of @xmath presented in section 6.4 .

#### 6.5.2 Beyond the Standard Model

We turn now to the possible effects of physics beyond the Standard
Model, that could enhance the predicted branching ratios ( 6.47 ). The
effects of new physics show up in the values of the Wilson coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the SM values of Wilson coefficients listed in Table
4.1 and in Eq. ( 4.45 ), while @xmath denote the changes due to new
physics effects. Note that the general feature of all the SM extension
is to overcome the @xmath suppression of the penguin operators @xmath (
4.54 ). Another general feature is that the new physics effects will
extend the basis of penguin operator ( 4.11 ) by operators @xmath with
quark chiralities switched ( 4.55 ).

#### 6.5.3 Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model

We start with the simplest supersymmetric extension of the SM, the
Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM). It is constructed by
putting the SM fermions in the chiral multiplets and the SM gauge bosons
in the vector multiplets, thus in effect doubling the spectrum of the
Standard Model fields. If no particular SUSY breaking mechanism is
assumed, the MSSM Lagrangian contains well over 100 unknown parameters.
It is thus very useful to adopt the so-called mass insertion
approximation. In this approximation the basis of fermion and sfermion
states is chosen such, that all the couplings of these particles to the
neutral gauginos are flavor diagonal, but then the squark mass matrices
are not diagonal. The squark propagators are then expanded in terms of
nondiagonal elements, where mass insertions induce changes of squark
flavor [ 224 ] . The mass insertions are parametrized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are flavor indices, @xmath denote chirality, @xmath are the
off-diagonal elements of the up-type squark mass matrices and @xmath is
the average squark mass.

The largest contribution to the @xmath transition is expected from
gluino-squark exchanges [ 109 , 110 , 225 ] . Allowing for only one
insertion, the contributions from gluino-squark exchange diagrams are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.50a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.50b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.50c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , while the functions @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Wilson coefficient @xmath receives the first nonzero contributions
from double mass insertions, therefore we neglect it in the following.
The Wilson coefficients @xmath corresponding to the operators with
“wrong chirality” receive contributions from gluino-squark exchanges
that are of the same form as expressions ( 6.50 ), but with the
interchange @xmath .

In the numerical evaluation of possible MSSM effects we use the gluino
mass @xmath GeV and the average squark mass @xmath GeV, that are given
by the lower experimental bounds [ 72 ] . For the bounds on the mass
insertions we use the analysis of [ 110 , 218 ] . The strongest bounds
on mass insertion parameters @xmath are obtained by requiring that the
minima of the scalar potential do not break charge or color, and that
they are bounded from below [ 218 , 226 ] , giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bounds on mass insertions @xmath and @xmath can be obtained from the
experimental upper bound on the mass difference in the neutral D system.
Saturating the experimental bound @xmath GeV [ 227 , 228 ] by the gluino
exchange, gives [ 110 , 218 , 229 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been set to zero. These translate into

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.54a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.54b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that both @xmath and @xmath receive largest contributions from
@xmath insertions. Note also that the upper limit on @xmath coefficient
is three orders of magnitude larger than the Standard Model value, while
for @xmath is an order of magnitude larger than the SM value. However,
as discussed in the previous section, SM prediction is dominated by the
@xmath insertions and therefore by the long distance effects.

The contributing diagrams are shown on Fig. 6.10 , to which the diagrams
with @xmath should be added. In the mass insertion approximation the
coefficient @xmath is small and will be neglected in the following. When
the @xmath operators are inserted, the photon bremsstrahlung off the
final lepton pair is not possible. In the case of the @xmath operator
this is because the diagrams are of the type shown in Fig. 6.9 , while
in the case of the @xmath operator the bremsstrahlung is prohibited
because of the vector current conservation.

Taking the values of induced Wilson coefficients at the upper bounds we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The MSSM contribution to the decay rate is entirely due to the gluino
exchange enhancement of the @xmath coefficients. The decay rate is thus
enhanced in low @xmath region, which also explains larger increase of
the @xmath decay rate. The increase is, however, not significant enough
to dominate over the resonant contributions ( 6.44 )-( 6.46 ). The MSSM
effects, if any, are thus too small to be unambiguously detected
experimentally in the decays @xmath .

#### 6.5.4 R parity violation

The situation is quite different once the assumption of @xmath parity
conservation is relaxed and the soft symmetry breaking terms are
introduced. We follow the analysis of Ref. [ 109 ] . The tree level
exchange of down squarks results in the effective interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the coefficients of the lepton–up-quark–down-squark
@xmath parity breaking terms of the superpotential in the quark mass
basis. The effective interaction ( 6.56 ) translates into the additional
contributions @xmath to the @xmath Wilson coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

while no contributions are generated to the @xmath Wilson coefficients [
109 ] . For electrons in the final states we use bounds on @xmath from
charged current universality [ 230 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

For muons in the final state, the limits come from @xmath [ 109 ] .
Using the new experimental bound @xmath [ 177 ] , this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bounds on trilinear couplings ( 6.58 ), ( 6.59 ) then give the
following bounds on possible enhancements of the @xmath Wilson
coefficients for the electron or muon channel

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.60a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.60b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Note that in ( 6.60 ) the squark mass cancels. The
enhancements @xmath are then added to the Standard Model values. The
diagrams are listed on Figure 6.10 . The possible enhancement over the
SM branching ratio predictions is quite striking and is in the case of
muons in the final state by almost two orders of magnitude, if the
values of @xmath Wilson coefficients are taken to be the upper bounds in
( 6.60 ). The diagrams on Fig. 6.10 with photon bremsstrahlung off the
final lepton pair and the insertion of the @xmath operator are IR
divergent. We take cutoff energy to be @xmath MeV or @xmath MeV. The
contributions from various sources, the nonresonant ( 6.41 ) and
resonant ( 6.44 )-( 6.46 ) SM contributions, the insertion of @xmath
operators with the @xmath values given in ( 6.54a ), and the
contributions from insertion of @xmath operators with @xmath bounded by
( 6.60 ) are summarized in Table 6.5 .

The maximal branching ratios obtainable in the framework of MSSM with
@xmath parity violation are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These are to be compared with the SM predictions ( 6.47 ). Note that the
SM predictions are not affected by the cuts on the soft photon energy at
the order of @xmath , as the bulk of the contribution either comes from
the resonances or the low @xmath region (while the cut on @xmath is the
cut on the high @xmath region).

The enhancement due to possible @xmath parity violating contributions is
by more than an order of magnitude in the muon channel compared to the
SM prediction. The enhancement also has a distinct signal in the @xmath
decay width distribution. In the SM model the decay @xmath either
proceeds through @xmath vector resonances or through nonresonant
two-meson exchanges, which are important in the low @xmath region. The
@xmath parity violating signal on the other hand would arise from the
insertion of @xmath operators and is large in the region of high @xmath
(small photon energy) region as can be seen from Fig. 6.12 . The largest
possible effect, however, is below expected experimental sensitivities
for the rare charm decays at B-factories and CLEO-c, which are
apparently expected to be of the order of @xmath [ 216 ] .

#### 6.5.5 Summary of @xmath

We have presented a detailed study of @xmath and @xmath decays both in
the Standard Model (SM) and in the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
(MSSM) with and without @xmath parity violation. As for the SM
prediction, the decays are dominated by the inclusion of @xmath
operators, which induce nonperturbative long distance (LD) effects. The
penguin operators are suppressed by @xmath CKM matrix elements and are
therefore irrelevant for the processes considered. Nonresonant LD
contributions are evaluated by employing the combined heavy quark and
chiral symmetries. They are found to be important only in the region of
low final lepton pair mass, while their contribution to the integrated
decay width is less then 10%. The decay width is dominated by the decay
cascade @xmath , where @xmath . The Standard Model branching ratio is
then predicted to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also investigated possible enhancements of the decay widths due to
new physics contributions. We have found that possible effects coming
from gluino-squark exchanges in the context of MSSM with @xmath parity
conserved are masked by the LD contributions from the SM. However, if
the assumption of @xmath parity conservation is relaxed, the tree level
exchange of down squarks can increase the predicted branching ratios by
more than an order of magnitude. The largest possible effect comes from
the diagrams with photon bremsstrahlung off the leptons in the final
state and is IR divergent. Choosing two different cuts on the photon
energy we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Allowing for the uncertainty in the SM calculation which we discussed
after Eq.( 6.47 ), we consider that branching ratios in excess of @xmath
are not accountable by the SM. The effect of the MSSM with R parity
violation in the muon channel is the closest to the experimental
sensitivities of @xmath expected at B-factories and CLEO-c [ 216 ] .
Thus we propose the @xmath decay as a possible probe of new physics.

## Chapter 7 Quenching errors in the heavy-to-light transitions

In this chapter we will turn to a slightly different subject, namely the
application of effective theories in the lattice QCD [ 36 ] . These have
been successfully exploited to tackle the various approximations made in
the calculations with the discretized version of QCD [ 53 ] .

In QCD there are several fairly different energy scales, which make the
calculations more challenging. There is the energy scale of
nonperturbative gluonic effects, @xmath , which for the purpose of this
chapter will be be set equal to the chiral perturbation scale @xmath
GeV. The other scales are set by the quark masses. For the light quark
masses, we have @xmath , with @xmath MeV, while the up and down quark
masses are about 25 times smaller. On the other hand, for the bottom
quark mass we have @xmath , while the charm quark mass @xmath GeV is
close to @xmath . The lattice also provides regularization of the theory
with both ultraviolet and infrared cutoffs [ 36 ] . The smallest Compton
wavelength realized on the lattice cannot be smaller than the lattice
spacing. The largest Compton wavelength realized on the lattice, on the
other hand cannot, be larger than the overall size of the lattice. The
UV cutoff @xmath in the momentum space is thus set by the nonzero
lattice spacing @xmath , while the IR cutoff @xmath is provided by the
finite size @xmath of the lattice. Ideally one would wish to have as
fined grained lattice as possible, so that the UV cutoff would be far
above the highest physical quark masses, while the lattice would be
larger then the largest Compton wavelengths present in the system,
@xmath . One would then have the hierarchy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a realistic situation, however, this is not possible. The memory
needed for such a calculation is roughly proportional to the number of
lattice sites @xmath and explodes quickly, if either the size of the
lattice is increased and/or the lattice spacing is reduced. In addition,
the algorithms slow down, if the number of lattice sites is increased,
as well as if the quark masses are reduced. The latter problem arises
from the calculation of quark propagators. For it, the inverse of a
discretized Dirac operator @xmath has to be computed. For small quark
masses most of the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator are small, making
the computation of an inverse numerically extremely demanding.

In a typical lattice QCD calculation nowadays [ 53 ] thus @xmath (where
different number of lattice points in temporal and spatial directions
are also used), with @xmath GeV (and thus @xmath GeV) and @xmath fm. In
typical calculations the “light” quarks have masses in the range @xmath
. For the heavy quarks either @xmath is used, or the static
approximation @xmath is taken. The values of masses @xmath , the size of
lattice @xmath and the lattice spacing @xmath are varied in the
calculation. Variation of lattice spacing @xmath is used to numerically
extrapolate from nonzero lattice spacing to a continuum @xmath .
Arguments from effective field theory approach can be used to describe
discretization effects and to improve the extrapolation to continuum.
This is the so called Symanzik improvement program, that allows for a
construction of improved lattice actions [ 53 , 231 ] . Effective
theories, i.e. the chiral perturbation theory, are also used to guide
the extrapolation in the quark masses to the physical values.

Another approximation that is very common in the lattice QCD
calculations, but that has not yet been mentioned in the discussion so
far, is the so called quenched approximation [ 232 ] . It is this
approximation, that we will focus on in the rest of this chapter.

### 7.1 Quenched approximation in the lattice QCD

To obtain physical observables in the quantum field theories, one has to
be able to compute Green’s functions of the form [ 36 , 76 , 234 ]

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are sets of fermion and gauge fields respectively,
with @xmath the Dirac indices, @xmath is the purely gluonic action,
while

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note, that we work in the Minkowski metric, while lattice calculations
are done in the Euclidean metric. Since we will not introduce lattice
QCD actions, nor do any explicit calculations with discretized QCD, this
will not be an obstacle.

Since the action in the path integral ( 7.2 ) is quadratic in the
fermion fields, these can be integrated out, giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are Dirac indices, @xmath are the space-time coordinates,
and the sum over all permutations is understood in ( 7.4 ). The
remaining integration over the gluonic fields is done numerically using
Monte Carlo methods. As already discussed above, the computation of the
Dirac operator inverses is numerically demanding, if the eigenvalues are
small, which occurs for small quark masses. Numerically even more
demanding is the computation of the Dirac operator determinant. It is
thus very tempting to set @xmath in the calculation of ( 7.4 ) and to
compensate for the corresponding omission of the sea quarks by adjusting
the bare couplings. This is the so called quenched approximation and
corresponds to omitting closed fermion loops in the calculation.

The exact shift in the observables due to the quenched approximation is
difficult to estimate without doing the full “unquenched” or “dynamical”
calculations (i.e. with the determinant in 7.4 kept in the calculation).
For the calculation of the hadronic spectrum the quenched approximation
agrees with the experimental data at the level of a few percent [ 235 ]
. The situation may not be so favorable in other observables, as will be
discussed further on. Even though the precise effect of quenching is
difficult to predict, there exists an effective theory approach that can
guide one toward the sizes of the quenching errors.

### 7.2 Quenched Chiral Perturbation Theory

An important observation that will lead us to the formulation of the
Quenched Chiral Perturbation Theory (Q @xmath PT) [ 236 , 237 ] , is
that the sea-quark loop effects can be removed by introducing ghost
fields. Consider for instance the path integral involving bosonic fields
@xmath , @xmath ^(*) ^(*) * The ghost fields @xmath , @xmath have
nothing to do with the fermion fields with Goldstone boson degrees of
freedom integrated out, that have been introduced in chapter 2 (see,
e.g., Eq. ( 2.18 )). I apologize to the reader for multiple use of the
symbol. Note also, that unlike the fermionic integration variables
@xmath , the ghost fields are not independent [ 238 ] . They have to be
constrained in order for the functional integrals to converge.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The inverse of the Dirac operator determinant in ( 7.5 ) is exactly what
is needed to cancel the determinant in ( 7.4 ). Adding another
integration over bosonic fields with the weight function ( 7.5 ) to the
Green’s function ( 7.2 ), will then result in the cancellation of the
Dirac operator determinant in the final result ( 7.4 ). Introduction of
the bosonic spin @xmath ghost fields (i.e. fields with ‘‘wrong’’
statistics) in the QCD Lagrangian thus mimics the quenched
approximation. The quenched QCD (QQCD) Lagrangian is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the purely gluonic part of the Lagrangian. From the
Lagrangian ( 7.6 ) we can anticipate the hadron spectrum of the quenched
approximation. In addition to the usual @xmath mesons, we will have
bosons consisting of two ghosts @xmath as well as fermions consisting of
quarks and ghosts, @xmath or @xmath .

If the masses @xmath in ( 7.6 ) are small compared to @xmath , the
quenched QCD ( 7.6 ) exhibits an approximate chiral symmetry. This has
the same Ward identities as the naively expected global symmetry of QQCD
[ 238 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes a semi-direct product ^(†) ^(†) † The semi-direct
product is defined as follows. Let @xmath and @xmath be subgroups of
@xmath , where @xmath is normal ( @xmath is a normal subgroup if, for
all @xmath and all @xmath , @xmath ). If @xmath , then the semi-direct
product @xmath consists of all @xmath . . The semi-direct product in (
7.7 ) is a consequence of the fact that the generator of @xmath group
@xmath , and some of the generators of @xmath do not commute. The @xmath
is a graded symmetry group that mixes @xmath fermionic and @xmath
bosonic degrees of freedom. The fundamental representation of @xmath
consists of @xmath matrices @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath the @xmath matrices of commuting numbers and,
@xmath of anticommuting numbers. We define also a cyclic “supertrace”
@xmath , while the “superdeterminant” is @xmath , with the property
@xmath [ 236 ] . For @xmath then @xmath and @xmath , with the hermitian
conjugation defined as usual (complex conjugation of the usual
transpose), while the complex conjugation switches the order of
anticommuting variables @xmath [ 236 , 239 ] .

As in the QCD, we assume, that the axial part of the symmetry group (
7.7 ) is spontaneously broken [ 236 , 238 ] . We then have the following
symmetry breaking pattern

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spontaneous symmetry breaking gives rise to massless Goldstone
bosons. From the simple counting of generators of the spontaneously
broken symmetry group @xmath , one would expect @xmath Goldstone bosons.
However, the @xmath meson does not decouple as in the usual QCD. This
will be discussed in some more detail.

Consider for definiteness the fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides the ordinary @xmath Goldstone mesons @xmath , which are
represented by the @xmath matrix @xmath in ( 7.10 ), we have also @xmath
mesons @xmath as well as @xmath pseudoscalar fermions @xmath . We also
define the field @xmath that is invariant under the unbroken symmetries
in ( 7.9 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The part of the @xmath matrix that contains @xmath fields, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath unit matrix and @xmath as before. Note, that
the unit matrix @xmath is one of the generators of @xmath group, as
@xmath , while the @xmath generates the anomalous @xmath . Since the
identity operator @xmath is a generator of broken symmetry, the field
@xmath is expected to couple to a Goldstone boson as usual. It takes
more effort to show, that also @xmath couples to a Goldstone boson and
has to be kept in the analysis ^(‡) ^(‡) ‡ This point has been clarified
recently in [ 238 ] through the use of Ward identities. The important
ingredients of this analysis are the facts that @xmath and @xmath . [
238 ] . We will not show this explicitly, but will give some further
arguments why @xmath , @xmath have to be kept in the analysis after the
effective Lagrangian is introduced (cf. Eqs. ( 7.15 ), ( 7.16 ))

To write down the chiral Lagrangian one then follows the classic
analysis of Gasser and Leutwyler with @xmath field kept in the
Lagrangian (see section 12. of [ 38 ] ). Since the @xmath field is
invariant under the non-anomalous part of the graded group, in principle
arbitrary functions of @xmath can appear in the Lagrangian. Expanding
the functions and keeping only the relevant terms for the processes of
interest, the Lagrangian up to the order @xmath is [ 236 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath MeV, @xmath . Two new low energy constants @xmath appear in
the chiral Lagrangian ( 7.13 ) [ 236 ] . The so-called hairpin insertion
@xmath is related to the commonly used dimensionless parameter @xmath ,
where @xmath . Note that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where
in the mass of @xmath meson the term @xmath has not been included, for
the reasons discussed below (cf. Eqs. ( 7.15 ), ( 7.16 )).

The presence of @xmath terms in ( 7.13 ) has some unusual consequences
for the interactions of @xmath bosons. Consider, for simplicity, the
case in which all the quark masses are equal. The @xmath part of the
Lagrangian ( 7.13 ) is [ 237 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse of a propagator in @xmath basis is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

To diagonalize this propagator, one would have to introduce @xmath
dependent eigenbasis! Instead, one treats the @xmath as an interaction.
Note that two subsequent applications of this interaction on one
propagator line give a vanishing contribution (i.e. multiplying the
first matrix in ( 7.15 ) from the left and from the right with the
second matrix in ( 7.15 ) gives zero). This is in agreement with the
expectations for the quark flow in @xmath propagator [ 233 , 236 ] as
depicted on Fig. 7.1 . In QQCD only the diagrams without quark loops
remain (which correspond to only one interaction vertex at the meson
level).

The propagator of the @xmath mesons is obtained by inverting ( 7.15 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This propagator is very different from what we are used to deal with in
the standard @xmath PT. First of all, the singlet part in ( 7.13 )
proportional to @xmath , that in unquenched or dynamical @xmath PT would
contribute to the mass of the @xmath meson, now stands in the
denominator of the second term in the @xmath propagator ( 7.16 ). Taking
@xmath , the @xmath meson does not decouple from the other Goldstone
bosons, in contrast to what happens in the standard @xmath PT.

The order @xmath Lagrangian @xmath contains a plethora of additional
terms [ 38 ] , which we refer to as counterterms. We write down only the
terms, which give non-zero contributions to the processes of interest

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the standard @xmath PT ( 2.28 ), ( 2.29 ) can be obtained from
equations ( 7.13 ), ( 7.17 ) by replacing @xmath , @xmath and setting
@xmath .

The heavy mesons are included by combining the heavy-quark symmetry and
chiral expansion. The effective Lagrangian in the heavy quark limit and
at the next-to-leading order in the chiral expansion is given by [ 54 ,
55 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Compared to the usual
dynamical heavy meson chiral Lagrangian ( 2.45 ), a new term appears at
the lowest level with the coupling constant @xmath . The higher order
terms in the expansion in @xmath and @xmath are then (up to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Dots denote terms that were not written out, since they
either do not contribute to the @xmath transition or are of higher order
in the chiral expansion. The effect of term proportional to @xmath is to
change the heavy meson propagator. In the case of @xmath quark the shift
is @xmath , where @xmath . Note that we do not consider the @xmath
corrections. The dynamical heavy meson chiral perturbation theory is
obtained by letting @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and setting @xmath .

Next we turn to the heavy-to-light current. At leading and
next-to-leading order in the chiral expansion this is (using the heavy
quark symmetry)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath as before. Only the terms which contribute to the processes
of interest up to the next-to-leading order in the chiral expansion are
displayed. The @xmath is an artifact of the quenched heavy-meson @xmath
PT. The phases of heavy mesons can be chosen such, that @xmath is
imaginary, while other coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
real as can be seen by @xmath symmetry considerations.

The values of coupling constants in the dynamical @xmath PT are
extracted from experiment as described in section 2.5 . We use the tree
level values of couplings as a first order estimate. Similarly, the
coupling constants of quenched chiral Lagrangians ( 7.13 ), ( 7.17 ), (
7.18 ), ( 7.19 ) and the heavy-to-light current ( 7.2 ) are extracted
from the quenched lattice data. From a compilation of quenched
determinations of @xmath decay constants @xmath [ 240 ] one arrives at
@xmath . The @xmath coupling in quenched QCD has been calculated
recently [ 241 ] with the value @xmath (see also exploratory calculation
in [ 242 ] ). The quenched pion constant is @xmath [ 243 ] .

The value of the quenched log parameter @xmath is estimated from a
number of quenched lattice analyses. The CP-PACS collaboration [ 244 ]
extracted the value of @xmath from the spectrum of pseudoscalar mesons,
and obtain @xmath , whereas from the pseudoscalar meson decay constants
they find @xmath . In Ref. [ 245 ] the authors quote @xmath as their
final estimate, while the Ref. [ 246 ] obtained @xmath . After combining
the above results with the pre-97 world average @xmath [ 247 ] we arrive
at @xmath . In terms of @xmath , by using @xmath MeV, this amounts to
@xmath

No evidence for a nonzero value of the coupling constant @xmath has been
found. Note that what is actually measured in the lattice simulations is
@xmath . The claim [ 245 ] is that @xmath dependence is mild so that the
hairpin (cross) vertex on Figure 7.1 is well described by the momentum
independent mass insertion @xmath , therefore we set @xmath in the
numerical analysis.

The @xmath coupling is a @xmath coupling ( 7.18 ) and there are no
lattice results for it. Large @xmath arguments suggest that @xmath , so
that we vary @xmath in this range. The analysis of the counterterms
@xmath has been made by the ALPHA collaboration [ 248 ] in which they
get @xmath . The @xmath is small by @xmath arguments and not determined
by their analysis. In numerical evaluation we take @xmath and @xmath .
There are no experimental data regarding the sizes of the @xmath and
@xmath counterterms. From large @xmath considerations we can conclude
that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath suppressed, i.e., the following
relations are expected @xmath , @xmath . In the numerical estimates we
then set @xmath . The approximate size of @xmath is determined by
observing that @xmath term in ( 2.29 ) and @xmath term in ( 2.45 ) have
similar structure compared to the kinetic term in ( 7.13 ) and ( 7.18 )
respectively. It is thus reasonable to expect that roughly @xmath .
Similar reasoning applies for @xmath , so that in the numerical
evaluation we vary @xmath and @xmath in the range @xmath .

### 7.3 Effects of quenching in @xmath transitions

In this section we apply the formalism of quenched chiral perturbation
theory to the weak @xmath transitions. Semileptonic decay @xmath plays a
crucial role in the determination of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM)
matrix element @xmath from the experiment [ 249 ] . For this purpose a
solid knowledge of the @xmath form factors is needed. In principle the
form factors can be obtained from lattice simulations, but these are
forced to use various approximations at present, as discussed at the
beginning of this chapter. We will address the effects of the quenched
approximation in this section.

The quenched version of the HH @xmath PT has already been used for the
heavy meson decay constants, corrections to the heavy meson masses,
Isgur-Wise function and bag parameters @xmath in [ 54 , 55 ] . On the
other hand, the heavy-to-light weak transition has been considered only
in the dynamical HH @xmath PT in [ 70 ] , while there has been no such
study in the quenched version. We study the matrix elements @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath . The V-A matrix element is the matrix element of the
hadronic current in the @xmath decays, while the tensor matrix element
@xmath plays an important role, for instance, in the decay @xmath . This
decay might be sensitive to new physics and has recently been observed
experimentally [ 250 ] .

A general parameterization of the vector current matrix element between
two pseudoscalar states is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , with @xmath the @xmath meson and @xmath the outgoing
light pseudoscalar meson momenta. The tensor current matrix element is
parametrized as [ 252 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the heavy meson velocity defined through @xmath with
@xmath the heavy quark mass. The operator @xmath induces the @xmath
decay, but the form factor @xmath does not contribute to this decay. The
form factor @xmath , which does contribute, can be related to @xmath in
the heavy-quark limit. The heavy quark symmetry relation @xmath [ 252 ]
for the heavy meson at rest, @xmath , (cf. section 2.3 ) leads to ^(§)
^(§) § As an intermediate step one can introduce a more convenient
parametrization

@xmath

with @xmath the heavy meson velocity and @xmath the pion energy in the
@xmath meson rest frame. In the heavy quark limit, with @xmath , then

@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the relation ( 7.22 ), we do not have to consider the tensor
currents separately. The conclusions for @xmath apply also for the
@xmath form factor.

The form factors @xmath are calculated to 1-loop using the heavy meson
chiral perturbation theory outlined in the previous section. The tree
level diagrams are shown in Fig. 7.2 . In the heavy-quark limit the
point diagram gives the leading contributions to @xmath , while the
@xmath form factor receives the leading contribution from the pole
diagram. The leading order amplitudes are corrected at one-loop through
the diagrams shown on Fig. ( 7.3 ). Beside the @xmath form factors
@xmath and @xmath , we give also the one-loop corrections to the heavy
pseudoscalar decay constant @xmath and the light pseudoscalar decay
constant @xmath . One loop calculation of the decay constants can be
found in [ 38 , 78 , 77 ] for the full (“dynamical”) theory, while in [
54 , 55 , 236 ] results for the quenched @xmath PT have been obtained.
The results of the calculation in the quenched @xmath PT are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

while in the dynamical theory (i.e. in the usual @xmath PT corresponding
to the full QCD) the physical observables are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (7.27)
                          (7.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the light quark masses ( 7.13 ), @xmath , while the
meson indices denote quark flavors @xmath , @xmath . Above we have also
introduced the variable @xmath , which is equal to the pion energy in
the B meson rest frame. It is trivially connected to the @xmath variable
@xmath . The @xmath , @xmath in ( 7.23 )-( 7.30 ) denote the one-loop
chiral corrections which are independent of the counterterms @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . They depend on the couplings @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and in the quenched theory also on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Note, that the coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath need not be
the same in the dynamical and quenched versions of the @xmath PT. We use
the values listed in Table 7.1 . The explicit expressions for @xmath ,
@xmath are listed in Eqs. ( C.1 )-( C.34 ) of appendix C . Loop diagrams
are calculated using dimensional regularization with the renormalization
prescription @xmath used by Gasser and Leutwyler in [ 38 ] . The isospin
limit @xmath has been used in the calculation, and mass differences
between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath meson states, when appearing
in the loop, have been neglected.

There are several interesting observations regarding expressions ( 7.23
)-( 7.30 ):

-   The scaling of the form factors with @xmath is as required by the
    heavy quark symmetry, i.e., @xmath , @xmath . The @xmath corrections
    are not included in the analysis. However, for the range of @xmath ,
    the corrections can be estimated by @xmath . Errors are expected to
    be smaller for larger @xmath , i.e. in the part of phase space where
    the approach of @xmath PT is valid.

-   The @xmath form factor has a pole at @xmath , as it can be seen from
    the presence of @xmath term in ( 7.23 ), ( 7.27 ). No such pole is
    present in @xmath . Apart from the pole in @xmath , all other @xmath
    dependence of @xmath and @xmath form factors near zero recoil is
    determined by the 1-loop factors @xmath and @xmath . There is no
    @xmath dependence coming from the counterterms.

-   The form factors @xmath , @xmath and the decay constant @xmath
    contain quenched logarithms of the form @xmath . These diverge in
    the limit @xmath (see Eqs. ( 7.31 ) below). Divergences of this type
    are present also in the quark condensate [ 236 ] and the heavy-meson
    decay constant @xmath [ 54 , 55 ] , but are not present in @xmath
    for degenerate quarks.

To show the last observation explicitly, we expand at fixed @xmath the
expressions ( 7.23 )-( 7.30 ) for small pseudoscalar mass @xmath . For
simplicity, the final light pseudoscalar @xmath is assumed to be
composed of two mass-degenerate quarks. For small mass expansion in the
quenched theory we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
                          (7.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As before, the @xmath mass difference of the heavy meson states has been
neglected in the loops. The coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
depend on @xmath and can be obtained by expanding the complete
expressions listed in appendix C . Same leading order terms are obtained
also for the expansion in @xmath at fixed @xmath , with the difference
from expansion ( 7.31 ) starting at the order @xmath . The expansion for
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath do not depend on @xmath . The expressions
( 7.31 ), ( 7.32 ) are to be compared with the unquenched chiral
expansions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath               (7.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.33b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where again @xmath depend on @xmath , while @xmath is ^(¶) ^(¶) ¶ The
importance of the chiral logarithms in this expansion for the ratio of
the heavy meson decay constants @xmath can be estimated by comparing it
to the ratio of the light pseudoscalar decay constants @xmath [ 251 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference in the expansions around @xmath between full and quenched
theories is striking. First of all, the chiral limit @xmath does not
exist for the quenched case, as then the quenched chiral logs @xmath
diverge. Next, in the expansion of @xmath a linear term in @xmath
appears, while in the full theory the expansion begins at @xmath as
usual. The linear term arises from the diagrams 7 and 9 in Fig. 7.3 . It
is absent, however, if @xmath is first kept different from zero in the
loops and then the limit @xmath is taken. This alternative expansion
would then be valid only if @xmath , which is not the case, e.g., in the
@xmath system. In the D meson system on the other hand @xmath for the
physical pion in the final state, so that the expansion given in ( 7.31
), ( 7.33 ) may not be valid for this limiting case. The expansions (
7.31 ), ( 7.33 ) are, however, valid both for the set of the light and
heavy quark masses used in the lattice at present, as well as for the
@xmath meson system.

Note, that the quenched chiral logarithmic terms do not depend on @xmath
. The divergent terms in ( 7.31b ) are positive for @xmath . This
implies that @xmath , @xmath should eventually start increasing with the
decreasing @xmath (see Figure 7.4 ). A general prediction of our
analysis is that at small values of @xmath , below @xmath , the @xmath
form factor increases with smaller @xmath . The chirally divergent
quenched logarithms start to dominate the behavior of the form factors
at around @xmath . The dependence of @xmath on @xmath is difficult to
predict for lager values of @xmath , as then higher order terms in
@xmath PT become important.

We illustrate the difference between the quenched and dynamical chiral
extrapolations to the physical pion mass on Figure 7.4 . Note, that the
chiral perturbation theory is valid only for small pseudoscalar masses
@xmath , while the lattice simulations are done at the pion masses
@xmath GeV [ 253 , 254 , 255 , 256 , 257 ] . The chiral perturbation
theory results thus cannot be directly compared with the lattice data on
@xmath transition. In order to illustrate the importance of the chiral
extrapolations we then proceed as follows. For the dependence of @xmath
form factor on @xmath at high values of the final pseudoscalar mass
@xmath GeV, we use the lattice results. In this range of @xmath , the
lattice data show linear dependence of form factors @xmath on @xmath .
For definiteness we use the data of APE collaboration [ 255 , 258 ] at
@xmath GeV. The error bars on the data are indicated by the shaded
regions on Figure 7.4 .

Linear extrapolation in @xmath is then used from the region of lattice
data points to the value @xmath at which the Q @xmath PT expressions (
7.23 )-( 7.24 ) are matched smoothly to the linear dependence of the
lattice data. The matching point is varied between @xmath . The form
factors at fixed @xmath are thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in ( 7.23 ), while @xmath denote the linear fit to
the lattice data. @xmath and @xmath denote derivatives of @xmath and
@xmath on @xmath . Expression ( 7.35 ) applies also for the @xmath form
factor with the replacement @xmath .

In exactly the same way as described above also the dynamical @xmath PT
expressions ( 7.27 )-( 7.28 ) are matched smoothly to the same quenched
lattice data . Even though the dynamical and quenched lattice data might
well not be the same at high @xmath GeV, this assumption does suffice
for our purposes of comparing chiral extrapolations at low pion masses.
Note also, that the extrapolation in pion mass for the dynamical @xmath
PT case is done at fixed value of the strange quark mass @xmath , that
is set equal to its physical value.

In Figure 7.4 the central values of the parameters in Table 7.1 have
been used. The general features of the analysis are not changed, if the
values of the parameters are varied within the ranges given in Table 7.1
. Note that the uncertainties due to unknown counterterms and the value
of @xmath coupling constant are small, as these contributions are
proportional to @xmath , which is small. The largest variations are
obtained by varying values of @xmath and @xmath as they are multiplying
the divergent chiral logarithmic terms ( 7.31 ). These variations are at
the order of @xmath at the physical pion mass and, most importantly, do
not change the overall @xmath behaviour of the form factors @xmath ,
@xmath .

There are several things to be learned from Figure 7.4 . First of all,
the behaviour of quenched and dynamical @xmath at fixed @xmath is
strikingly different at low @xmath . The extrapolation of @xmath using
quenched @xmath PT (red dotted line) rises above the linear
extrapolation suggested by the lattice data points at higher @xmath
(solid black line). This behaviour is not surprising, and is expected
from the presence of quenched chiral logarithms as discussed below
Eqs. ( 7.31 )-( 7.34 ). On the other hand, the extrapolation of @xmath
using dynamical @xmath PT (blue dashed line) falls below the linear
extrapolation. Note, however, that this does not suggest that the values
of @xmath obtained by the linear extrapolation from the quenched lattice
data lie below the physical values of @xmath . We do not know the values
of @xmath at high @xmath for the dynamical case. These might as well be
higher than the quenched lattice data, while we have set them equal.
This issue can only be settled by the full dynamical lattice simulation.
The other thing to note is, that the chiral extrapolation using
dynamical @xmath PT does not deviate much from the linear extrapolation
for the case of the @xmath form factor, while the difference might be
substantial for the @xmath form factor.

The discussion above suggests, that going to very low quark masses in
the quenched lattice calculations of @xmath transition is not the most
sensible thing to do. Both @xmath and @xmath form factors blow up at
small @xmath due to the presence of quenched chiral logarithms. The
desirable thing to do is, of course, the dynamical lattice simulation.
Chiral perturbation theory can then be used to guide the extrapolation
down to the physical pion mass. The @xmath PT driven extrapolation is
important for the case of @xmath form factor, while it marginally
deviates from the linear extrapolation for @xmath form factor (see Fig.
7.4 ). However, as long as the dynamical lattice calculations do not
become available, the linear extrapolations of quenched lattice results
seem to be perfectly sensible thing to do. As a very rough estimate of
the quenching errors, we might use the difference between Q @xmath PT
extrapolation and the linear one at the mass @xmath , giving the value
of around 30%. For more detailed quantitative discussion on the
quenching errors in @xmath transitions, using the same method as
outlined in this thesis, we refer the interested reader to the recent
work [ 51 ] . We stress, however, that the method of (Q) @xmath PT can
merely point toward possible sizes of quenching effects, so that the
issue of quenching errors in @xmath form factors will be completely
settled only by a direct comparison of quenched calculations with the
future dynamical results.

## Chapter 8 Concluding remarks

The nonperturbative nature of QCD is a persisting problem of
calculations in the hadronic physics. In order to asses these effects in
the heavy meson decays, we have used the approach of effective theories.
In the processes with momenta exchanges small compared to the chiral
scale @xmath GeV and compared to the scale set by the heavy quark mass,
either @xmath GeV or @xmath GeV, the combined chiral and heavy quark
expansion can be used. Keeping the lowest order terms in the chiral and
@xmath expansion one ends up with a set of interaction terms with
unknown couplings. The set of leading order couplings is small enough,
so that all of them can be fixed from existing experimental data.

The heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory (HH @xmath PT) has been
applied to @xmath meson decays. The energy of intermediate pseudoscalar
mesons in these decays is of order @xmath , so that the chiral expansion
@xmath (for @xmath GeV) is rather close to unity. Thus, we have extended
the possible range of applicability of the chiral expansion in HH @xmath
PT, compared to the previous treatments like @xmath , @xmath or @xmath ,
in which a heavy meson appears in the final state. In view of this, the
formally next-to-leading terms could be as large as the leading ones.
The higher order terms are difficult to evaluate due to the lack of
experimental data, but can be estimated by using different
renormalization schemes for the chiral loops.

This idea has been tested on the decay mode @xmath . A naive application
of the widely used factorization approximation leads to a vanishing
prediction for this decay mode, in contrast to the experimental
situation. In the context of the HH @xmath PT the factorizable
contribution, which is zero, is of @xmath , while the decay receives
nonzero contributions at the one chiral loop order @xmath . The charged
pion and kaon exchanges thus introduce the nonfactorizable contributions
in the decay. A different nonfactorizable contribution coming from the
product of colored currents has been also estimated using gluon
condensate. The final results agree with the experimental result. The
error due to the neglected higher order terms can be estimated to be at
the order of @xmath .

It is rather difficult to considerably reduce this error with the
current approach. However, for the discussion of the flavor changing
neutral current (FCNC) rare charm decays, where the formalism has been
applied next, the errors of @xmath are not disturbingly large. In
addition, in the radiative @xmath meson decays @xmath , @xmath the order
@xmath counterterms do not contribute. No unknown couplings then enter
the prediction at the leading order, reducing the error. Also, the
chiral loops are finite so that there is no scheme dependence of the
predicted decay widths at the leading order.

The prime interest in the rare heavy meson decays is the search for new
physics signatures. Possible effects of the Standard Model extensions
can be quite remarkable for some of the inclusive charm decays. For
instance, the @xmath parity violating terms can increase the @xmath
decay probability by @xmath orders of magnitude over the SM quark level
prediction. Experimentally more tractable are, however, the exclusive
modes. The perplexity of the exclusive mode calculations is the
estimation of the nonperturbative effects. While in the @xmath meson
physics it is possible to find exclusive decay modes, that are dominated
by the perturbative short distance physics, this is not the case for the
@xmath meson rare decays. These are dominated by the nonperturbative,
“long distance”, physics. Nevertheless, as the FCNC charm rare decays
are one of the rare probes of the flavor dynamics in the up-quark
sector, possible effects of physics beyond the Standard Model can still
be large. We have considered rare nonhadronic radiative decays @xmath ,
@xmath using HH @xmath PT. Calculations were done in the context of the
Standard Model and its minimal supersymmetric extension with and without
conserved @xmath parity. The results are summarized in Table 8.1 . Note
that in @xmath calculation the inclusion of intermediate vector mesons
was necessary. The results obtained are to be compared with experimental
sensitivities of @xmath expected at B-factories and CLEO-c.

To perform the calculation several technical details had to be resolved
as well. To do the calculations in the framework of the HH @xmath PT,
the solutions of one-loop integrals with the heavy-meson propagators had
to be found. General results for up to four-point scalar functions are
discussed in chapter 3 of the thesis. In addition, the existing
calculations of renormalization group evolutions in the @xmath and
@xmath rare decays have been used to perform the next-to-leading order
renormalization group improved evaluation of the Wilson coefficients
relevant for the charm decays.

Finally, a modification of the HH @xmath PT, the quenched chiral
perturbation theory, has been used to discuss the common approximation
made in the lattice calculation of @xmath transitions. The so called
quenched approximation consists of omitting the sea-quark loops in the
calculations. This can be mimicked by introducing ghost fields in the
theory. As a consequence the one chiral loop corrections to the @xmath
form factors @xmath introduce terms that diverge in the chiral limit
@xmath . This is similar to what has already been found earlier for the
heavy meson decay constant @xmath and the light quark condensates. The
appearance of chirally divergent terms suggests two things, (i) that the
dependence of @xmath on @xmath is substantially different for the
quenched and dynamical (i.e. physical) theories in the region of small
final pseudoscalar masses @xmath , and (ii) that making quenched lattice
calculations with final pseudoscalar masses close to the physical pion
mass is not worth the effort as it may well lead away from the dynamical
result.

## Appendix A One loop scalar and tensor functions, special cases

The general solutions for the scalar functions appearing in the HQET
have been found in [ 79 ] and are reviewed in chapter 3 . The final
expressions for the three-point and four-point functions are quite
cumbersome. For this reason we list in this appendix expressions for the
three-point and four-point functions for several special sets of
parameters. We also list explicit expressions for some of the tensor
functions appearing in ( 3.6 )-( 3.11 ). At the end we also give a
“glossary” between notations used in [ 45 , 47 ] and the present text.

### a.1 Veltman-Passarino functions, special cases

In this section we give explicit expressions for some of the
Veltman-Passarino functions used in the calculation in chapters 5 , 6 ,
7 . The one-point scalar function @xmath , and the two-point scalar
function @xmath for equal masses in the propagators, are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The tensor functions are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath               (A.4)
                          (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

while @xmath is assumed to be positive.

Finally, we give explicit expressions for the three-point tensor
functions with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath               (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

used in the calculation of the @xmath decay (cf. section 6.4 ). They are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
                          (A.10a)
     @xmath               (A.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.10c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have abbreviated @xmath and @xmath , while @xmath is a
dilogarithm (see chapter 3 , Eq. ( 3.33 )).

### a.2 Heavy-quark scalar and tensor functions, special cases

In this section we give explicitly the HQET tensor functions that have
been used in chapters 5 , 6 for the calculation of the @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath decay widths. As a start we list the first few two-point
tensor functions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
                          (A.12)
                          (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be found in ( A.1 ), @xmath is given in ( 3.51 )
together with ( 3.41 ), while @xmath is given in ( 3.52 ).

Next we give the scalar three-point function in two limiting cases,
@xmath with @xmath and for @xmath (in the calculation we have @xmath ).
They are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.14)
     @xmath         (A.15)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the calculation of @xmath also a tensor function @xmath with @xmath
appears (cf. Eqs. ( B.5 ), ( B.7 ), ( B.13 ), ( B.14 ), ( B.21 )). It is
explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, let us give the expression for the four-point function @xmath
in the case of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath an infinitesimal positive parameter. This function appears
in the calculation of @xmath in section 6.4 , where @xmath .

### a.3 Notational glossary

In this section we list relations between notation for the scalar and
tensor functions as given in section 3.1 and the notation commonly used
in the 1-loop calculations of the chiral corrections in the heavy meson
systems. The relations between one-point and two-point functions as
defined in Refs. [ 44 , 66 , 67 ] and those defined in section 3.1 are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

the explicit expressions for these functions can be found above, @xmath
in Eq. ( A.1 ), @xmath in ( 3.51 ) together with ( 3.41 ), while @xmath
, @xmath are given in ( A.12 ), ( A.13 ) respectively. Note that the
expressions for @xmath , @xmath differ from the ones given in [ 66 ] by
the last two terms in Eqs. ( A.12 ), ( A.13 ), that are of the order of
@xmath . These additional finite terms originate from the fact that
@xmath is @xmath dimensional metric tensor [ 45 , 158 ] .

Finally, we give a glossary connecting the functions defined in [ 45 ,
47 ] with those defined in section 3.1 :

-   Veltman-Passarino two-point functions

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    The explicit expressions for @xmath are given in Eqs. ( A.2 )-( A.5
    ).

-   Veltman-Passarino three-point functions for @xmath

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.27)
         @xmath               (A.28)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.29)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    where the explicit expressions are given in ( A.10 ).

-   heavy-quark three-point functions

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.31)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

-   heavy-quark four-point function

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The relation in ( A.32 ) is valid for the case of @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath . The explicit expression for this function is given in Eq. (
    A.18 ).

## Appendix B Invariant amplitudes for the @xmath decay

In this appendix we list explicit expressions for the invariant
amplitudes corresponding to the diagrams shown on Figures 6.8 , 6.10 .

### b.1 Nonresonant LD invariant amplitudes

In this section we list the analytical results for the diagrams shown on
Fig. 6.8 . They contribute only to the @xmath part of the invariant
amplitude ( 6.38 ). Since separate diagrams are not gauge invariant, a
general form of an invariant amplitude corresponding to a single diagram
is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For a gauge invariant sum of diagrams therefore @xmath (cf. ( 6.39 ))
has to be true, which represents a very useful numerical check.

Note that @xmath form factors corresponding to diagrams on Fig. 6.8 are
zero. The analytical expressions for @xmath form factors are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
     @xmath               (B.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
                          (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.13)
                          (B.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.24)
     @xmath               (B.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.26)
     @xmath               (B.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (B.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , while in @xmath we have used the
abbreviation

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

with the dots representing the same dependence on the arguments as for
the first function in the square brackets.

### b.2 Nonresonant SD invariant amplitudes

In this appendix we list the invariant amplitudes corresponding to the
diagrams on Fig. 6.10 . We use the notation of Eq. ( 6.38 ), where we
write down only the nonzero form factors

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath have been used for short, while @xmath is the
lepton mass. Note that the “wrong chirality” Wilson coefficients @xmath
are negligible in the SM.

## Appendix C Chiral corrections to @xmath form factors

### c.1 Quenched theory

Bellow we list the chiral corrections to the form factors of the @xmath
matrix element, where the flavor content of mesons is @xmath , @xmath .
We work in the isospin limit with @xmath . In the case of @xmath , i.e.,
for the case of @xmath matrix element, the results bellow have to be
multiplied by @xmath . In the expressions given below, the abbreviation
@xmath is used, where @xmath are the quark masses. We also use the
definitions @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . When the
expression of the form @xmath is to be evaluated for @xmath (i.e. for
@xmath ), the appropriate derivative in terms of @xmath has to be taken.
The one-loop chiral corrections for the form factors in the quenched
heavy hadron @xmath PT are (cf. ( 7.23 ), ( 7.24 ))

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are as defined in ( 7.23 ), ( 7.24 ) and do not contain the
counterterms. The sum runs over diagrams shown on Figure 7.3 , while
@xmath are the wave function renormalization factors defined in ( C.13 )
below. In the calculation of one loop contributions we make several
approximations in order to simplify the final expressions. We make use
of the fact that @xmath for the @xmath transition ^(*) ^(*) * The lower
limit for @xmath value is the mass of the outgoing pseudoscalar meson
@xmath , while the connection with @xmath is @xmath . . Thus we can
safely neglect mass differences between @xmath states, if they appear in
the loop. This limit is physically sensible for most of the diagrams,
but it does lead to a spurious singularity at @xmath for (7a,b)
diagrams. It is thus necessary and appropriate to resum the
corresponding diagrams and then subtract the term, that renormalizes the
@xmath meson mass [ 70 ] . The nonzero corrections @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the corresponding diagram in Fig. 7.3 , with @xmath denoting
diagrams without (with) hairpin insertion, are (in the approximation
just described)

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath               (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
                          (C.5)
     @xmath               (C.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath , @xmath can be found in appendix A.3 . The nonzero
corrections @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath               (C.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.11)
                          (C.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the wave function renormalization factors @xmath we split the
one-loop contributions @xmath and the contributions coming from the
counterterms @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The loop contributions are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.14a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.14b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

while the counterterms contribute as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the quark masses as before. For @xmath the wave
function renormalization factor @xmath is in the isospin limit @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We list also the expressions for the heavy and light meson decay
constants

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (C.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are defined in ( C.13 ). For @xmath and @xmath this leads
in the isospin limit to

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (C.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.19b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

### c.2 Dynamical theory

In this subsection the expressions for the form factors in the dynamical
theory are listed. In the dynamical case the supertrace along @xmath
matrices is replaced by the trace along the @xmath matrices, the @xmath
field decouples, the @xmath field is traceless, @xmath is set to zero
and there are no diagrams with crosses in Fig. 7.2 , 7.3 . The
non-analytic contributions to form factors in this theory have been
calculated in [ 70 ] . Our results include also the analytic terms and
are obtained from the Lagrangians and currents as given in chapter 2 .
As in the quenched case, we work in the isospin limit @xmath and neglect
the differences of heavy meson masses in the loops. The chiral
corrections @xmath ( 7.27 ), ( 7.28 ) to the form factors of @xmath
transition @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum runs over the diagrams on Figure 7.3 , and @xmath are the one
loop wave function renormalization factors defined as in ( C.13 ). One
loop chiral corrections to the @xmath form factor are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath depend on the final and initial state and are

-   for @xmath transition
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

-   for @xmath transition
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

-   for @xmath transition
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

The nonzero one-loop chiral corrections to the @xmath form factor of
@xmath transition are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients are

-   for @xmath
    @xmath

-   for @xmath
    @xmath

-   for @xmath
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

The wave function renormalization factors @xmath for @xmath mesons in
the dynamical theory are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which are the limiting @xmath expressions of ( 2.87 ), ( 2.88 ). The
wave function renormalization factors for the light pseudoscalars @xmath
, @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (C.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Decay constants of @xmath mesons are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (C.31)
     @xmath         (C.32)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

while for @xmath they are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
                    (C.33)
     @xmath         (C.34)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

## Index

-    1PI §2.5
-    @xmath §2.3 , §2.3 , §2.5 , §2.5 — Table 7.1
-    @xmath §7.2 , §7.2 , Table 7.1
-    amplitude
    -    @xmath scattering §4.1
    -    gauge invariant §2.4 , §2.4 — §2.4
    -    in @xmath §6.3
    -    in @xmath Chapter 5 , §5.1 , §5.3 , Table 5.1
    -    in @xmath §6.5.1
    -    in @xmath §6.4.2 , Table 6.1 , Table 6.2
    -    in factorization approximation §4.3
-    amputated diagram §2.5
-    amputated Green function §4.2
-    analytic continuation §3.3 , §3.4
-    analyticity §3.6
-    annihilation diagrams Chapter 5 , §6.4.1
-    anomalous dimension §4.2 — §4.2
    -    definition of §4.2 — §4.2
    -    expansion of §4.2
    -    values of §4.2
-    anomalous interaction §6.4.2
-    APE collaboration §7.3
-    approach, used in thesis Chapter 1 — Chapter 1 , §2.2 — §2.4 , §4.2
    — §4.3 , Chapter 5 — §6.4.1
-    astrophysical constraints, on SM Chapter 1
-    axial anomaly §2.2
-    axial current §2.2 , §2.5
-    B-factories Chapter 1 , §6.2 , §6.5.4
-    BaBar Chapter 1 , §6.2
-    bare operators §4.2 , §4.2
-    Belle Chapter 1 , §6.2
-    @xmath §2.4 , §2.5 , Table 2.1
-    beyond the Standard Model Chapter 1 — §6.5.2 , §6.5.4
-    bosonization §2.3 , §5.2.2 , §5.2.2
-    bremsstrahlung §6.5.1 , §6.5.1 , §6.5.3 , §6.5.4 , §6.5.5
-    @xmath §4.2 , Table 4.1
-    @xmath §4.2 , §4.2
-    @xmath §4.2 , Table 4.1
-    @xmath §4.2 , §4.2
-    @xmath §4.2 , Table 4.1
-    Cabibbo allowed §4.3 , §4.3 , Chapter 5
-    Cabibbo doubly suppressed §4.3
-    Cabibbo once suppressed §4.3 , §6.3
-    Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix Chapter 1
-    calculation
    -    results of Table 4.1 , §5.3 — §5.3 , §6.4.3 — §6.4.3 , §6.5.5 —
        §6.5.5 , Chapter 8 — Chapter 8
    -    scalar functions §3.4 — §3.7
-    @xmath §6.4.1
-    chiral
    -    counting §2.3
    -    expansion §2.2 — §2.2
    -    Lagrangian §2.2 , §2.2 , §2.3 , §2.3
    -    perturbation theory §2.2 — §2.2
-    @xmath PT §2.2 — §2.2
-    CKM matrix Chapter 1
-    CLEO §2.5 , §6.2
-    CLEO-c §6.2 , §6.5.4 , §6.5.5
-    @xmath §6.2 — §6.3
-    color-currents, contributions of §5.2 — §5.2.2 , §5.3
-    completeness relation for @xmath §4.3
-    conclusions Chapter 8
-    contributions
    -    chiral loop §2.3 — §2.3 , §5.1 — §6.4.2 , §6.4.2 , §6.5.1 —
        §6.5.1
    -    vector resonance §6.5.1 — §6.5.1
-    corrections, chiral to couplings §2.5 — §2.5
-    cosmological constraints on SM Chapter 1
-    counterterms
    -    contributions of Figure 2.4 , §2.5 — §2.5 , §5.1 , §5.3 ,
        §6.4.2 , §6.4.2 , §6.4.2 , §6.4.3
    -    definition of §2.2 , §2.3
    -    quenched §7.2 , §7.2
    -    values of §2.3 , §2.5 , §5.1
-    coupling constants
    -    chiral, leading order §2.2
    -    chiral, NLO §2.2
    -    heavy meson sector §2.3
    -    light current §2.2
    -    photon coupling §2.4
    -    quenched §7.2 , §7.2 — §7.2
    -    values of Table 2.1
-    @xmath footnote 2 , Chapter 1 , Chapter 1 , Chapter 1 , Chapter 1 ,
    §4.2 , Chapter 5 , §6.1
-    @xmath Chapter 1 , §4.2 , §6.2 , §6.2 , §6.4.1 , §6.4.3
-    current heavy-to-light §2.3
-    current, light §2.2
-    @xmath §6.4 — §6.4.3
-    @xmath Chapter 5 — §5.3
-    @xmath §6.5 — §6.5.5
-    decay
    -    @xmath Chapter 5 — §5.3
    -    @xmath §6.5 — §6.5.5
    -    @xmath §6.4 — §6.4.3
-    diagrammatic, proof of gauge invariance §2.4 , §2.4 — §2.4
-    difficulties
    -    in calculation of scalar functions §3.2 — §3.2
    -    of approach Chapter 1 , Chapter 5 , §5.3 , §6.4.1
-    dilogarithm
    -    definition of §3.3
    -    useful relations §3.3 , §3.7 — §3.7
-    dimensional regularization Chapter 3 — §3.7
-    double pole §C.1
-    @xmath §6.2
-    effective action Figure 2.2 , §2.1 , §2.1
-    effective Lagrangian, definition of §2.1 — §2.1
-    effective theories
    -    ”bottom-up” approach Chapter 1
    -    ”top-down” approach Chapter 1
-    effective theory approach §2.1
-    effective vertices Figure 2.1 , §2.1
-    effective weak interaction §4.1 — §4.1 , §4.2 , §4.2 , §4.3
-    electromagnetic, interactions in approach §2.4
-    errors, estimation §5.3 , §6.4.3 — §6.4.3 , Chapter 8
-    exclusive decays , see @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
-    expansion
    -    chiral §2.2 , §2.3 — §2.3
    -    in @xmath §2.3 — §2.3
    -    in small @xmath §7.3 — §7.3
-    extrapolation
    -    chiral Chapter 7 , §7.3 — §7.3
    -    comparison of quenched and dynamical §7.3 — §7.3
    -    to continuum Chapter 7
-    @xmath , value of §7.2
-    @xmath , definition of §7.3
-    factorization approximation §4.3 — Chapter 5 , §5.1 , §5.1 , §6.4.1
    , §6.5.1
-    @xmath §7.2 , §7.3 , §7.3
-    FCNC Chapter 1 , §6.1 , §6.1 , §6.1 , §6.1 , §6.2
-    Fermi constant §4.1
-    FERMILAB §6.2
-    final state interactions §4.3 , Chapter 5 , Chapter 5 , Chapter 5 ,
    §5.3
-    @xmath , chiral corrections to §C.1 , §C.2 , §2.5
-    flavor §2.2
-    FOCUS §6.2
-    form factors
    -    in @xmath , see @xmath
    -    in @xmath §6.5.1
-    formalism, used in thesis , see approach , used in thesis
-    @xmath , chiral corrections to §C.1 , §C.2 , §2.5
-    framework, used in thesis , see approach , used in thesis
-    FSI , see final state interaction s
-    @xmath §2.3 , §2.5 , Table 2.1 , §7.2 , Table 7.1
-    @xmath §7.2 , Table 7.1
-    gauge interactions in effective theories §2.4 — §2.4
-    gauge invariance
    -    diagrammatic proof §2.4 — §2.4
    -    general proof §2.4 — §2.4
    -    useful theorem §2.4 — §2.4
-    @xmath §4.1
-    ghost fields §7.2
-    GIM suppression §4.2 , Chapter 5 , §6.1 , §6.3
-    GL, renormalization scheme , see renormalization scheme ,
    Gasser-Leutwyler
-    Glashow-Iliopoulos-Maiani , see GIM suppression
-    gluon condensate §5.2 — §5.2.2
-    Goldstone bosons §2.1 , §2.2
    -    interactions of §2.3
-    graded symmetry group §7.2
-    @xmath §2.2
-    GUT Chapter 1 , Chapter 1
-    hadronization
    -    currents §2.2 , §2.3 , §7.2
    -    general forms §2.3
-    hairpin insertion Figure 7.3 , §7.2 , §7.2
-    heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory §2.1 — §2.5
-    heavy quark propagator §2.3
-    Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Model §5.2.1
-    heavy-to-light current §2.3
-    HH @xmath PT , see heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory
-    Higgs boson Chapter 1
-    HL @xmath QM §5.2.1
-    HQET Chapter 1 , §2.3
-    hypercharge Chapter 1
-    hypergeometric function §3.3 — §3.3
    -    definition of §3.3
    -    useful relations §3.3
-    Inami-Lim calculation of @xmath §4.2 — §4.2
-    inclusive decays , see @xmath , @xmath
-    infrared divergences §6.5.4 , §6.5.5
-    integration of scalar functions §3.4 — §3.6
-    IR , see infrared divergences
-    @xmath §2.3 , §2.5
-    @xmath §2.3 , §2.5 , §7.2 , §7.2 , Table 7.1
-    Lagrangian
    -    chiral leading §2.2
    -    chiral subleading §2.2
    -    heavy meson §2.3 , §2.3
-    lattice QCD Chapter 7 — §7.3
    -    approximations in Chapter 7
    -    quenching §7.1
    -    setup Chapter 7
-    Lehmann-Symanzik-Zymmermann , see LSZ
-    LEP Chapter 1
-    leptonic decay , see @xmath , @xmath
-    Levi-Civita, tensor , see notation
-    light current §2.2
-    logarithm, branch cuts §3.2
-    long-distance contributions Chapter 1 , §6.1 , §6.3
-    loop
    -    corrections , see contributions , chiral loop
    -    regularization , see dimensional regularization
    -    renormalization §5.1
-    LoopTools §3.1
-    LSZ §2.4 , §2.5 , §4.2
-    @xmath Figure 7.1 , §7.2 , §7.2 , §7.2 , Table 7.1
-    mechanism of decay , see decay
-    Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Mode , see MSSM
-    @xmath §5.1
-    MSSM §6.3 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.3 — §6.5.3
-    @xmath §2.2 , §7.2
-    neglected effects, in thesis , see difficulties , of approach
-    neglected QCD in @xmath §4.2 — §4.2
-    neutrino oscillations Chapter 1
-    new physics
    -    see signatures, new physics §C.2
-    nonfactorizable contributions §5.1 — §5.3 , §6.4.1
-    nonperturbative effects Chapter 1 , Chapter 1 , Figure 2.2 , §2.1 ,
    §4.3 , §6.1 , §6.1 , §6.2
-    nonresonant contributions §5.3 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.1 — §6.5.1
-    notation §A.3 — Appendix B , §3.1 — §3.1 , see also Notation in the
    preamble to thesis
-    one particle irreducible diagrams §2.5
-    OPE §4.1 — §4.2 , §4.3 , §6.3
-    operator product expansion , see OPE
-    operators
    -    four-fermion §4.1 , §4.2
    -    penguin §4.1 , §4.2
    -    semileptonic §4.1
-    parameterization, Wolfenstein Chapter 1
-    penguin operators §4.1 — §4.2
    -    contribution in charm decays §4.2
    -    definition of §4.1
    -    semileptonic §4.1
-    @xmath 4.10 , Figure 4.1 , §4.1 , §4.2 , §4.3 , §4.3 , §5.1
-    @xmath §2.3 , §4.1 , §4.2 , §4.2 , §6.5.3
-    @xmath §4.1 , §4.2 , §4.2 , §6.5.4
-    @xmath 4.55d , §4.1 , §4.2 , §6.5.4
-    QCD Chapter 1 , §2.1 , §2.2
-    QCD factorization §4.3 , §6.4.3
-    QCD scale §4.2
-    QQCD §7.2 , see also quenched approximation
-    Quantum Chromodynamics Chapter 1 , §2.1 , §2.2
-    quark-hadron duality §6.4.3
-    quenched approximation §7.1 — §7.1
-    quenched logarithms 3rd item , §7.3
-    quenching effects §7.3 — §7.3
-    Q @xmath PT §7.2 — §7.2
-    @xmath parity violating terms §6.2 , §6.2 , §6.3 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.4
    — §6.5.4
-    rare decays Chapter 1 , Chapter 6 — §6.5.5
    -    calculation of §6.2 — §6.5.5
    -    experimental searches §6.1 , §6.2 , §6.5.4
    -    motivation for §6.1
    -    short review of charm §6.2
-    reliability of approach used , see difficulties , of approach
-    renormalization group §4.2 — §4.2
    -    calculation of Wilson coefficients §4.2 — §4.2
    -    effect on @xmath §4.2 , §4.2
    -    general framework §4.2 — §4.2
    -    in charm decays §4.2 — §4.2
-    renormalization scheme
    -    @xmath §5.1
    -    Gasser-Leutwyler §5.1
-    renormalization, wave function §2.5
-    renormalized operators §4.2 , §4.2
-    resonant contributions §4.3 , Chapter 5 , Chapter 5 , §5.3 , §6.4.1
    , §6.4.3 , §6.5.1 — §6.5.1
-    results §5.3 , §6.3 , §6.3 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.5 , Chapter 8
-    RG , see renormalization group
-    running, strong coupling constant §4.2
-    scalar function §3.1 — §3.7
    -    four-point §3.6 , §3.6
    -    one-point §3.4 , §3.4
    -    three-point §3.5
    -    two-point §3.4 , §3.4
-    sea-quark Chapter 1 , §7.2
-    semileptonic operators , see operators , semileptonic
-    short-distance contributions §6.3
-    signatures, new physics Chapter 1 , Chapter 1 , §6.1 , §6.1 , §6.1
    , §6.2 , §6.2 , §6.2 , §6.3 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.2 , §6.5.5
-    smoking gun §6.2
-    SNO Chapter 1
-    spontaneous symmetry breaking §2.1 , §2.2 , §7.2
-    Standard Model Chapter 1
    -    origin of name Chapter 1
-    @xmath Chapter 1
-    @xmath Chapter 1
-    @xmath Chapter 1
-    @xmath 2.41 , §2.1 , §2.2 , §2.2
-    summary §4.2 , §6.4.3 , §6.5.5 , Table 8.1
-    superdeterminant §7.2
-    Superkamiokande Chapter 1
-    supersymmetry Chapter 1 , §6.2 , §6.3 , §6.5.3 — §6.5.5 , Chapter 8
-    supertrace §7.2
-    SUSY , see supersymmetry
-    @xmath §4.1
-    @xmath §2.2
-    tables of results Table 4.1 , Table 5.1 , Table 6.1 , Table 6.2 ,
    Table 6.3
-    tensor functions Chapter 3 — §3.1
-    theorem, regarding gauge invariance §2.4
-    trilinear couplings , see @xmath parity violating terms
-    @xmath Chapter 1
-    unitarity §3.6
-    V-A Chapter 1 , §4.1 , §4.1
-    vector meson dominance , see VMD
-    Veltman-Passarino functions §A.1 , 1st item , §3.1 , §3.1
-    VMD §6.4.3 , §6.5.1
-    wave function renormalization §2.5
-    weak isospin Chapter 1 , §4.1 , §4.2
-    Wess-Zumino term §6.4.2
-    Wick rotation §3.2
-    Wilson coefficients §4.1 , §4.1 , §4.2 — §4.2 , §6.2
-    Wilson expansion , see OPE
-    Wolfenstein parameterization Chapter 1
-    @xmath §2.1 , §2.2

## List of abbreviations

  -------------- ---------------------------------------------
  @xmath PT      Chiral Perturbation Theory
  @xmath QM      Chiral Quark Model
  CKM            Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
  FCNC           Flavor Changing Neutral Current
  FSI            Final State Interaction(s)
  GIM            Glashow-Iliopoulos-Maiani
  GL             Gasser-Leutwyler
  GUT            Grand Unified Theory
  HH @xmath PT   Heavy Hadron Chiral Perturbation Theory
  HL @xmath QM   Heavy-Light Chiral Quark Model
  HQET           Heavy Quark Effective Theory
  IL             Inami-Lim
  IR             Infrared
  LO             Leading Order
  LSZ            Lehmann-Symanzik-Zymmermann
  MSSM           Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
  NLO            Next-to-Leading Order
  NNLO           Next-to-Next-to-Leading Order
  OPE            Operator Product Expansion
  @xmath         Modified Minimal Subtraction
  QCD            Quantum Chromodynamics
  Q @xmath PT    Quenched Chiral Perturbation Theory
  QED            Quantum Electrodynamics
  QQCD           Quenched Quantum Chromodynamics
  RG             Renormalization Group
  RGE            Renormalization Group Equation(s)/Evolution
  SM             Standard Model
  SUSY           Supersymmetry
  UV             Ultraviolet
  VMD            Vector Meson Dominance
  -------------- ---------------------------------------------