The effective theory based on combined chiral and heavy quark symmetry,
the heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory, is applied to @xmath meson
decays. In @xmath decay the nonfactorizable contributions are
calculated. These arise from chiral loops and products of color-octet
currents, while the prediction vanishes in the factorization limit. The
approach is confronted with the experimental data. Next, the flavor
changing neutral current rare charm decays are considered. The
predictions for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are given both in the
Standard Model as well as for the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
with and without @xmath parity conservation. A possible enhancement of
order 50 compared to the Standard model prediction is found for the
@xmath channel. This makes it an interesting probe of New Physics.

A modified version of the heavy hadron chiral perturbation theory is
used to estimate effects of quenched approximation in the lattice
calculations of @xmath transitions. The relevant form factors, @xmath ,
contain the chiral quenched logarithms that diverge in the chiral limit
@xmath . Behavior of the form factors as functions of @xmath in quenched
and full QCD is then found to be substantially different in the region
close to the physical pion mass.

In the thesis several technical details are clarified as well. The
explicit calculation of three and four-point scalar functions with one
heavy-quark propagator is given. Next, existing renormalization group
evolutions for @xmath and @xmath meson decays are modified to perform
next-to-leading order evolution of Wilson coefficients for charm decays.
Also a discussion of gauge invariance in effective theories is given.

Key Words: flavor changing neutral current, weak decays of heavy mesons,
heavy meson chiral perturbation theory, rare radiative decays, new
physics searches, quenched approximation, lattice quantum chromodynamics

PACS: 13.25.Ft, 13.20.-v, 13.60.-r, 12.60.Jv, 12.38.Gc
