##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 History and Motivation
        -    1.1.1 One-dimensional sigma models
        -    1.1.2 Two-dimensional sigma models and Gauge theories
    -    1.2 Outline
        -    1.2.1 Supersymmetry in sigma models
        -    1.2.2 Supergravity and one-dimensional sigma models
        -    1.2.3 Equivariant cohomology
        -    1.2.4 New two dimensional gauge theories
        -    1.2.5 Vortices and bounds
-    2 Sigma Models
    -    2.1 Two dimensional sigma models
        -    2.1.1 The action
        -    2.1.2 The Wess-Zumino term
        -    2.1.3 Global aspects of torsion
        -    2.1.4 Supersymmetric sigma models
        -    2.1.5 (1,0) supersymmetric sigma models
        -    2.1.6 (2,0) supersymmetry
        -    2.1.7 (4,0) supersymmetry
        -    2.1.8 (1,1) supersymmetry
        -    2.1.9 (2,1) supersymmetry
        -    2.1.10 (4,1) supersymmetry
    -    2.2 One dimensional sigma models
-    3 Spinning particles and Supergravity
    -    3.1 The @xmath supersymmetric action
    -    3.2 Supergravity in one dimension
    -    3.3 Hamiltonian Analysis
    -    3.4 Quantisation
-    4 Equivariant Cohomology
    -    4.1 Equivariant cohomology
        -    4.1.1 Definition
    -    4.2 The Weil Model
        -    4.2.1 The cohomology of @xmath
    -    4.3 Weil model for equivariant cohomology
        -    4.3.1 Equivariant extensions
    -    4.4 A physicist’s approach to equivariant cohomology
-    5 New two dimensional gauge theories
    -    5.1 Two-dimensional gauged sigma models with Wess-Zumino term
        -    5.1.1 Geometric Data and Action
        -    5.1.2 Conditions for gauge invariance
    -    5.2 @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory
        -    5.2.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.2.2 Sigma model multiplets
        -    5.2.3 Supersymmetric action
        -    5.2.4 The action of (1,0)-model in components and scalar
            potential
    -    5.3 @xmath supersymmetry
        -    5.3.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.3.2 The sigma model multiplet
        -    5.3.3 The fermionic multiplet
        -    5.3.4 Action
        -    5.3.5 The gauge multiplet action
        -    5.3.6 The sigma model action
        -    5.3.7 The action of the fermionic multiplet
        -    5.3.8 The action in components
        -    5.3.9 Scalar potential and classical vacua
    -    5.4 @xmath supersymmetry
        -    5.4.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.4.2 The sigma model multiplet
        -    5.4.3 The fermionic multiplet
        -    5.4.4 Action
        -    5.4.5 The gauge multiplet action
        -    5.4.6 The sigma model multiplet action
        -    5.4.7 The action of the fermionic multiplet
        -    5.4.8 The action in components and scalar potential
        -    5.4.9 Scalar Potential and Classical Vacua
    -    5.5 @xmath supersymmetry
        -    5.5.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.5.2 The sigma model multiplet
        -    5.5.3 Action
        -    5.5.4 The gauge multiplet action
        -    5.5.5 The sigma model multiplet action and potential term
        -    5.5.6 A generalisation of the action
        -    5.5.7 Scalar Potential
    -    5.6 @xmath supersymmetry
        -    5.6.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.6.2 The sigma model multiplet
        -    5.6.3 Action
        -    5.6.4 The gauge multiplet action
        -    5.6.5 The sigma model multiplet action and potential
        -    5.6.6 A generalisation
    -    5.7 @xmath supersymmetry
        -    5.7.1 The gauge multiplet
        -    5.7.2 The sigma model multiplet
        -    5.7.3 Action
        -    5.7.4 The gauge multiplet action
        -    5.7.5 The sigma model multiplet action and the potential
        -    5.7.6 A generalisation
    -    5.8 Summary
-    6 Vortices and Equivariant cohomology
    -    6.1 Introduction
    -    6.2 A bound for vortices in the (2,0) model
    -    6.3 A bound for vortices in the (4,0) model
    -    6.4 Kähler manifolds and non-abelian vortices
    -    6.5 Hyper-Kähler manifolds and non-abelian vortices
-    7 Conclusions

## Chapter 1 Introduction

This thesis is on the theory of two dimensional sigma models. Sigma
models have found a wide variety of applications in particle and
theoretical physics. We shall first outline briefly the historical
background and development of the theory, putting sigma models into
their proper context and then motivating their study by making the
reader aware of a small selection of their wide range of applications.
We shall also outline the results of this thesis.

### 1.1 History and Motivation

Nonlinear sigma models have been used to describe the dynamics of
relativistic and non-relativistic particles; their original motivation
was the study of the propagation of such particles in curved
space-times. Sigma models, in the modern sense, were first described in
[ 1 ] as a model of high energy hadron physics; it was postulated that
the pion field depended on a scalar meson called @xmath proposed in [ 2
] . This idea was formalised in [ 3 ] , where chiral invariant
Lagrangians were also written down,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are coordinates of @xmath and @xmath are coordinates of
@xmath . The coupling @xmath is a metric on the sigma model manifold
@xmath .

Today it is understood that strong interactions and hadron physics are
described not by nonlinear sigma models but by the Standard Model.
However, nonlinear two-dimensional ( @xmath ) sigma models have found
new applications in string theory [ 4 , 5 ] . The Lagrangian for this is
a natural generalisation of ( 1.1.1 ), with the addition of
supersymmetry.

Supersymmetry is a symmetry which rotates bosons into fermions. It
improves the short distance behaviour of quantum theories and gives an
elegant solution to the hierarchy problem. In string theory, the five
known consistent string theories are supersymmetric.

Supersymmetric sigma models have a rich geometrical structure. This was
first observed in [ 6 ] for four dimensional models and later developed
by [ 7 ] for two dimensional models. In particular it was shown that
@xmath sigma models require the target space to be a (pseudo-)Riemannian
manifold, @xmath requires the manifold to be Kähler and @xmath requires
the manifold to be hyper-Kähler. If the manifold has torsion, the model
generalises to have chiral supersymmetry [ 8 , 9 , 10 ] , where the
number of left handed supersymmetries differs from the number of right
handed supersymmetries. We will review this in the next chapter.

Massive supersymmetric sigma models were first constructed in [ 11 ] by
the addition of potentials. The inclusion of a potential may impose
additional restrictions on the target space geometry.

#### 1.1.1 One-dimensional sigma models

The simplest examples of nonlinear sigma models are those where the
worldspace is one-dimensional. The sigma models obtained can therefore
be thought of as particles, where the dependence on the worldsheet
signifies time dependence. Such sigma models describe the dynamics of
point particles.

In the past the model that was mostly investigated was a relativistic or
non-relativistic particle propagating in a Riemannian manifold with a
metric @xmath . These results were extended to @xmath locally
supersymmetric particle models in [ 12 , 13 ] . Later the action of
supersymmetric particles with extended supersymmetry was given in [ 14 ]
.

One-dimensional sigma models have many applications. The simplest
example is that they form the basis for supersymmetric quantum
mechanics, when @xmath this can be associated [ 15 , 16 , 17 ] with
@xmath , @xmath supersymmetric field theories after an appropriate
dimensional reduction.

The conditions on the target space required by supersymmetry in @xmath
manifolds is given by [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 ] .

In [ 18 ] it was found that rigid supersymmetry in one dimension allows
for the construction of more general models than those considered in the
past. In particular, the manifold that the particle propagates in can
have torsion which is not a closed 3-form. Such models have been found
to describe the effective theory of multi-black hole systems [ 24 ] . A
scalar potential and a coupling to a magnetic field in the action of [
18 ] was added to the sigma model formalism in [ 25 ] , following the
earlier work of [ 26 , 27 ] .

More recently, interest in sigma models has arisen in the context of the
AdS/CFT conjecture. It has been observed [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] that
supersymmetric sigma models describe the dynamics of a supersymmetric
particle near the AdS horizon of an extreme Reissner-Nordström black
hole.

In this case, superconformal supersymmetry is required, which imposes
additional constraints on the target space geometry. Superconformal
quantum mechanics may even provide a dual description of string theory
on @xmath [ 22 ] .

#### 1.1.2 Two-dimensional sigma models and Gauge theories

Two dimensional sigma models are interesting in their own right because
they have a rich mathematical structure. In addition to the fact that
supersymmetry constrains the target space, they have improved UV
behaviour and in @xmath , they have improved UV behaviour and power
counting shows that they are renormalisable. In fact models with @xmath
supersymmetry are finite to all orders in perturbation theory.

In addition to string theory, two dimensional sigma models can be used
to describe certain properties of four-dimensional gauge theories. For
example, the magnetic monopole and dyon in the gauge theory correspond
to the kink and Q-kink solution of sigma models. There are also
applications to the theory of integrable systems and supersymmetric
models have been used in the investigation of duality.

Two-dimensional sigma models and some two-dimensional gauge theories
have been used to model the dynamics of fundamental and D-strings,
respectively. The small fluctuations of strings which arise as
intersections in various brane configurations are described by
two-dimensional gauge theories coupled to scalars. Because of this, many
of the properties and the various objects that arise in gauge theories
coupled to scalars have a brane interpretation [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] .
Supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to linear sigma models have been
constructed in [ 35 ] and they have been used to illuminate the relation
between Landau-Ginzburg models and Calabi-Yau spaces. Recently a
two-dimensional gauge theory coupled to a linear sigma model was used to
investigate aspects of the dynamics of vortices using branes [ 36 ] .

In two dimensions, the Wess-Zumino term has the same mass dimension as
the kinetic term of sigma model scalars. Therefore two-dimensional
supersymmetric gauged theories can couple to non-linear sigma model
matter which also has a non-vanishing Wess-Zumino coupling. Such a
theory is renormalizable. The gauging of supersymmetric two-dimensional
non-linear sigma models with a Wess-Zumino term have been considered in
[ 37 , 38 ] . However in these papers the part of the action which
involves the gauge field kinetic terms has not been given. It has been
found in [ 37 ] that the Wess-Zumino term of a non-linear sigma model
cannot always be gauged. The conditions for gauging a Wess-Zumino term
have been identified as the obstructions to the extension of the closed
form associated with the Wess-Zumino term to an element of the
equivariant cohomology [ 39 ] of the sigma model target space [ 40 , 41
] . Scalar potentials for supersymmetric two-dimensional sigma models
with Wess-Zumino term have been investigated in [ 25 , 9 , 10 , 42 ] .

### 1.2 Outline

#### 1.2.1 Supersymmetry in sigma models

In the second chapter, we review one and two dimensional sigma model
with various amounts of supersymmetry. We begin with a discussion of
two-dimensional sigma models @xmath where the target space has a torsion
@xmath . The torsion is introduced into the action by a Wess-Zumino
term, however this term is only defined locally on a given coordinate
patch of @xmath , therefore the action @xmath is not globally defined;
in particular the exponential @xmath that appears in the path integral
may not be well defined. We will discuss the global aspects of torsion,
for example we will derive a topological condition, analogous to Dirac’s
quantisation condition for strings, for @xmath to be well defined and
therefore write the action in a globally defined way. Next we shall
introduce the ( @xmath , @xmath ) supersymmetry model where @xmath . The
(1,0) model is enlarging the worldspace @xmath to the superspace @xmath
by adding a Grassman (anticommuting) degree of freedom; the sigma model
map will then be a multiplet consisting of a scalar @xmath and a fermion
field @xmath . We will write down the supersymmetric action as an action
over the superspace @xmath and construct the Noether supercharge @xmath
that generates the supersymmetry. On writing the action as an integral
over the bosonic coordinates of the superspace only, ie. the coordinates
of @xmath only, we will recover the original non-supersymmetric action
plus fermion terms. Then we will introduce ( @xmath ,0) supersymmetry
for @xmath . We will find that (2,0) supersymmetry requires that the
target manifold @xmath is a KT manifold and that (4,0) supersymmetry
requires that @xmath is HKT, demonstrating the relationship between
supersymmetry and target space geometry. We will show that no other
interesting cases for ( @xmath ,0) supersymmetry exist. Next we will
introduce ( @xmath ,1) supersymmetry for @xmath . We will find that
these models are analogous to the ( @xmath ,0) models; in particular
(2,1) supersymmetry requires that @xmath is KT and (4,1) supersymmetry
requires that @xmath is HKT. We will demonstrate why it is not possible
to define a (2,1) supersymmetric theory on a manifold with vanishing
torsion. Finally we will introduce one dimensional sigma models, which
are maps @xmath where the (bosonic) dimension of the superspace is
@xmath . In this section we will also introduce a fermionic superfield
@xmath , which can be thought of as belonging to the Yang-Mills sector
of the theory. We will describe an @xmath supersymmetric action for
@xmath and @xmath and construct the Noether supercharge of the symmetry.
We will briefly comment on the differences of the geometry of the target
space between two-dimensional and one-dimensional sigma models with
extended supersymmetry.

#### 1.2.2 Supergravity and one-dimensional sigma models

In the third chapter, we will introduce the most general one dimensional
@xmath supersymmetric action with dimensionless couplings, and describe
the action in components. We will then describe the Noether procedure,
where the supersymmetry parameter @xmath is no longer assumed to be
constant, but to depend on the coordinates of the worldspace. Such
models are known as supergravity models because they can be shown to
include gravity. We demonstrate the Noether technique explicitly on a
simple Lagrangian, introducing gauge fields which cancel the variations
proportional to derivatives of @xmath . We then describe the most
general @xmath action after gauging its supersymmetry and introducing
the supergravity gauge fields. We derive the Hamiltonian of the theory
and calculate the first and second class constraints; we show that these
are conserved with time and express the Hamiltonian as a linear
combination of the second class constraints. We then quantise the theory
using the Dirac-Bergmann method; we calculate the Dirac operator and
show that it squares to the Klein-Gordon operator. We will give two
representations of the Dirac operator in terms of Dirac matrices, then
finally we will comment on the existence of zero modes of the Dirac
operator on curved manifolds.

#### 1.2.3 Equivariant cohomology

In the fourth chapter, we review the results of equivariant cohomology
that we will use in the following chapters. Equivariant cohomology
describes the cohomology of gauge invariant forms that arise when a
manifold @xmath admits a group action with gauge group @xmath ; we will
give a mathematician’s definition in terms of the universal classifying
space @xmath of @xmath . We will then construct a model for the
equivariant cohomology as follows. We define the Weil algebra, which can
be thought of as the differential graded algebra generated by the gauge
potential @xmath and the field strength @xmath . The Weil algebra is
used to generalise the space of forms to include forms which are
polynomial in @xmath and @xmath ; the subspace invariant under gauge
transformations is called the space of basic forms @xmath . The
cohomology of @xmath is the equivariant cohomology. We will define an
equivariant extension of a form, and in a final section which can be
read independently of the rest of the chapter, we will give a more
useful, physicist’s way of thinking about equivariant cohomology.

#### 1.2.4 New two dimensional gauge theories

In the fifth chapter, we shall construct the actions of (p,0)- and
(p,1)-supersymmetric, @xmath , two-dimensional gauge theories coupled to
non-linear sigma model matter and with non-vanishing Wess-Zumino term.
In addition we shall also consider the scalar potentials that arise in
these theories. This will generalise various partial results that have
already appeared in the literature. To simplify the description of the
results from here on, we shall use the term ‘sigma models’ instead of
the term ‘non-linear sigma models’ unless otherwise explicitly stated.
The method we shall use to construct the various actions of
supersymmetric two-dimensional gauged theories coupled to sigma models
is based on the superfields found in the context of supersymmetric sigma
models [ 43 , 44 ] and later used in the context supersymmetric gauged
sigma models [ 38 ] . One advantage of this method is that it keeps
manifest the various geometric properties of the couplings that appear
in these theories. This will be used in the fourth chapter to construct
of various bounds for vortices. Since the parts of the actions that we
shall describe involving the kinetic term of the sigma model scalars,
the Wess-Zumino term and their couplings to gauge fields are known, we
shall focus on the kinetic term of the gauge fields and the scalar
potentials of these theories. We shall allow the gauge couplings to
depend on the sigma model scalars and we shall derive the various
conditions on these couplings required by gauge invariance and
supersymmetry. We shall find that the scalar potential of gauge theories
coupled to sigma models in two dimensions, even in the presence of
Wess-Zumino term, is the sum of a ‘F’ term or a ‘D’ term or both. The
presence of a D-term, or Fayet-Iliopoulos term, may come as a surprise.
This is because in the presence of a Wess-Zumino term the geometry of
the target space, say, of (2,0)-supersymmetric models where such a term
in expected, is not Kähler and but Kähler with torsion (KT). Thus the
Kähler form is not closed and there are no obvious moment maps. However,
it has been shown in [ 45 ] that KT geometries under certain conditions
admit moment maps and are those that appear in the Fayet-Iliopoulos term
of these models. Similar results hold for the (4,0)-supersymmetric
models. We shall observe that the gauged (p,1), @xmath , multiplets are
associated with scalar superfields. For the gauge theories with (2,1)
and (4,1) supersymmetry, these scalar multiplets satisfy the same
supersymmetry constraints as the associated sigma model multiplets.
Therefore these gauge theories can be thought of as sigma models with
target spaces @xmath , @xmath . This will allow us to combine the (p,1)
gauge multiplet and the standard sigma model @xmath multiplet to a new
sigma model multiplet. As a result, sigma model type of actions can be
written for these gauge theories coupled to matter for which the
associated couplings depend on the scalar fields of both the sigma model
and gauge multiplets. This generalizes the results of [ 38 ] .

#### 1.2.5 Vortices and bounds

In the sixth chapter, we shall show that the Euclidean actions of (2,0)-
and (4,0)-supersymmetric two-dimensional gauge theories coupled to sigma
models with a Fayet-Iliopoulos term but with vanishing Wess-Zumino term
admit bounds. In particular we shall find that the Euclidean action
@xmath of the (2,0)-supersymmetric theory is bounded by the absolute
value of a topological charge @xmath which is the integral over the
two-dimensional spacetime of the equivariant extension of the Kähler
form of its sigma model target space, @xmath . The sigma model manifold
in the (4,0)-supersymmetric theory is hyper-Kähler and so there are
three Kähler forms each having an equivariant extension. The Euclidean
action @xmath of the (4,0)-supersymmetric theory is bounded by the
length of the three topological charges @xmath each associated with the
integral over the two-dimensional spacetime of the equivariant
extensions of the three Kähler forms, @xmath . This is another
application of the equivariant cohomology in the context of
two-dimensional gauged sigma models which is distinct from that found in
[ 40 , 41 ] and we have mentioned above. (For many other applications
see for example [ 46 ] .) The configurations that saturate these bounds
are vortices and include the Nielsen-Olesen type of vortices [ 47 ]
associated with gauge theories coupled to linear sigma models. In
particular the bounds above generalise that found by Bogomol’nyi in [ 48
] for the abelian vortices of a gauge theory coupled to a single linear
complex scalar field.

We also find that similar bounds exist in higher dimensions for action
type of functionals that involve maps between two Kähler manifolds of
any dimension coupled to gauge fields or maps from a Kähler manifold
into a hyper-Kähler manifold again coupled to gauge fields. The
structure of these functionals is such that it includes the Euclidean
actions of some supersymmetric gauge theories in higher dimensions
coupled to sigma models with Fayet-Iliopoulos terms. In particular the
first case, which involves maps between two-Kähler spaces, includes the
Euclidean action of a four-dimensional @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theory coupled to a sigma model. The latter case, which involved maps
from a Kähler manifold into a hyper-Kähler one, can be associated with
the Euclidean action of a four-dimensional @xmath supersymmetric gauge
theory coupled to a sigma model. Note that in @xmath theories in four
dimensions the sigma model target space is Kähler while in the @xmath
theories in four dimensions the sigma model target space is
hyper-Kähler. In all these cases the action functionals are bounded by
topological charges which involve the equivariant extensions of the
Kähler forms of the sigma model target space as well as the second Chern
character of the gauge fields. Our results are different from those of [
49 , 50 ] for non-abelian vortices which involve non-abelian gauge
theories coupled to linear sigma model matter. Note that in the bound
constructed in [ 49 ] , the topological term involves the first class
and second Chern character of the gauge fields instead of the
equivariant extension of the Kähler form and the second Chern character
of the gauge field that we find. It turns out that in the case of gauge
theories coupled to linear sigma models of [ 35 ] the two different
topological charges can be related, see also [ 51 ] . However this
involves a partial integration procedure in which various surface terms
are taken to vanish. We remark that in the construction of the bounds
that involve the equivariant extensions of the Kähler forms, and also in
[ 48 ] , the topological terms are identified with what remains after
writing the Euclidean actions of the theories as a sum of squares
without the use of partial integrations. It is clear that our results
can also be used to construct bounds for solitons in appropriate gauge
theories coupled to sigma model matter in odd-spacetime dimensions. This
is the usual situation where instantons in an n-dimensional theory can
be thought of as static solitons of an (n+1)-dimensional theory. In
particular, there is a bound for the energy of static configurations of
a three-dimensional @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory coupled to sigma
model matter. This new bound is an extension to gauged theories of the
of bounds found in [ 52 ] and generalizes that of [ 53 ] .

## Chapter 2 Sigma Models

A sigma model is defined by two manifolds: the worldspace (or superspace
) @xmath , the target space @xmath and the sigma model fields which are
maps @xmath . The dimension of the sigma model is the dimension of
@xmath ; in this chapter we will describe the cases @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.1 Two dimensional sigma models

In the two dimensional case, sigma model fields are maps @xmath where
@xmath . It is usual to take @xmath to be a flat Minkowski manifold with
coordinates @xmath and metric @xmath because this represents objects
with string-like degrees of freedom; we can think of the timelike
direction @xmath as proper time and the spacelike direction @xmath as
the degree of freedom along the stringlike object.

Since the Lorentz group acts on @xmath it is convenient to use the null
coordinates @xmath ; with this choice of parameterisation the group
action is diagonalised and the indices denote the Lorentz weights:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
           @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a vector and @xmath is an infinitesimal Lorentz group
generator. An object is Lorentz invariant if its total weight is zero.

#### 2.1.1 The action

The fields of interest satisfy an action principle with action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the metric of the target space manifold @xmath . This
action is invariant under the following transformations: (i) coordinate
changes @xmath of the target manifold @xmath , (ii) Lorentz
transformations on @xmath , and (iii) linear transformations of the
field @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a real constant. The third set of transformations are
generated by the Noether charge @xmath associated with energy and
momentum, and is realised on @xmath by @xmath . In fact the action (
2.1.2 ) is also invariant under conformal transformations @xmath ,
@xmath .

#### 2.1.2 The Wess-Zumino term

It is natural to add torsion to the theories described above, as we
shall see this is essential in the formulation of certain supersymmetric
theories. Other applications of torsion include the cancellation of
anomaly terms, see for example [ 54 ] .

The previous action with a Wess-Zumino term is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a two-form; the torsion of @xmath is @xmath .

The action with torsion ( 2.1.4 ) has the same invariances as before,
ie. under (i) coordinate changes of @xmath , (ii) Lorentz
transformations of @xmath , and (iii) linear translations of @xmath .
However @xmath may change by a gauge transformation when we move between
coordinate patches on @xmath . Therefore @xmath and the action ( 2.1.4 )
may only be locally defined if the topology of @xmath is non-trivial.
Note though that @xmath is always globally defined. We discuss this in
the next section.

#### 2.1.3 Global aspects of torsion

The equations of motion are globally defined because they depend on the
torsion @xmath not the Wess-Zumino term @xmath , which is locally
defined. It is not possible classically for the action of the
Wess-Zumino term to be globally defined. However in quantum theory,
@xmath must be globally defined, where @xmath is the Euclidean action.

Choose a ‘background’ map @xmath which is homotopic to the sigma model
map @xmath defined before. Then we define the Euclidean action of the
Wess-Zumino term as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath is the interval @xmath , and @xmath are the
interpolating maps with @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath depends on the choice of @xmath . To determine this dependence,
take a second homotopy @xmath between @xmath and @xmath and calculate
the difference,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and satisfies @xmath . The difference ( 2.1.8 ) is the integral of a
closed three-form over a compact three-manifold without boundary and in
general evaluates to a real number.

Therefore, if @xmath then @xmath where @xmath is an integer, so @xmath
will be independent of the choice of the interpolation between @xmath
and @xmath and so well-defined.

#### 2.1.4 Supersymmetric sigma models

We will introduce supersymmetry through its algebra. Let @xmath be the
Noether (super)charge generating a supersymmetry, then the supersymmetry
algebra is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the brackets are anticommutators. Note that @xmath must be
anticommuting (Grassman odd).

In components, @xmath so Lorentz consistency requires that @xmath with
Lorentz weights @xmath respectively. Fields with an even number of plus
or minus signs are bosonic (commuting); those with an odd number are
fermionic (Grassman odd).

A @xmath supersymmetric model has @xmath left-handed supercharges @xmath
and @xmath right-handed supercharges @xmath . We will construct various
@xmath supersymmetric models in the following sections.

#### 2.1.5 (1,0) supersymmetric sigma models

In this section we will construct a two-dimensional sigma model which
realises the (1,0) supersymmetry algebra symmetry algebra

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.1.10)
  -- -- -- ----------

We begin with the superspace @xmath , which we take to be a
supermanifold parameterised by @xmath where @xmath are the null
coordinates defined in section 2.1 and @xmath is a real Grassman
coordinate, which is anticommuting and in particular @xmath . The index
denotes the Lorentz weight, we define an upper ( @xmath ) index the same
as a lower ( @xmath ) index.

The Grassman derivative @xmath satisfies @xmath , and we define the
supercovariant derivative @xmath by @xmath , in components this is

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (2.1.11)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

To construct the Noether charges, @xmath is realised exactly as before,
@xmath . We may now define @xmath by the property that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in components this is

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (2.1.13)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

It may be checked that @xmath and @xmath indeed obey the supersymmetry
algebra ( 2.1.10 ).

The two-dimensional (1,0) supersymmetric sigma model is defined by the
superspace (worldspace) @xmath , the target manifold @xmath and the
sigma model fields @xmath . The fields satisfy an action principle with
action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integral @xmath is the standard Berezin integration (we remind the
reader that @xmath has the opposite Lorentz weight to @xmath ); @xmath
is the Wess-Zumino term of the previous section.

The action ( 2.1.14 ) is invariant under the three transformations
before: (i) coordinate changes of @xmath (up to gauge transformations of
@xmath ), (ii) Lorentz transformations of @xmath and (iii) linear
transformations of @xmath generated by @xmath . In addition, it is
invariant under supersymmetries generated by @xmath , @xmath where
@xmath is a constant anticommuting parameter. To see this, set @xmath ,
apply @xmath to the fields, use @xmath and expand @xmath in components
to give

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.1.15)
  -- -- -- ----------

which evaluates to a surface term that vanishes. In general an integral
over the full superspace is manifestly supersymmetric.

For @xmath , under the conditions of section 2.1.3 , the action may be
written globally as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is manifestly supersymmetric.

It remains to describe the sigma model multiplet (superfield) @xmath .
We calculate the Taylor expansion around @xmath , which quickly
terminates to give

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the components are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

which are the scalar and the fermion field. The fermion can be thought
of as the superpartner of @xmath .

Under the supersymmetry transformation,

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (2.1.19)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

we see that supersymmetry swaps a field with its superpartner.

Evaluating the superspace integral in ( 2.1.14 ) gives the action for
the components,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection; we see that
@xmath is a torsion three-form.

#### 2.1.6 (2,0) supersymmetry

Now we will construct the (2,0) supersymmetry algebra,

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (2.1.21)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

where @xmath . We begin with the sigma model from the previous section;
recall that @xmath , @xmath and that the action is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We note that @xmath has the same component expansion as before ( 2.1.18
) because it is defined in exactly the same way; the second
supersymmetry will not introduce any new fields.

We relabel the previous supercharge as @xmath and look for a second
supercharge of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Lorentz covariance requires that @xmath is a (1,1) tensor on @xmath . We
require that @xmath satisfies the supersymmetry algebra; we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and so closure of the algebra requires the constraints

  -- -------- -- -----------
                 
     @xmath      (2.1.25a)
     @xmath      (2.1.25b)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the Nijenhuis tensor. These conditions imply that @xmath
is a complex structure, therefore @xmath is a complex manifold; in
particular its dimension is even.

Invariance of the action under the second supersymmetry requires that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore @xmath is a Hermitian metric and @xmath is covariantly
constant with respect to @xmath , where @xmath is the Levi-Civita
connection and @xmath is the torsion. This implies that @xmath must be a
KT (Kähler with Torsion) manifold, in particular @xmath has @xmath
holonomy.

We observe that the amount of supersymmetry in the model constrains the
target space geometry. The converse is also true; given a complex
structure on a Hermitian manifold satisfying the constraints above, we
can construct a second supersymmetry, and this is a general feature of
two-dimensional supersymmetric sigma models.

We present a second, equivalent, formulation of the (2,0) model by
introducing the (2,0) superspace @xmath with coordinates @xmath ; the
sigma model fields are now maps @xmath . Supercovariant derivatives
@xmath are defined similarly to the (1,0) case ( 2.1.11 ) and satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.28)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We impose the constraint

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

on the superfields. The independent components of @xmath are then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

which correspond to those defined before in ( 2.1.18 ).

Consistency of the above constraint with ( 2.1.28 ) requires precisely
the conditions we had before for the closure of the algebra ( 2.1.25 );
therefore @xmath is a complex structure and @xmath is a complex
manifold.

The supercharges @xmath are defined by @xmath ; with the above
constraint they are identical to those defined in the first part of this
section, and in particular satisfy the supersymmetry algebra.

The action is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which is exactly as before ( 2.1.22 ) except that here the @xmath are
(2,0) superfields. Invariance of this action under supersymmetry is an
identical calculation to the previous case and leads to the same
constraints ( 2.1.26 ); in particular, @xmath is a KT manifold.

#### 2.1.7 (4,0) supersymmetry

The results of the previous section are readily generalised to the case
when we have more than two left-handed supersymmetries,

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (2.1.32)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

Let @xmath be the usual (1,0) superspace and @xmath be the sigma model
field. We consider the supercharges

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.33)
     @xmath      (2.1.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath was defined in ( 2.1.13 ) and @xmath . By an identical
calculation ( 2.1.25 ) to the previous section, the requirement that the
supersymmetry algebra is satisfied implies that each @xmath is a complex
structure. An extra constraint arises because the @xmath anticommute;
this is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The action of the theory is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and as in the previous section, invariance of the action requires that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the metric is Hermitian with respect to each complex
structure, and each complex structure is covariantly constant. In
particular, @xmath and @xmath has @xmath holonomy.

From ( 2.1.35 ), if we have two complex structures @xmath and @xmath ,
we may form a third @xmath , so (3,0) supersymmetry implies (4,0)
supersymmetry. Furthermore, if there are more than three complex
structures, then the target manifold @xmath is reducible [ 7 ] . Thus
(4,0) supersymmetry is the only additional interesting case, and the
geometry of @xmath is then HKT (Hyper-Kähler with Torsion); ie. there
exists a metric connection with torsion whose holonomy is @xmath ;
@xmath .

#### 2.1.8 (1,1) supersymmetry

We will now generalise the analysis of section 2.1.5 to have two
supercharges of opposite chirality. The supersymmetry algebra is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath            @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.39)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (2.1.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We define the (1,1) superspace @xmath where @xmath are the null
coordinates defined in section 2.1 and @xmath are Grassman coordinates
of opposite chirality. We define the supercovariant derivatives @xmath
by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ; their component expansion is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               (2.1.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The Noether supercharges are defined so that @xmath and @xmath ; their
expansions in components are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               (2.1.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and it may be checked that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath obey the
supersymmetry algebra ( 2.1.39 ).

The two dimensional (1,1) supersymmetric sigma model is defined by the
superspace @xmath , the target manifold @xmath and sigma model maps
@xmath which satisfy an action principle with action

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This action is invariant under (i) coordinate changes of @xmath (modulo
gauge transformations of @xmath ), (ii) Lorentz transformations of
@xmath and (iii) the transformations of the fields generated by
translations and supertranslations, ie.

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               (2.1.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal (bosonic) constant and @xmath are
constant Grassman parameters. To show that this is the case, (i) and
(ii) are manifest; for part (iii), invariance under @xmath follows
similarly to section 2.1.1 and invariance under @xmath follows from a
similar calculation to ( 2.1.15 ).

The new right-handed supersymmetry introduces a second fermion to the
theory to the sigma model multiplet; @xmath now has the components

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the vertical line denotes evaluation at @xmath .

The action in components is

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (2.1.50)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

is the curvature of @xmath and @xmath is the Riemann tensor. We may
eliminate @xmath from the above action because its equation of motion is
@xmath .

The components transform under the supersymmetry transformations as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.52)
     @xmath               (2.1.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have eliminated the field @xmath .

#### 2.1.9 (2,1) supersymmetry

The (2,1) supersymmetry algebra is

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.55)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and all other brackets vanish. We recall the definition of
the (1,1) supersymmetric sigma model and relabel the supercharge as
@xmath . The second supersymmetry is defined to be

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

To satisfy the supersymmetry algebra, we must impose the same conditions
on @xmath as the (2,0) case ( 2.1.25 ), ie. that @xmath is a complex
structure. Invariance of the action

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

requires that @xmath is Hermitian with respect to @xmath and that @xmath
is covariantly constant, ie.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore @xmath is a KT manifold.

The component form of the action ( 2.1.57 ) was given in the previous
section ( 2.1.50 ).

A second equivalent formulation is to define the (2,1) superspace @xmath
with coordinates @xmath . Supercovariant derivatives @xmath , @xmath are
defined to satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.59)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

we constrain the sigma model maps @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Consistency of this constraint with the algebra ( 2.1.59 ) of
supercovariant derivatives requires that @xmath is a complex structure;
invariance of the action ( 2.1.57 ) requires precisely the same
constraints as before ( 2.1.58 ), which imply that @xmath is a KT
manifold.

We observe how the torsion of the theory allows us to define theories
with differing numbers of right and left handed supersymmetries. For
suppose we look for an additional right handed supersymmetry,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The supersymmetry algebra and invariance of the action then imply the
conditions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.62)
     @xmath      (2.1.63)
     @xmath      (2.1.64)
     @xmath      (2.1.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If the torsion vanishes, @xmath , the last condition above becomes
@xmath which is satisfied by taking @xmath ; therefore it is not
necessary to introduce a second complex structure @xmath . Hence on a
Kähler manifold, (2,1) supersymmetry implies (2,2) supersymmetry.

We note that (2,2) supersymmetry on a KT manifold @xmath requires two
commuting complex structures @xmath and @xmath ; in this case we can
form a product structure @xmath ; using @xmath we may decompose @xmath
to be diffeomorphic (but not isometric) to product of two manifolds,
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are both KT. This allows the introduction
of twisted multiplets, see for example [ 38 ] .

#### 2.1.10 (4,1) supersymmetry

The results of the previous section are readily generalised to the case
when we have two or more left handed supersymmetries (and one right
handed supersymmetry). From the section on (4,0) supersymmetry, we know
that the only interesting case will be (4,1) supersymmetry.

The (4,1) supersymmetry algebra is

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.66)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . We define the (4,1) superspace @xmath with coordinates
@xmath ; the sigma model fields are maps @xmath . We define the
supercovariant derivatives @xmath , @xmath to satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.67)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and impose the following constraint on the sigma model fields,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The supercharges are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.69)
     @xmath               (2.1.70)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The supercharges obey the supersymmetry algebra if and
only if the algebra of supercovariant derivatives is satisfied; for this
to hold we require

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the @xmath are anticommuting complex structures.

The action is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

invariance of the action requires that @xmath is Hermitian with respect
to each @xmath and that each @xmath is covariantly constant,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore @xmath is a HKT manifold. We note that the torsion vanishes,
@xmath , then we would be able to construct (4,4) supersymmetry in a
similar way to the previous section.

### 2.2 One dimensional sigma models

Let @xmath be one dimensional @xmath superspace with coordinates @xmath
where where @xmath is a real coordinate and @xmath is a Grassman
coordinate. A one dimensional @xmath sigma model superfield is a map
@xmath where @xmath is the target manifold; @xmath can be thought of as
a point particle with proper time @xmath .

We introduce a second fermionic superfield @xmath which is defined to be
a section of the bundle @xmath over @xmath , where @xmath is the real
vector bundle over @xmath . It can be thought of as the Yang-Mills
sector, and is used for example to introduce a potential into the model,
see for example [ 11 ] .

We define the supercovariant derivative @xmath by the property @xmath
where @xmath , in components

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath be the fibre metric and @xmath the connection of the bundle.
We define the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

without loss of generality we may assume that the fibre metric @xmath is
compatible with the connection, @xmath .

The two multiplets satisfy an action principle with action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

if @xmath is closed then it may be interpreted as the torsion of @xmath
, however we will make no such restriction.

The action is invariant under (i) reparameterisations of the superspace
@xmath , (ii) reparameterisations of the target manifold @xmath and
(iii) linear translations of the field given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is real and constant; these transformations generate the
Noether charge @xmath associated with energy. The action is also
invariant under supersymmetry generated by the supercharge @xmath
defined by @xmath , in components this is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and acts on the fields as @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is an constant
Grassman parameter.

Taking the commutator of two such transformations,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the supersymmetry algebra,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We expand the action in components defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the line means evaluation at @xmath . We are following the
standard convention of using the same letter for a superfield and its
lowest component. The field @xmath is auxiliary and we will eliminate it
later. Expanding the action ( 3.1.1 ) into component form, we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the curvature of the vector bundle connection @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the covariant derivative including the @xmath term,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath supersymmetry transformations of the component fields are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.14)
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Extended supersymmetries, where there are @xmath supercharges may be
constructed in the same way as for two dimensional sigma models. We
comment that the resulting models are broadly similar to the two
dimensional case, except that the resulting geometry of the target
manifold @xmath is not so tightly constrained. For example, in [ 18 ] an
@xmath multiplet is constructed which does not imply @xmath , and @xmath
models are defined on manifolds with foliations.

## Chapter 3 Spinning particles and Supergravity

### 3.1 The @xmath supersymmetric action

The most general @xmath spinning particle action with rigid
supersymmetry is [ 55 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recall the definitions from the previous chapter; @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a connection of the bundle @xmath with fibre metric
@xmath . We may assume that the fibre metric @xmath is compatible with
the connection, @xmath .

The action includes the @xmath -term @xmath and an electromagnetic
potential @xmath . The potential of the theory is described in terms of
@xmath [ 25 ] , @xmath . Also present are the Yukawa couplings @xmath
and @xmath .

The action is invariant under worldline translations generated by @xmath
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and supersymmetry transformations generated by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is anticommuting. These two transformations satisfy the
@xmath supersymmetry algebra @xmath .

We expand the action in components defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Expanding the action ( 3.1.1 ) into component form, we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the curvature of the vector bundle connection @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is the covariant derivative including the @xmath -term,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath supersymmetry transformations of the component fields are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
     @xmath      (3.1.11)
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
     @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

### 3.2 Supergravity in one dimension

To construct the @xmath supergravity action, we gauge the rigid
supersymmetry by promoting the supersymmetry parameter @xmath to a local
parameter, @xmath . In general this will destroy invariance of ( 2.2.11
) under supersymmetry, because we will get terms proportional to @xmath
. Therefore it is necessary to introduce gauge fields whose
transformations will cancel with the @xmath terms arising from varying (
2.2.11 ).

The method to find how these fields appear in the action, and their
transformations, is the Noether technique.

To illustrate this technique we will gauge the supersymmetry for a
simple Lagrangian in flat space, reproducing the results of [ 12 , 13 ]
.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking the supersymmetry transformation, with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

up to surface terms, which vanish in the action. To cancel ( 3.2.2 ),
consider the Lagrangian to first order in a parameter @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a gauge field with @xmath . Then the variation of the
new Lagrangian vanishes to zeroth order in @xmath .

Continuing this process for all orders of @xmath , the Noether technique
gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is precisely the result of [ 12 ] . It proves necessary to
introduce a second gauge field @xmath which transforms under local
supersymmetry as @xmath . It is an einbein which is the gauge field
associated with the diffeomorphisms of the worldline.

It is also necessary to modify the transformation for @xmath to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying the Noether method to ( 3.1.7 ), the @xmath supergravity action
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that the Lagrangian is not obtained by the simple minimal
coupling rule @xmath .

The geometric interpretation of the couplings with the above action is
manifest. The above action is similar to that of models with rigid
supersymmetry in [ 18 ] .

After various redefinitions of the couplings and the fields, one can
recover the action constructed in [ 56 ] in the special case where
@xmath . However, if @xmath then ( 3.2.6 ) is more general.

The @xmath supersymmetry transformations for the components fields
become

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The einbein @xmath and gravitino @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Checking the algebra of the new transformations ( 3.2.7 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.12)
              @xmath            @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

from which we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the same is true on the components @xmath .

For invariance of ( 3.2.6 ) under worldline diffeomorphisms, we need to
specify the action of @xmath on the einbein and the gravitino,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and those for @xmath and @xmath are unchanged.

### 3.3 Hamiltonian Analysis

To investigate the Hamiltonian dynamics of the system described by (
3.3.2 ), we follow the Dirac-Bergman procedure [ 57 ] to analyse the
constraints. This will be important when we come to quantise the system
in the next section.

At this stage we introduce vielbeins @xmath , @xmath so that @xmath and
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the flat metrics on the manifold and
vector bundle respectively. We will use latin letters for vielbein
indices and greek letters otherwise. We take

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

as our new fermion fields. This ensures that in the next section, the
Dirac brackets, hence commutation relations, between @xmath and the
fermions are zero. In the following analysis it is also necessary to set
the Yukawa coupling @xmath .

Adopting this notation, and eliminating the auxiliary field @xmath
from ( 3.1.7 ) using its equation of motion, gives the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where for convenience we define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the two covariant derivatives are with respect to the spin
connection @xmath on the manifold and the spin connection @xmath on the
vector bundle,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The canonical momenta for @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively. Similarly the canonical momenta for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Clearly the system is constrained, as would be expected. The explicit
constraints are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath denotes weak equality, in other words equality up to
polynomial combinations of the other constraints.

The constrained Hamiltonian can then be found to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath was defined in ( 3.3.3 ) and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The primary Hamiltonian is defined to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are all Lagrange multipliers (and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are anticommuting).

We require that the constraints ( 3.3.9 ) hold for all time,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Each condition either determines a multiplier or leads to a new
constraint. We assume the canonical Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Imposing ( 3.3.15 ) requires the secondary constraints

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact these are the charges of @xmath respectively. It can be checked
that both of these are conserved over time,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

so they give rise to no new constraints.

The remaining conditions ( 3.3.14 ) determine

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Observe that the constrained Hamiltonian @xmath can be written in terms
of the secondary constraints

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Essentially this is because @xmath and @xmath and the Hamiltonian @xmath
is linear in the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath .

### 3.4 Quantisation

We observe that the constraints @xmath and @xmath are both second class,
whereas

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
     @xmath      (3.4.3)
     @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are all first class. Defining the Dirac bracket as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then Poisson brackets between the primed constraints are weakly equal to
Dirac brackets between the original unprimed constraints.

The extra terms on the right of ( 3.4.5 ) give rise to new relations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can check that the @xmath supersymmetry algebra is still obeyed,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and that all the brackets between secondary constraints vanish,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The Hamiltonian can be written in terms of these first class
constraints. From ( 3.3.24 ) and ( 3.3.26 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so it is vanishing weakly, as is expected for a gravitational system.

In Dirac’s process of quantisation, fields become operators acting on
some Hilbert space and second class constraints are imposed as operator
conditions on the states. First class constraints generate unphysical
degrees of freedom, so it is necessary to fix a gauge,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Moving over to the quantised system, Dirac brackets become (anti)
commutation relations. One realisation of this algebra is using the
standard Clifford algebra generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

If the dimension of the manifold is even, for example @xmath , then we
have an element of the algebra, @xmath , satisfying @xmath and @xmath so
the following realisation exists,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath ensures that @xmath and @xmath anticommute.

If the manifold @xmath is not even dimensional then the following
realisation may be used,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the Pauli spin matrices which satisfy @xmath . For the
@xmath -extended case, see for example [ 58 ] .

In the following we will assume that the dimension of @xmath is even and
use the first realisation given. Then the second class constraints are
imposed as conditions on physical states,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The new terms which appear here include a Riemann tensor which vanishes
classically because it is contracted with four fermions, and several
terms involving a trace of the connection which arise because of the way
we have chosen to order the equation.

In ( 3.4.17 ) and ( 3.4.18 ) we have defined as usual

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It can be checked that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the familiar result that the square of the Dirac operator gives the
Klein Gordon equation.

Finally we note that it is not always the case that the system will have
physical states. This is because manifolds exist for which the
Dirac-like operators do not have zero modes. However it is expected that
most models will have a physical Hilbert space which is non-empty.

To see this, consider the case where the supersymmetry charge is the
Dirac operator @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar. A physical state satisfies @xmath .
Such a state cannot exist if @xmath , because the following partial
integration argument.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus @xmath and so @xmath cannot solve the Dirac equation, on the
assumption that @xmath is compact and without boundary.

However solutions exist if @xmath is negative or indefinite.

## Chapter 4 Equivariant Cohomology

### 4.1 Equivariant cohomology

Equivariant cohomology arises when the sigma model manifold @xmath
admits a Lie group action with gauge group @xmath . We shall see that it
generalises the de Rham complex @xmath to the complex @xmath which can
be thought of as the space of gauge invariant forms generated by @xmath
, the gauge field @xmath and field strength @xmath , and therefore
provides a natural framework for understanding the conditions needed in
the gauging of forms, see for example [ 41 , 40 ] . In this chapter we
will summarise some of the facts about equivariant cohomology that we
shall use later.

#### 4.1.1 Definition

Let @xmath be a manifold which admits an action by a group @xmath . The
equivariant cohomology @xmath of @xmath is defined as the de Rham
cohomology of @xmath where @xmath is the universal bundle over the
classifying space of the group @xmath , ie.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath acts freely on @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a fibration. Since @xmath is contractible, it follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

ie. the equivariant cohomology of @xmath is identified with the standard
cohomology of @xmath .

In the other extreme, @xmath is a point @xmath , and we have @xmath
where @xmath is the classifying space @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In general there are many ways to compute the equivariant cohomology.
For example, one such method is the use of spectral sequences for the
fibrations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However for many applications a de Rham version of the equivariant
cohomology is needed. Such a method was proposed in [ 39 ] using a model
for the de Rham equivariant cohomology based on Weil’s model of the
cohomology of the universal classifying space

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First we will give a mathematical definition and then (more usefully) we
will give a physicist’s way of thinking about it.

### 4.2 The Weil Model

First we need to define the Weil algebra @xmath , which is used to
capture the algebraic properties satisfied by the gauge field @xmath and
field strength @xmath . Let @xmath be the Lie algebra of @xmath . We
define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the exterior algebra of the dual @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath is the symmetric algebra. We attach degree 1 to the element
@xmath in the exterior algebra and degree 2 the corresponding element in
the symmetric algebra.

Note that @xmath and @xmath can be thought of as generators obeying the
same algebraic relations as the gauge field @xmath and field strength
@xmath respectively. @xmath is a graded commutative algebra freely
generated by the basis @xmath .

Next we define the following differential operator

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants of @xmath . Because of the
Jacobi identities, we can show that @xmath and that @xmath defines a
cohomology on the complex @xmath . It can be shown that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The general proof is given in [ 39 ] ; in fact @xmath should be thought
of as a model for the cohomology of @xmath . This is why it is trivial,
but here we shall show this in some special cases only. For example,
take @xmath . Then @xmath , and since @xmath is abelian,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

A degree zero element is clearly any constant @xmath . Moreover, @xmath
. Thus @xmath . A general element of degree 1 is @xmath . @xmath implies
@xmath and therefore @xmath . This implies that @xmath , so we have
@xmath .

A general element of degree two is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath implies that @xmath and this implies that @xmath . Therefore the
closed elements are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However these elements are exact because @xmath when @xmath . Therefore
@xmath , again. In general @xmath for all @xmath .

#### 4.2.1 The cohomology of @xmath

It is taken that @xmath models the cohomology of @xmath . Now a model
should be constructed for the cohomology of @xmath . We should identify
the elements of @xmath which are associated with the cohomology @xmath .
Thinking about the fibration @xmath , the elements of @xmath which are
forms associated with those that are pullbacks of @xmath should have two
properties: (i) they should vanish when evaluated along the fibre
directions and (ii) they should be invariant under the action of @xmath
. To model these two properties we define the inner derivation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can also define a Lie derivative in the usual way,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath be all the elements of @xmath which have the property that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

such elements are called basic .

To interpret this condition, we note that a gauge transformation can be
defined on ordinary forms @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With the definitions ( 4.2.8 ), this formula extends to @xmath and
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (4.2.12)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

which are the familiar transformation laws for the gauge potential and
field strength. Therefore ( 4.2.10 ) is equivalent to the condition for
gauge invariance.

It is easy to see that in fact @xmath can be identified with the
polynomials in @xmath which are invariant under the co-adjoint action of
@xmath on @xmath , ie.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, in [ 39 ] it was shown that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To illustrate these, consider the special case where @xmath as before.
The co-adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath is trivial because @xmath is
abelian. Thus any @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath .

It remains to find the restrictions imposed by the other condition
@xmath . Any @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (4.2.15)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

Now

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and so @xmath implies that @xmath . Therefore @xmath implies that @xmath
.

The result ( 4.2.14 ) implies that the cohomology of @xmath is generated
by @xmath as a polynomial, ie.

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This can be confirmed by an independent calculation using, say, the
spectral sequence of the fibration @xmath .

This concludes the discussion of the Weil model for the cohomology of
@xmath .

### 4.3 Weil model for equivariant cohomology

A model for the equivariant cohomology of @xmath can be defined as
follows.

First we consider the complex

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For example, a degree one element of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions on @xmath . A degree two element
is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and so on.

One can define the inner derivation with respect to an element of @xmath
by contracting @xmath with the associated vector field on @xmath and
using the contractions ( 4.2.8 ) defined in the Weil model. For example,
for the degree two element above, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define an exterior derivative @xmath by a combinations of the
exterior derivative @xmath of @xmath and that defined in the previous
section on @xmath . Denote this exterior derivative by @xmath . We can
also define a Lie derivative as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now the forms of @xmath in @xmath are those for which

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

ie. the basic (gauge invariant) forms, and we write @xmath for the space
that they generate.

Let us illustrate what this means for the case @xmath and degree 2.
Since we have done the calculation of @xmath above, we set @xmath to
find

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Substituting into ( 4.3.3 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9)
              @xmath      (4.3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The condition @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the usual Lie derivative on forms in @xmath . Thus a
basic degree-two from is given by ( 4.3.10 ) provided that all the
components are invariant under the action of @xmath on @xmath .

Similarly a basic degree-one form is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the one-form @xmath satifies @xmath .

The cohomology of @xmath is given by @xmath . It can be shown that under
certain conditions, this is the equivariant cohomology,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To understand some of the elements that represent @xmath , let us find
the closed form in @xmath of degree two for the case @xmath . Computing
the exterior derivative of @xmath in ( 4.3.9 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This form is exact if @xmath where @xmath is a basic form of degree one,
so from ( 4.3.12 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus @xmath is exact if and only if the two-form @xmath is exact and
@xmath .

#### 4.3.1 Equivariant extensions

Given a closed form @xmath in @xmath which is invariant under the @xmath
-action, we say that @xmath has an equivariant extension if there exists
a closed basic form @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that @xmath is not a necessary condition for the existence of an
equivariant extension as we have seen.

### 4.4 A physicist’s approach to equivariant cohomology

As we shall see later, we need to construct the equivariant extensions
of closed forms on a manifold @xmath . Suppose that @xmath has a @xmath
-action, with associated vector fields @xmath .

Let @xmath be a closed form and write @xmath . We introduce a connection
@xmath and gauge the form by performing a ‘minimal’ substitution @xmath
.

Thus we construct

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This form is invariant under gauge transformations, but we have lost the
property that @xmath is closed. To ‘repair’ this, we add an extra piece
as follows,

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.4.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath .

Gauge invariance of this form implies that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.4.3)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Since @xmath is gauge invariant, we can write @xmath and use @xmath .

Now, if @xmath is closed then @xmath which implies that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (4.4.4)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

and so on. These are the conditions for an equivariant extension .

We shall apply these results to sigma models.

## Chapter 5 New two dimensional gauge theories

### 5.1 Two-dimensional gauged sigma models with Wess-Zumino term

#### 5.1.1 Geometric Data and Action

To describe two-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to
sigma model matter with a Wess-Zumino term, it is instructive to begin
with a non-supersymmetric system as a toy example. Let @xmath be the
two-dimensional Minkowski spacetime with light-cone coordinates @xmath .
The fields of the model that we shall consider here are the following: a
gauge potential @xmath with gauge group @xmath , sigma model matter
fields @xmath which are locally maps from @xmath into a sigma model
manifold or target space @xmath and real fermions @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath of opposite chirality.

The couplings of two-dimensional gauged sigma model are described by a
Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath and the Wess-Zumino term which is a
locally-defined two-form @xmath on @xmath ; @xmath is a globally defined
closed three-form on @xmath . In addition, the gauge group @xmath acts
on @xmath leaving invariant both the metric and the Wess-Zumino term, ie

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Lie-derivative with respect to the vector fields
@xmath generated by the action of the gauge group @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath . Therefore, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants of @xmath ; @xmath are gauge
indices. The first condition in ( 5.1.1 ) implies that @xmath are
Killing vectors, ie

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection of @xmath and @xmath . The
second condition in ( 5.1.1 ) together with @xmath imply that @xmath is
closed and so

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for some locally defined one-form @xmath .

A sigma model with rigid transformation symmetries can be thought of as
a trivial principal @xmath -bundle @xmath . The sigma model fields
@xmath are sections of an associated bundle @xmath , and since @xmath is
trivial, these are precisely the maps @xmath .

Promoting the gauge transformation parameters @xmath to be local , ie.
functions @xmath defined on @xmath , then @xmath becomes an arbitary
@xmath -bundle, @xmath . The sigma model fields, which are sections of
an associated bundle, can be represented locally as maps @xmath . The
gauge potential @xmath can be represented locally as the pull back of
the connection one-form of @xmath onto an open neighbourhood of @xmath .

To describe the couplings of the fermions, we consider two vector
bundles @xmath and @xmath over @xmath equipped with connections @xmath
and @xmath and with fibre metrics @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
fermions @xmath and @xmath can be thought of as sections of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, where @xmath and @xmath are spin bundles over
@xmath associated to the two inequivalent real representation of @xmath
. Note that in two dimensions there are Majorana-Weyl fermions and so
two inequivalent one-dimensional real spinor representations of @xmath .
In addition we shall assume that the connections @xmath and @xmath as
well as the fibre metrics @xmath and @xmath are invariant under the
action of the gauge group on @xmath . These conditions imply that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath are infinitesimal gauge transformations, @xmath , and
similarly for the connection @xmath and fibre metric @xmath . The above
conditions on the connection @xmath have appeared in [ 59 ] . An action
for the fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.1.8)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath are the gauge couplings which in general depend on @xmath ,
@xmath is a scalar potential and

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.1.9)
  -- -- -- ---------

where we have suppressed gauged indices. The covariant derivatives in
the action above are defined as follows,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath , and similarly for @xmath . The latter can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that the part of the action involving the Wess-Zumino term has
been written as an integral over a three-dimensional space. The
conditions for this term to be written in a two-dimensional form as well
as the conditions for the gauge invariance of the action will be
investigated in the next section, see also [ 37 ] .

#### 5.1.2 Conditions for gauge invariance

The gauge transformations of the fields are

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.1.14)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is the parameter of infinitesimal gauge transformations.
Some of the conditions required for the invariance of the action ( 5.1.8
) have been incorporated as part of the geometric data of the sigma
model in the previous section. In particular, in addition to the
conditions ( 5.1.1 ) and ( 5.1.5 ), we require that (i) @xmath is a
globally defined one-form on @xmath which (ii) satisfies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To write the Wess-Zumino part of the action in a two-dimensional form,
it is necessary for the relevant three form to be closed. This in
addition requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then the three-dimensional part of the action ( 5.1.8 ) can be written
locally [ 37 ] as

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.1.17)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

The conditions above that require (i) @xmath to be invariant under the
group action, (ii) @xmath to be globally defined on @xmath , (iii) (
5.1.15 ) and (iv) ( 5.1.16 ) are those for the closed form @xmath to
have an extension, i.e.  equivariant extension [ 39 ] , as a closed form
in @xmath [ 40 , 41 ] .

Next let us consider the conditions for gauge invariance of part of the
action ( 5.1.8 ) involving the fermions. We find that this requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the gauge couplings @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We have not assumed that @xmath . However given a connection on a vector
bundle with a fibre metric @xmath , there always exist another
connection @xmath such that @xmath . Suppose that the @xmath is used for
the fermionic couplings. If this is the case, the gauge group is @xmath
and therefore the right-hand-side of ( 5.1.6 ) vanishes.

Observe that the equation ( 5.1.5 ) can be written in a more covariant
form as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In what follows we shall assume that the conditions stated in this
section by requiring gauge invariance of the non-supersymmetric model
described by the action ( 5.1.8 ) hold. We shall see that for
supersymmetric sigma models more conditions are necessary.

### 5.2 @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory

The (1,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model involves the coupling of
three different (1,0)-multiplets. To simplify the construction of this
model we shall describe each multiplet and the conditions for
supersymmetry and gauge invariance separately. There are different ways
of approaching this problem. Here we shall use ‘standard’
(1,0)-superfields. The action will be constructed using (1,0)-superspace
methods.

#### 5.2.1 The gauge multiplet

The (1,0)-superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are
bosonic light-cone coordinates and @xmath is a Grassmann odd-coordinate.
The (1,0)-supersymmetric Yang-Mills multiplet with gauge group @xmath is
described by a connection @xmath in superspace which has components
@xmath . In addition, it is required that these satisfy the
supersymmetry constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath are the components of the curvature of the
superspace connection @xmath . (The gauge indices have been suppressed.)
Jacobi identities imply that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Therefore the independent components of the gauge multiplet are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gaugino and @xmath is the two-form gauge field
strength.

#### 5.2.2 Sigma model multiplets

To describe the sigma model multiplet that couples to the above gauge
field, we introduce a Riemannian manifold @xmath with metric @xmath and
a locally defined two form @xmath . In addition we assume that @xmath
admits a vector bundle @xmath with fibre metric @xmath , connection
@xmath and a section @xmath . The data required for the description of
the sigma model multiplet are the same as those given in section 5.1.1 .
In addition we take the section @xmath to satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -supersymmetric sigma model multiplet is described by a real
scalar superfield @xmath and a fermionic superfield @xmath . The
superfield @xmath is a map from the superspace @xmath into a sigma model
manifold @xmath and the fermionic superfield @xmath is a section of the
bundle @xmath ; @xmath is a spin bundle over @xmath .

The components of the superfields @xmath , @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the covariant derivatives are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the usual flat superspace derivative, @xmath .

#### 5.2.3 Supersymmetric action

It is straightforward to couple the gauge multiplet to @xmath
-supersymmetric sigma model matter. The full action is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath is not necessarily symmetric in the gauge
indices and @xmath is a @xmath -type of term which may depend on the
scalar field @xmath .

The gauge covariant supersymmetric action for the fields @xmath is [ 38
]

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.2.9)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

which as in section 5.1.1 can also be written as an integral over @xmath
superspace provided that @xmath admits an equivariant extension. In
particular we have

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.2.10)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

The action of the gauged fermionic multiplet is [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The definition of the covariant derivative @xmath is similar to the one
given in section ( 5.1.1 ) for the covariant derivative @xmath .

The action for the potential term is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which is similar to that of the ungauged model in [ 25 ] .

The superfields transform under the gauge group @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a @xmath superspace index and @xmath is an infinitesimal
gauge transformation parameter. Gauge invariance of the action ( 5.2.7 )
requires, in addition to the conditions given in section ( 5.1.2 ), the
condition ( 5.2.4 ) and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 5.2.4 The action of (1,0)-model in components and scalar potential

The action of (1,0)-supersymmetric two-dimensional gauged sigma model
described by the action ( 5.2.7 ) can be easily written in components by
performing the @xmath integration and using the definition of the
various component fields of the (1,0)-multiplets which we have described
in the previous sections. In particular we find for the part of the
action involving the kinetic term of the gauge multiplet that

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.2.15)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

Next we find that

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.2.16)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath are the usual metric connections with torsion @xmath and
@xmath are the associated connections involving also the gauge
connection @xmath . For the fermionic multiplet we have

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.2.17)
  -- -- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The scalar potential in these models is precisely that of the ungauged
(1,0) sigma models in [ 25 ] , ie.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

So we find that only ‘ @xmath -terms’ contribute to the potential. This
is because the gauge multiplet does not have a auxiliary field.
Therefore the classical vacua of the theory are the points of the sigma
model manifold @xmath for which the section @xmath vanishes. If there is
such a point, then @xmath will vanish at the orbit of the gauge group
@xmath in @xmath which contains that point. This is because the section
@xmath is invariant under the action of the gauge group. So in general
the theory will not have isolated vacua unless they are fixed points of
the group action of @xmath on @xmath .

### 5.3 @xmath supersymmetry

#### 5.3.1 The gauge multiplet

The @xmath superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath where @xmath are the
usual light-cone coordinates and @xmath are anticommuting coordinates.
The (2,0)-supersymmetric Yang-Mills multiplet is described by a
connection @xmath in @xmath superspace with components @xmath , @xmath .
In addition it is required that these satisfy the supersymmetry
constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath            @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Jacobi identities imply that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

The components of the gauge multiplet are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The components, @xmath , are the gaugini which are real chiral fermions
in two dimensions, @xmath is the field strength and @xmath is an
auxiliary field. (We have suppressed the gauge indices.)

#### 5.3.2 The sigma model multiplet

We recall that the target manifold @xmath of a (2,0)-supersymmetric
ungauged sigma model is a Kähler manifold with torsion (KT). Therefore
@xmath is a hermitian manifold with metric @xmath and equipped with a
complex structure @xmath which is parallel with respect to the @xmath
connection. (For the definition of these geometries see [ 60 , 19 ] ).
To gauge the model, we assume as in section 5.1.1 that the gauge group
@xmath acts on @xmath and leaving invariant the metric @xmath and the
Wess-Zumino term @xmath . In addition we require that the action of the
group @xmath is holomorphic. This means that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Lie derivative is along vector fields @xmath generating the
group action of @xmath . The sigma model fields are maps @xmath into a
complex manifold @xmath which in addition satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Note that the requirement for @xmath to be a complex
manifold can be derived from the above condition.

The components of the sigma model multiplet @xmath are as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 5.3.3 The fermionic multiplet

Let @xmath be a vector bundle over @xmath equipped with a connection
@xmath and a fibre (almost) complex structure @xmath . The fermionic
multiplet @xmath is a section of @xmath over the @xmath , where @xmath
is a spin bundle over @xmath . In addition we require that the fermionic
multiplet @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a section of @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath .

Compatibility of the condition ( 5.3.7 ) with gauge transformations
requires that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

These are the conditions for the gauge transformations and the
(2,0)-supersymmetry transformations to commute.

The compatibility of this constraint with the algebra of covariant
derivatives @xmath implies the following conditions:

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

These are precisely the conditions required for the off-shell closure of
(2,0) supersymmetry algebra.

It is always possible to find a connection @xmath on the bundle @xmath
such that @xmath . In such case the last condition in ( 5.3.10 ) is
satisfied. Decomposing @xmath as @xmath using @xmath , the first
condition implies that @xmath is a holomorphic vector bundle. Then the
second condition in ( 5.3.10 ) implies that the section @xmath is the
real part of a holomorphic section of @xmath .

The components of the fermionic multiplet are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a two-dimensional real chiral fermion and @xmath is an
auxiliary field.

#### 5.3.4 Action

The action of the (2,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model can be written
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the action of the gauge multiplet, @xmath is the action
of the sigma-model multiplet and @xmath is the action of the fermionic
multiplet. We shall describe each term separately.

#### 5.3.5 The gauge multiplet action

The most general action for the (2,0)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet up
to terms quadratic in the field strength is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge coupling constants which in
general depend on the superfield @xmath and similarly for the theta
terms @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are not necessarily symmetric in
the gauge indices. The above action can be written in different ways.
However there are always field and coupling constant redefinitions which
can bring the action to the above form.

Observe that this action is not an integral over the full @xmath
superspace. Therefore it is not manifestly (2,0)-supersymmetric. The
requirement of invariance under (2,0) supersymmetry imposes the
conditions

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

This is most easily seen by verifying that the Lagrangian density is
independent of @xmath up to @xmath -surface terms. The conditions (
5.3.14 ) are the Cauchy-Riemann equations which imply that @xmath and
@xmath are holomorphic .

Indeed provided that the holomorphicity conditions ( 5.3.14 ) hold, the
action ( 5.3.13 ) apart from the theta terms can be written as an
integral over the @xmath superspace as

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

for any constant @xmath . After integrating over the odd coordinate
@xmath we recover the action ( 5.3.13 ). Observe that the action (
5.3.15 ) simplifies if one takes @xmath to be symmetric matrices. In
particular one finds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Invariance of the action ( 5.3.13 ) under gauge transformations requires
that the couplings @xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.3.17)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

The gauge transformations of the gauge multiplet and the sigma model
multiplet that are required to derive the above result are as in the
(1,0)-supersymmetric models studied in the previous sections.

#### 5.3.6 The sigma model action

The part of the action which describes the coupling of the sigma model
(2,0)-multiplet to the gauge multiplet has already been given in [ 38 ]
. This action is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.3.18)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function on @xmath , possibly locally defined, given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Under certain conditions [ 45 ] the maps @xmath can be thought of as the
moment maps of KT geometry.

Gauge invariance of the above part of action requires in addition to the
conditions on @xmath , which we have already mentioned in section 5.1.2
, that @xmath is globally defined on @xmath and that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 5.3.7 The action of the fermionic multiplet

This part of the action is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Gauge invariance of this part of the action requires the same conditions
as those appearing for the couplings of (1,0)-multiplet in ( 5.1.19 ).

The conditions required by (2,0)-supersymmetry on the couplings of the
above action are the same as those of the ungauged model and have been
given in [ 8 ] . These can be easily derived by requiring that the
Lagrangian density is independent from @xmath up to @xmath surface
terms. In particular, we find that

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.3.22)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

The first condition implies that the fibre metric is hermitian with
respect to the fibre complex structure. It is always possible to choose
such a fibre metric given a fibre complex structure on a bundle vector
bundle @xmath . In the context of sigma models this has been explained
in [ 44 ] . The rest of the conditions can be considerably simplified if
the connection @xmath is chosen such that @xmath . Such connection
always exists on a hermitian vector bundle @xmath . In such case, the
third equation in ( 5.3.22 ) implies that @xmath is the real part of a
holomorphic section of @xmath .

#### 5.3.8 The action in components

It is straightforward to write the action @xmath of the
(2,0)-supersymmetric gauge sigma model in components. In particular we
find that the component action of the gauge multiplet ( 5.3.13 ) is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.3.23)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

The component action of the sigma model part is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.3.24)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

and the component action of the fermionic multiplet is

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.3.25)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

Eliminating the auxiliary fields of the gauge and fermionic multiplets,
we find that

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.3.26)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is the matrix inverse of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Note that we have assumed that @xmath is invertible.

#### 5.3.9 Scalar potential and classical vacua

The scalar potential of the (2,0)-supersymmetric gauge theories coupled
to sigma model matter is is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The scalar potential in these models is written as a sum of a ‘ @xmath ’
and an ‘ @xmath ’ term. The classical supersymmetric vacua of the theory
are those for which

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The inequivalent classical vacua are the space of orbits of the gauge
group on the zero set of the section @xmath and @xmath . If the section
@xmath and @xmath vanish, then the space of inequivalent vacua is the KT
reduction @xmath of the sigma model target space @xmath . It has been
shown in [ 45 ] that the space of vacua inherits the KT structure of the
sigma model manifold @xmath and under certain assumptions is a smooth
manifold. However the three-form of the Wess-Zumino term on @xmath is
not necessarily closed.

### 5.4 @xmath supersymmetry

#### 5.4.1 The gauge multiplet

The @xmath superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath , where @xmath ,
@xmath , are the odd coordinates. The (4,0)-supersymmetric Yang-Mills
multiplet is described by a connection @xmath in superspace with
components @xmath , @xmath . In addition it is required that these
satisfy the supersymmetry constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.4.1)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath in the last condition. (We have suppressed gauge
indices.) Jacobi identities imply that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.4.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

The components of the gauge multiplet are

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first four fields, @xmath , are the gaugini which are real chiral
fermions in two dimensions, @xmath is the field strength and @xmath are
the auxiliary fields.

#### 5.4.2 The sigma model multiplet

Let @xmath be a hyper-Kähler manifold with torsion (HKT). This implies
that @xmath admits a hypercomplex structure @xmath the metric @xmath on
@xmath is tri-hermitian and the hypercomplex structure is parallel with
respect to a metric connection with as torsion the three-form @xmath ,
@xmath ; (see [ 60 , 19 ] for more details). In addition we assume that
the gauge group @xmath acts on @xmath preserving the metric, three-form
@xmath and the hypercomplex structure. The latter condition implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Lie derivative is along vector fields @xmath generated by the
action of @xmath on @xmath . The sigma model fields are maps @xmath into
the HKT manifold @xmath which in addition satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . We remark that the algebra of (4,0)
supersymmetry transformations closes as a consequence of the HKT
condition we imposed on @xmath .

The components of the sigma model multiplet @xmath are as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 5.4.3 The fermionic multiplet

Let @xmath be a vector bundle over @xmath equipped with a connection
@xmath and a fibre almost hypercomplex structure @xmath . The fermionic
multiplet @xmath is a section of @xmath over the @xmath , where @xmath
is a spin bundle over @xmath . In addition the fermionic multiplet
@xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are sections of @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath .

Compatibility of the condition ( 5.4.7 ) with gauge transformations
requires that

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.4.9)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

These are the conditions for the gauge transformations and the
(2,0)-supersymmetry transformations to commute.

The conditions required for the closure of the (4,0) supersymmetry
algebra are similar to those found for the ungauged (4,0) model in [ 25
, 43 ] . Here to simplify the analysis, we shall in addition assume that
the fibre hypercomplex structure is parallel with respect to @xmath , ie
@xmath . (See [ 44 ] for a discussion on the conditions required for the
existence of such a connection @xmath on the vector bundle @xmath .) The
more general case can be easily derived but we shall not use these
results later. In the special case, we find that

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.4.10)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

The first condition implies that the curvature @xmath of the vector
bundle @xmath is a (1,1)-form with respect to all three complex
structures @xmath . Observe that the diagonal relation @xmath implies
all the rest. The diagonal part of the second condition implies that
each section @xmath is a holomorphic section with respect to the pair
@xmath .

The components of the fermionic multiplet are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a two-dimensional real chiral fermion and @xmath is an
auxiliary field.

#### 5.4.4 Action

The action of the (4,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model can be written
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the action of the gauge multiplet, @xmath is the action
of the sigma-model multiplet and @xmath is the action of the fermionic
multiplet. We shall describe each term separately.

#### 5.4.5 The gauge multiplet action

The most general action for the (4,0)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet up
to terms quadratic in the field strength is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge coupling constants which in
general depend on the superfield @xmath and @xmath are not necessarily
symmetric in the gauge indices. The above action can be written in
different ways. However there are always field and coupling constant
redefinitions which bring the action to the above form.

Observe that this action is not an integral over the full @xmath
superspace. Therefore it is not manifestly (4,0)-supersymmetry. Define
@xmath . The requirement of invariance the action ( 5.4.13 ) under (4,0)
supersymmetry imposes the conditions

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.4.14)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

and @xmath are symmetric in the gauge indices. In addition

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.4.15)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

The conditions ( 5.4.14 ) and ( 5.4.15 ) imply that in fact @xmath and
@xmath are constant, i.e.  independent from the sigma model superfield
@xmath . The above conditions are most easily derived by verifying that
the Lagrangian density is independent of @xmath up to surface terms in
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In addition gauge invariance requires that
the coupling constants @xmath and @xmath satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.4.16)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

In particular @xmath should be proportional to an invariant quadratic
form on the Lie algebra of the gauge group @xmath . If @xmath
semi-simple, the condition on @xmath implies that @xmath . If @xmath is
abelian, then the above conditions are satisfied for any constants
@xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.4.6 The sigma model multiplet action

This part of the action has already been described in [ 38 ] . Here we
shall summarise the some of results relevant to this chapter. The action
of this multiplet is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.17)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function on @xmath , possibly locally defined, given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

It has been shown in [ 45 ] that under certain conditions @xmath is the
moment map of HKT geometry.

The gauge transformations of the superfield @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Gauge invariance of the above action requires that the one-form @xmath
should satisfy the conditions mentioned in section 5.1.2 , the moment
maps should be globally defined on the sigma model target space @xmath
and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 5.4.7 The action of the fermionic multiplet

This part of the action is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Gauge invariance of this part of the action requires the same conditions
as those appearing for the couplings of (1,0)-multiplet in ( 5.1.19 ).

The conditions required by (4,0)-supersymmetry on the couplings of the
above action are the same as those of the ungauged model and have been
given in [ 43 ] . These can be easily derived by requiring that the
Lagrangian density is independent from @xmath up to @xmath surface
terms. In particular, we find that

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (5.4.22)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

To derive the above conditions we have used that @xmath as we have
assumed in the construction of the fermionic multiplet. The first
condition implies that the fibre metric is tri-hermitian. These
conditions can be further simplified if the connection @xmath is chosen
such that @xmath . In such case, the third equation in ( 5.4.22 )
implies that @xmath is the real part of three holomorphic sections of
@xmath each with respect to the three doublets @xmath of complex
structures, ie @xmath is triholomorphic.

#### 5.4.8 The action in components and scalar potential

The part of the action of the theory involving the kinetic term of the
gauge multiplets ( 5.4.13 ) can be easily expanded in components as
follows,

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.23)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

To derive this we have used that @xmath are constant and @xmath
symmetric in the gauge indices.

The part of the action that contains the kinetic term and the
Wess-Zumino term of the sigma model fields in components is as follows,

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.24)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

The part of the action that contains the kinetic term the fermionic
multiplet in components is as follows:

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.25)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

After eliminating the auxiliary fields of both the gauge multiplet and
the fermionic multiplet, we find that the action of (4,0)-supersymmetric
gauge theories coupled to sigma models is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.26)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

It is straightforward to write the action @xmath of the
(2,0)-supersymmetric gauge sigma model in components. In particular we
find the following:

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.4.27)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

#### 5.4.9 Scalar Potential and Classical Vacua

The scalar potential of the (4,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma models is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have absorbed the constants @xmath into the definition of the
moment maps @xmath . The scalar potential in these models is written as
a sum of a ‘ @xmath ’ and an ‘ @xmath ’ term. The classical
supersymmetric vacua of the theory are those for which

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The inequivalent classical vacua are the space of orbits of the gauge
group on the zero set of the section @xmath and the HKT moment maps
@xmath . If the section @xmath vanishes, then the space of inequivalent
vacua is the theory is the HKT reduction @xmath of the sigma model
target space @xmath . It has been shown in [ 45 ] that under certain
assumptions the space of vacua inherits the HKT structure of the sigma
model manifold @xmath and it is a smooth space. However the three-form
of the Wess-Zumino term on @xmath is not necessarily closed.

### 5.5 @xmath supersymmetry

#### 5.5.1 The gauge multiplet

The @xmath superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are
Grassman valued odd coordinates. The (1,1)-supersymmetric Yang-Mills
multiplet is described by a connection @xmath in superspace with
components @xmath . In addition it is required that these satisfy the
supersymmetry constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                        
                       @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

(We have suppressed the gauge indices.) The Jacobi identities imply that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 (5.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We mention that the (1,1)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet can be
constructed from a scalar superfield. This allows for the possibility of
non-linear couplings between the sigma model multiplet and the gauge
multiplet. The components of the gauge multiplet are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The field, @xmath , is a scalar, @xmath , @xmath are gaugini which are
real chiral fermions in two dimensions, and @xmath is the field
strength.

#### 5.5.2 The sigma model multiplet

Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold with metric @xmath and locally
defined two-form @xmath . We take the gauge group @xmath to act on
@xmath with isometries preserving the Wess-Zumino three-form @xmath and
generating the vector fields @xmath as in section 5.1.1 . In addition we
assume that the one-form @xmath satisfies the conditions of section
5.1.2 .

The sigma model (1,1) multiplet @xmath is a map from the (1,1)
superspace @xmath into the Riemannian manifold @xmath . The components
of @xmath are as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and similarly for @xmath . Observe that the first two
components of @xmath superfield @xmath can be identified with the two
components of a @xmath superfield @xmath while the latter two components
can be identified with those of a @xmath fermionic superfield @xmath .
The vector bundle associated with this fermionic multiplet is the
tangent bundle of @xmath .

#### 5.5.3 Action

The action of the (1,1)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model can be written
as sum of three terms,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the action of the gauge multiplet, @xmath is the action
of the sigma-model multiplet and @xmath is a potential term. We shall
describe each term separately.

#### 5.5.4 The gauge multiplet action

An action of the (1,1)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet is most easily
written in (1,1) superspace. In particular we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath is not necessarily symmetric in the gauge indices,
@xmath and the theta term @xmath . Of course this action is manifestly
(1,1)-supersymmetric because it is an integral over full superspace.
Gauge invariance imposes the additional conditions

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.5.7)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

on the couplings @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The action ( 5.5.6 ) can be easily expanded in components to find

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.5.8)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

#### 5.5.5 The sigma model multiplet action and potential term

A (1,1)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model action has been given in [ 38
] . This action can be written as

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.5.9)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

This can be written without the @xmath integration as

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.5.10)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

It is straightforward to add a potential term to the above actions as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function of the superfield @xmath . Gauge invariance
of the above action requires that @xmath should satisfy the conditions
stated in section 5.1.2 .

#### 5.5.6 A generalisation of the action

The action of (1,1)-supersymmetric gauge theory presented above can be
generalized by allowing the various couplings of the theory to depend on
the scalar component of the gauge multiplet superfield. Supersymmetry
then requires additional fermionic couplings. The new theory can be
organised as a (1,1)-supersymmetric sigma model which has target space
@xmath , where @xmath is the Lie algebra of the gauge group @xmath . The
various allowed couplings are restricted by two-dimensional Lorentz
invariance, supersymmetry and gauge invariance as usual. The sigma model
multiplet is maps @xmath from the (1,1) superspace @xmath into @xmath ,
where @xmath is the usual (1,1) sigma model superfield and @xmath is the
(1,1) gauge theory multiplet. We again allow the gauge group @xmath to
act on @xmath with a group action on @xmath and the adjoint action on
@xmath . The vector fields generated by such a group action are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , the component @xmath is allowed to depend on both @xmath
and @xmath , and the partial derivative with the gauge index denotes
differential with respect to @xmath .

Next we introduce a metric @xmath and a Wess-Zumino term @xmath on
@xmath and assume that the gauge group @xmath acts on @xmath with
isometries leaving the Wess-Zumino term @xmath invariant. We also define
@xmath as @xmath , where @xmath is the new Killing vector field ( 5.5.12
). Then an action can be written for this new sigma model as

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.5.13)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function which depends on @xmath . This action is
clearly supersymmetric because it is a full (1,1) superspace integral.
Gauge invariance requires that @xmath above satisfies all the conditions
stated in section 5.1.2 but for the group action ( 5.5.12 ) and the
Wess-Zumino term in @xmath . In addition, it requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the Lie derivative is with respect to the vector field ( 5.5.12 ).

#### 5.5.7 Scalar Potential

To compute the scalar potential we express the action in components and
eliminate the auxiliary field of the sigma model superfield @xmath from
the action using the field equations. The scalar potential is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the inverse of the restriction of the metric of @xmath
on @xmath . Observe that @xmath depends on both the sigma model scalar
@xmath and the gauge multiplet scalar @xmath . The classical
supersymmetric vacua of the theory are those values of @xmath for which
@xmath . For example, for the special (1,1)-supersymmetric model
investigated in the beginning of the section, @xmath , where in this
case @xmath .

### 5.6 @xmath supersymmetry

#### 5.6.1 The gauge multiplet

The @xmath superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are
the even and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are odd coordinates. The
(2,1)-supersymmetric Yang-Mills multiplet is described by a connection
@xmath in superspace with components @xmath , @xmath . In addition it is
required that these satisfy the supersymmetry constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                        
                       @xmath   @xmath      (5.6.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have suppressed the gauge indices. We remark that @xmath are scalar
superfields. The Jacobi identities imply that

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The two scalar superfields @xmath can be viewed as a map @xmath from the
(2,1) superspace @xmath into @xmath , where @xmath is the Lie algebra of
the group @xmath . Next introduce a complex structure @xmath in @xmath
where @xmath is the constant complex structure in @xmath with @xmath .
The last two conditions in ( 5.6.1 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In fact this implies that @xmath is a covariantly chiral superfield,
@xmath .

The components of the gauge superfields @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are scalars, @xmath and @xmath are the gaugini which are
real chiral fermions in two dimensions, @xmath is the field strength and
@xmath is a real auxiliary field. As in the (1,1)-supersymmetric gauge
theory, the gauge multiplet is determined by scalar superfields. This
will lead again to non-linear interactions because the various couplings
of the theory can depend on them.

#### 5.6.2 The sigma model multiplet

Let @xmath be a KT manifold with metric @xmath and complex structure
@xmath . We in addition assume that the gauge group @xmath acts on
@xmath with isometries which furthermore preserve the complex structure
@xmath and the Wess-Zumino term @xmath . These conditions are the same
as in the case of (2,0)-supersymmetric model. The (2,1) sigma model
superfield @xmath is a map from the (2,1) superspace @xmath into the
sigma model manifold @xmath . In addition it is required that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the vector fields on @xmath generated by the
group action. As we have seen, the (2,1) gauge multiplet satisfies the
condition ( 5.6.2 ) similar to ( 5.6.4 ). The superfield @xmath is also
covariantly chiral, as can be seen by choosing complex coordinates on
the sigma model manifold @xmath . These results will be used later for
the construction of actions of (2,1)-supersymmetric gauge theories
coupled to sigma models.

The components of the sigma model multiplet @xmath are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a scalar, @xmath and @xmath are real fermions, and
@xmath is an auxiliary field.

#### 5.6.3 Action

An action of a (2,1)-supersymmetric gauge theory coupled to sigma model
matter can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.6.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the action of the gauge multiplet, @xmath is the action
of the sigma-model multiplet and @xmath contains the potential term. We
shall describe each term separately.

#### 5.6.4 The gauge multiplet action

An action for the (2,1)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet is

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.6.7)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath are the gauge coupling constants and @xmath are theta term
type of couplings. All the couplings are allowed to depend on the
superfield @xmath . We shall assume that both @xmath are symmetric in
the gauge indices but this restriction can be lifted.

Observe that this action is not an integral over the full @xmath
superspace. Therefore it is not manifestly (2,1)-supersymmetric. The
requirement of invariance under (2,1) supersymmetry imposes the
conditions

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.6.8)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Therefore the couplings @xmath and @xmath are holomorphic.

In addition gauge invariance of the action ( 5.6.7 ) implies that

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.6.9)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

#### 5.6.5 The sigma model multiplet action and potential

The action of the gauged (2,1)-supersymmetric sigma model with
Wess-Zumino term has been given in [ 38 ] . Here we shall summarise some
of results relevant to this chapter. The action of this multiplet is

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.6.10)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

This can be written without the @xmath integration as

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.6.11)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

The gauge transformations of @xmath are @xmath . Gauge invariance of the
above action requires that @xmath should satisfy the conditions
described in section 5.1.2 . As in the case of (2,0)-supersymmetric
gauged sigma model, @xmath should satisfy @xmath . In fact @xmath is a
moment map associated with the action of the gauge group on the KT
manifold @xmath .

The part of the action involving the potential is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.6.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath Invariance under (2,1) supersymmetry requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.6.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . This implies that @xmath is the real part of a
holomorphic function on @xmath .

The scalar potential of (2,1)-supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to
sigma models described above is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.6.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 5.6.6 A generalisation

As we have shown both the (2,1) gauge multiplet and the (2,1) sigma
model multiplet are constructed from covariantly chiral scalar
superfields, ie both satisfy the conditions ( 5.6.4 ) and ( 5.6.2 ).
Because of this, these two superfields can be combined to a single
superfield @xmath which is a map from the @xmath superspace @xmath into
@xmath . In addition we can take @xmath to satisfy a chirality condition
which is the combination of ( 5.6.2 ) and ( 5.6.4 ). Next we can take
the gauge group @xmath to act on @xmath with the adjoint action in the
first factor and a group action on @xmath . The vector fields associated
by such a group action are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.6.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Treating the (2,1)-supersymmetric gauge theory coupled to sigma model
matter as a sigma model with superfield @xmath , which satisfies ( 5.6.2
) and ( 5.6.4 ), we can write the action

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.6.16)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where now all the couplings are defined using the geometry of @xmath .
Of course (2,1)-supersymmetric requires that @xmath is a KT manifold
with respect to the complex structure @xmath . In particular the metric
and the rest of the couplings depend on the coordinates of @xmath . The
conditions for gauge invariance are easily determined from those of the
(2,1)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model. We remark that the couplings of
( 5.6.16 ) can be arranged such that the @xmath R-symmetry of the @xmath
-supersymmetry algebra is broken. In particular the @xmath rotation that
rotate the @xmath scalar components is not a symmetry of the action.
However if one insists in preserving the R-symmetry, then the KT
manifold @xmath should admit a @xmath action preserving all the
geometric data.

### 5.7 @xmath supersymmetry

#### 5.7.1 The gauge multiplet

The @xmath superspace @xmath has coordinates @xmath , where @xmath are
the even and @xmath are the odd coordinates. The (4,1)-supersymmetric
Yang-Mills multiplet is described by a connection @xmath in @xmath
superspace with components @xmath with @xmath . In addition it is
required that these satisfy the supersymmetry constraints [ 38 ]

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(We have suppressed all the gauge indices.) The Jacobi identities imply
that

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The (4,1) gauge multiplet is determined by four scalar superfields. Some
of the conditions on these superfields given in ( 5.7.1 ), like in the
(2,1) model previously, can be expressed as conditions of a (4,1) sigma
model multiplet. For this view the four-scalar superfields @xmath as
maps from the superspace @xmath into @xmath , where @xmath is the Lie
algebra of the gauge group @xmath . Then introduce three constant
complex structures @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath . The conditions on @xmath in ( 5.7.1 ) and ( 5.7.1 ) can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.7.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The components of the gauge multiplet are

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are scalars, @xmath , @xmath are the gaugini which are real
chiral fermions in two dimensions, @xmath is the field strength and
@xmath are auxiliary fields. The @xmath R-symmetry of the
(4,1)-supersymmetric gauge theory rotates both the scalars and the
fermions of the gauge multiplet.

#### 5.7.2 The sigma model multiplet

Let @xmath be a HKT manifold with metric @xmath and hypercomplex
structure @xmath . We in addition assume that the gauge group @xmath
acts on @xmath with isometries which in addition preserve the
hypercomplex structure @xmath and the Wess-Zumino term @xmath . These
conditions are the same as in the case of (4,0)-supersymmetric model.
The (4,1) sigma model superfield @xmath is a map from the (4,1)
superspace @xmath into the sigma model manifold @xmath . In addition it
is required that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.7.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the vector fields on @xmath generated by the
group action. As we have seen the (4,1) gauge multiplet satisfies the
condition ( 5.7.1 ) similar to ( 5.7.2 ). These results will be used
later for the construction of actions of (4,1)-supersymmetric gauge
theories coupled to sigma models.

The components of the sigma model (4,1) multiplet @xmath are as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a scalar, @xmath and @xmath are real fermions, and
@xmath is an auxiliary field.

#### 5.7.3 Action

The action of a (4,1)-supersymmetric gauged theory coupled to sigma
model matter can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the action of the gauge multiplet, @xmath is the action
of the sigma-model multiplet and @xmath is the potential. We shall
describe each term separately.

#### 5.7.4 The gauge multiplet action

An action for the (4,1)-supersymmetric gauge multiplet is

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.7.5)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge coupling constants and theta type
of terms, respectively, which in general depend on the superfield @xmath
. We shall assume that both @xmath are symmetric in the gauge indices
but this restriction can be lifted.

Observe that this action is not an integral over the full @xmath
superspace. Therefore it is not manifestly (4,1)-supersymmetric. The
requirement of invariance under (4,1) supersymmetry imposes the
condition that @xmath and @xmath are constant. This is similar to the
condition that arises in (4,0) supersymmetric gauge theories. Gauge
invariance of the action ( 5.7.5 ) in addition requires

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (5.7.6)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Thus @xmath must be invariant quadratic forms on the Lie algebra of the
group @xmath and @xmath must be invariant elements of the Lie algebra.
Of course @xmath , if @xmath is semi-simple.

#### 5.7.5 The sigma model multiplet action and the potential

An action for the (4,1) sigma model multiplet coupled to gauge fields
has been given in [ 38 ] . Here we shall summarise the some of results
relevant to this chapter. The action of this multiplet is

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (5.7.7)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

The gauge transformations of @xmath are @xmath . Gauge invariance of the
above action requires that @xmath should satisfy the conditions
described in section 5.1.2 . As in the case of (4,0)-supersymmetric
gauged sigma model, @xmath should satisfy @xmath . In fact @xmath is a
moment map associated with the action of the gauge group @xmath on the
HKT manifold @xmath .

The part of the action involving the potential is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.7.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Invariance under (4,1) supersymmetry requires that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.7.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . This implies that @xmath is the real part of three
holomorphic functions on @xmath , ie @xmath is tri-holomorphic.

The scalar potential of (4,1)-supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to
sigma models is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.7.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have shifted the moment maps @xmath by a constant @xmath .

#### 5.7.6 A generalisation

As we have shown both the (4,1) gauge multiplet and the (4,1) sigma
model multiplet are constructed from scalar superfields which satisfy
the similar constraints ( 5.7.1 ) and ( 5.7.2 ). Because of this, these
two superfields can be combined to a single superfield @xmath which is a
map from the @xmath superspace @xmath into @xmath . In addition we can
take @xmath to satisfy a condition which is the combination of ( 5.7.2 )
and ( 5.7.1 ). Next we can take the gauge group @xmath to act on @xmath
with the adjoint action in the first factor and a group action on @xmath
. The vector fields associated by such a group action are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.7.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Treating the (4,1)-supersymmetric gauge theory coupled to sigma model
matter as a sigma model with superfield @xmath , which satisfies ( 5.7.1
) and ( 5.7.2 ), we can write the action

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (5.7.12)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

where now all the couplings are defined using the geometry of @xmath .
Of course (4,1)-supersymmetry requires that @xmath is a HKT manifold
with respect to the hypercomplex structure @xmath . In particular the
metric and the rest of the couplings depend on the coordinates of @xmath
. The conditions for gauge invariance are easily determined from those
of the (4,1)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model. We remark that the
couplings of ( 5.7.12 ) can be arranged such that the @xmath R-symmetry
of the @xmath -supersymmetry algebra is broken. In particular the @xmath
rotation that rotates the @xmath scalar components is not a symmetry of
the action. However if one insists in preserving the R-symmetry, then
the HKT manifold @xmath should admit a @xmath action preserving all the
geometric data.

### 5.8 Summary

We now summarise the conditions given in this chapter. The conditions
for the general case are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conditions in the cases of @xmath and @xmath supersymmetry are given
in the following tables.

## Chapter 6 Vortices and Equivariant cohomology

### 6.1 Introduction

Vortices are the instantons of two-dimensional gauge theories coupled to
sigma models. Bogomol’nyi type of bounds for both abelian [ 48 ] and
non-abelian vortices [ 49 , 50 ] have been investigated in the context
of linear sigma models. To describe them, it is instructive to begin
with a toy example.

Let @xmath be the usual two-dimensional spacetime, which after a Wick
rotation we can take to be Euclidean, @xmath with metric @xmath . The
sigma model fields are maps @xmath to a sigma model manifold @xmath ,
which in this introduction we take to be @xmath . The gauge group @xmath
acts on @xmath with isometries, for simplicity we take @xmath to be
abelian.

The Yang-Mills-Higgs action is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is ths usual covariant derivative, and @xmath . The final
term is the Higgs self-interaction term, and @xmath is constant.

This action admits finite action, solotonic configurations [ 61 ] , and
these configurations are precsiely those that saturate the following
bound, due to Bogomol’nyi [ 48 ] . We rewrite ( 6.1.1 ) as

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is the alternating tensor. This expression is obtained by
completing squares and collecting the remaining terms together in the
square brackets above. Finiteness of the action ( 6.1.1 ) requires that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and with these boundary conditions, using a partial integration, the
action ( 6.1.2 ) may be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.1.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The last term is a topological charge proportional to the first Chern
character, which is an integer @xmath (assuming sufficiently uniform
limits in ( 6.1.3 )). @xmath is also called the vortex number and
solutions with @xmath are called @xmath -vortex solutions.

Because the other integrands are non-negative, we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because we may always choose the signs in ( 6.1 ) so that the
topological charge is positive. For @xmath , there is equality if and
only if

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (6.1.6)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

The appearance of the alternating tensor @xmath suggests that we should
consider @xmath as a Kähler manifold, which implies that we should
consider models with (2,0) supersymmetry. We would also like to derive a
bound for those gauge theories introduced in the previous chapter. This
will be done in the remainder of the chapter.

### 6.2 A bound for vortices in the (2,0) model

In this section we shall establish bounds for vortices for non-linear
sigma models considered in the previous chapter. For this we shall
consider the Euclidean action of the (2,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma
model without Wess-Zumino term. The sigma model target space @xmath is
Kähler with metric @xmath , complex structure @xmath and associated
Kähler form @xmath . After a Wick rotation the two-dimensional spacetime
is @xmath with the standard Euclidean metric. The relevant part of the
bosonic Euclidean action of a (2,0)-supersymmetric gauge theory coupled
to a sigma model is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next we introduce @xmath a constant complex structure on @xmath such
that @xmath is a Kähler manifold. The associated Kähler form @xmath is
the volume form of @xmath . In such a case the Euclidean action ( 6.2.1
) can be rewritten as

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (6.2.2)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). The above
expression for the Euclidean action has been constructed from ( 6.2.1 )
by completing squares and collecting all the remaining terms which
organise themselves in the last term of ( 6.2.2 ).

The last term in ( 6.2.2 ) is the topological charge,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the equivariant extension of the Kähler form @xmath of the sigma
model target space @xmath , see section 4.3.1 . That @xmath is closed
follows from dimensional grounds. In fact ( 4.4.4 ) easily generalises
to show that @xmath is closed as a two-form on any manifold @xmath for
any map @xmath from @xmath into the sigma model manifold @xmath and for
any choice of connection @xmath .

The Euclidean action of the (2,0)-supersymmetric two-dimensional sigma
model is bounded by the absolute value of the topological charge @xmath
, @xmath . This is because it is always possible to choose the signs in
the Bogomol’nyi bound above such that the topological term is positive.
If the topological charge is positive, then the bound is attained if

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.2.5)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

In two-dimensions, the curvature @xmath is a (1,1)-form. Choosing
complex coordinates @xmath on @xmath with respect to the complex
structure @xmath , it is always possible to arrange using a (complex)
gauge transformation that @xmath . Choosing complex coordinates in the
sigma model target space @xmath as well, the second BPS condition
becomes @xmath which means that the map @xmath is holomorphic from the
spacetime @xmath into the sigma model manifold @xmath .

A special case of this bound arises for gauge theories couple to linear
sigma models for which the sigma model manifold @xmath with the
Euclidean metric and equipped with a constant compatible complex
structure @xmath . This case includes the Nielsen-Olesen vortices [ 47 ]
. (For these, existence of a solution was shown in [ 51 ] and the moduli
were studied in [ 62 ] , [ 49 ] and more recently in [ 63 ] , see also [
64 ] ). The case with a single complex scalar has been analysed in [ 48
] . Choosing complex coordinates @xmath in @xmath , we write

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.2.6)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Next consider the abelian group @xmath -action @xmath which generates
the holomorphic Killing vector fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The moment map is ( 5.3.19 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a (cosmological) constant. This is an example of a
@xmath -supersymmetric gauged linear sigma model with gauge group @xmath
of the type considered in [ 35 ] . The topological charge is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath . To compare the
bound above ( 6.2.2 ) with that of vortices in [ 35 ] , we observe that
after some integration by parts we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term in the above expression is the topological charge
expected for the vortices (instantons) of ungauged two-dimensional sigma
models. The same topological charge also appears in the kink solitons of
three-dimensional non-linear sigma models [ 65 ] . The last part in the
above expression involving the cosmological constant and the Maxwell
field is the usual degree of an abelian vortex. The relation between the
topological charge @xmath in ( 6.2.9 ) and the degree of an abelian
vortex involves integration by parts. Under certain boundary conditions
the two topological charges are the same. However as we have shown, the
bound that involves the equivariant extension of the Kähler form
generalizes in the context of gauge theories coupled to non-linear sigma
models.

### 6.3 A bound for vortices in the (4,0) model

A bound similar to the one we have described in the previous section for
the Euclidean action of (2,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma model can also
be found for the Euclidean action of (4,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma
model. The Euclidean action of the (4,0)-supersymmetric gauged sigma
model with vanishing Wess-Zumino term is

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.3.1)
  -- -- -- ---------

The sigma model target space is hyper-Kähler with metric @xmath ,
hypercomplex structure @xmath and associated Kähler forms @xmath . After
a Wick rotation the two-dimensional spacetime is @xmath with the
standard Euclidean metric. Let @xmath be a compatible constant complex
structure such that @xmath is a Kähler manifold with associated Kähler
form @xmath . In the same ways as before, Euclidean action can be
written as

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (6.3.2)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant vector with length one, @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the equivariant extension of the Kähler form @xmath .

The strictest bound is attained whenever the unit vector @xmath is
parallel to the vector of the topological charges @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the sign is chosen such that the topological term in the bound is
positive. If the inner product of @xmath and @xmath in ( 6.3.2 ) is
positive, we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This bound is attained whenever

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.3.6)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Using a rotation in the space of three complex structures, we can
arrange such that @xmath and @xmath . In such case, the last equation in
( 6.3.6 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This in turn gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore either @xmath takes values in the fixed point set @xmath of
the group action of @xmath in @xmath or the curvature @xmath of the
connection @xmath vanishes. In the latter case, the first equation in (
6.3.6 ) implies that @xmath and these are the vacua of the theory. If
these are no non-trivial flat connections and @xmath , then the space of
solutions is the hyper-Kähler reduction @xmath of @xmath and it is a
hyper-Kähler manifold. On the other hand if @xmath takes values in
@xmath , then the second equation in ( 6.3.6 ) implies that @xmath is
constant. Substituting this in the first equation in ( 6.3.6 ) implies
that @xmath is in @xmath . In addition we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the Hermitian-Einstein equation in two dimensions.

The first condition in ( 6.3.6 ) implies that the curvature @xmath is a
(1,1)-form. Choosing complex coordinates @xmath on the two-dimensional
spacetime associated with the complex structure @xmath , it is always
possible to arrange using a gauge transformation such that @xmath .
Choosing complex coordinates in the sigma model target space @xmath as
well, it is easy to see that the second BPS condition implies that the
map @xmath is holomorphic from the spacetime into the sigma model
manifold @xmath .

### 6.4 Kähler manifolds and non-abelian vortices

The bounds that we have described in the previous sections can be
generalized as follows. Consider two Kähler manifolds @xmath and @xmath
of dimensions @xmath and @xmath , and Kähler forms @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Next allow @xmath to admit a holomorphic @xmath -action
with associated killing vector fields @xmath and moment map @xmath . In
our conventions @xmath . Next consider the functional

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a fibre inner
product on the gauge bundle which we can set @xmath .

The functional @xmath can be rewritten as follows:

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where we have chosen the normalisation @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the
(2,0) part of the curvature @xmath that corresponds to the splitting
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the equivariant extension of the Kähler form @xmath . (The inner
products are taken with respect to the Riemannian metrics @xmath and
@xmath .) The rest of the notation is self-explanatory. We remark that
if @xmath represents the first Chern class of a line bundle, i.e. the
Kähler manifold is Hodge, then @xmath can be thought of as the
equivariant extension of the first Chern class (see [ 39 ] ).

If @xmath is a constant invariant quadratic form on the Lie algebra of
the gauge group @xmath , it is clear that the functional @xmath is
bounded by a topological term @xmath which involves the equivariant
extension of the Kähler form and the second Chern character of the
bundle @xmath , where @xmath is a principal bundle of the gauge group
@xmath and @xmath acts on @xmath with the adjoint representation. In
particular we can write

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is an appropriate normalisation factor involving the ratio
between the fibre inner product on @xmath and @xmath ; where @xmath is
simple. It is worth pointing out that the term involving the second
Chern character is not affected by the choice of sign in writing ( 6.4.2
). Therefore there are three cases to consider the following: (i) there
is no choice of sign such that the topological charge @xmath is
positive. In such a case the bound cannot be attained. (ii) There is a
critical case in which for one sign the topological charge is negative
while for the other is zero. This case implies that the Euclidean action
vanishes and so every term should vanish. Solutions exist for @xmath .
(iii) For one of the choice of signs the topological charge is positive.
Suppose that @xmath is positive in ( 6.4.2 ) for the first choice of
sign. In such case the bound is attained provided that the equations

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.4.5)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

hold. The first equation implies that @xmath is a (1,1)-form. The last
equation in ( 6.4.5 ) implies that the maps @xmath are holomorphic.
Finally the middle equation is the standard non-abelian vortex equation.
If the term involving the moment map is constant, then the resulting
equation is the Hermitian-Einstein equation.

### 6.5 Hyper-Kähler manifolds and non-abelian vortices

Let @xmath be a Kähler manifold of dimension @xmath with associated
Kähler form @xmath and @xmath be a hyper-Kähler manifold of dimension
@xmath with associated Kähler forms @xmath . Next allow @xmath to admit
a tri-holomorphic @xmath -action with associated killing vector fields
@xmath moment maps @xmath . In our conventions @xmath . Next consider
the functional

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a fibre inner
product on the gauge bundle which we can set @xmath .

The functional @xmath can be rewritten as follows:

  -- -- -- -- ---------
              (6.5.2)
  -- -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath is a constant vector of length one, @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath is the (2,0) part of the curvature @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the equivariant extension of the Kähler form @xmath . (The inner
products are taken with respect to the Riemannian metrics @xmath and
@xmath .) The rest of the notation is self-explanatory.

It is clear that the functional @xmath is bounded by a topological
charge @xmath which involves the equivariant extensions of the Kähler
forms @xmath and, if @xmath is a constant invariant quadratic form on
@xmath , the second Chern character of the gauge bundle @xmath . It is
worth pointing out that the term involving the second Chern character is
not affected by the choice of sign in writing ( 6.5.2 ). Therefore as in
the Kähler case, there are several cases to consider but we shall not
repeat the analysis. Suppose that both @xmath and the inner product of
the vector @xmath with @xmath are positive in ( 6.5.2 ), where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the bound is attained provided that the equations

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (6.5.5)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

hold. The first equation implies that @xmath is a (1,1)-form. It is
always possible with a rotation in the space of complex structures of
the hyper-Kähler manifold to set @xmath and @xmath . Then last equation
in ( 6.5.5 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This in turn implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore either the connection @xmath is flat or the maps @xmath take
values in the fixed set @xmath of the @xmath -group action on @xmath .
In the former case, in the absence of non-trivial flat connections, the
moduli space of solutions to these equations is the hyper-Kähler
reduction @xmath of @xmath and it is a smooth manifold provided that the
level set does not intersect @xmath . In the latter case, the maps
@xmath are constant and the two remaining equations in ( 6.5.5 ) are the
Hermitian-Einstein equations for the connection @xmath ; see [ 45 ] and
references therein.

One can also consider the case where @xmath is a hyper-Kähler manifold
while @xmath is a Kähler manifold which admits a @xmath -holomorphic
action of isometries. This case can be treated as that considered in the
previous section involving only Kähler manifolds. A Kähler structure on
@xmath can chosen with respect to any complex structure which lies in
the two-sphere of complex structures of @xmath .

## Chapter 7 Conclusions

We have gauged the supersymmetry of the most general @xmath
supersymmetric one dimensional sigma model; we have investigate the
dynamics of the theory by deriving the Hamiltonian and the first and
second class constraints. We have then quantised the theory using the
Dirac method and checked that the Dirac operator squares to the Klein
Gordon operator.

We have commented that the zero modes of the Dirac operator do not exist
if the target manifold @xmath is compact, without boundary and with
positive scalar curvature. It would be interesting to investigate
further the relationship between the geometry of the target manifold and
existence of zero modes of the Dirac operator.

We have constructed the actions of two-dimensional (p,0)- and
(p,1)-supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to sigma model matter with
Wess-Zumino term. We have also given the scalar potentials of these
theories. Our method of constructing these theories relies on a
superfield method. Then we have shown that the Euclidean actions these
theories admit vortex type of bounds which generalise to higher
dimensions.

The gauge theories that we have constructed are not the most general
ones. It is known for example that the (1,1)-supersymmetric sigma model
admits a scalar potential which is the length of a killing vector field
[ 11 ] . Our superfield method cannot describe such a term. There are
also other possibilities, for example the sigma models with almost
complex manifolds as a target space as well as those associated with
@xmath fermionic multiplets for which the supersymmetry algebra closes
on-shell [ 44 , 8 ] . Other models of interest that we have not
described here are those with @xmath , @xmath , and (4,4) supersymmetry.
All the above models can be described using (1,0) superfields. This
method has been used before, see [ 9 , 10 , 42 ] . This means that the
action of such models can be written in terms of (1,0) superfields and
the additional supersymmetries can be implemented by requiring
invariance of the action under additional suitable transformations. The
(2,2) and (4,4) supersymmetric gauge theories have been described using
other methods in [ 35 ] and [ 66 ] .

The gauge theories coupled to sigma models which we have described with
@xmath supersymmetry have soliton type of bounds in addition to the
vortex type of bounds that we have described. For the former bounds the
energy of these models can be written as a sum of squares and a
topological term. This is very similar to bounds of (ungauged) sigma
models [ 52 ] and so we have not described them here. It would be of
interest to investigate the solutions of the vortex equations we have
presented for different types of moment maps. It may be that for a
suitable choice, the vortex equations can be solved exactly.