##### List of Figures

-    2.1 Amplitude damping of the harmonic oscillator: Wigner view
-    2.2 Wigner representation of the phase relaxation in harmonic
    oscillator
-    3.1 Wave functions of two Morse coherent states
-    3.2 The expectation value of the position operator in the Morse
    potential as a function of time (without environment)
-    3.3 The dominant frequencies responsible for the collapse-revival
    phenomenon in the expectation value of the position operator
-    3.4 Wigner view of Schrödinger-cat state formation in the Morse
    potential
-    3.5 Nonclassicality during the process of Schrödinger-cat state
    formation
-    4.1 Phase portrait of an anharmonic wave packet subject to
    decoherence
-    4.2 Determination of the decoherence time in the Morse system by
    the aid of timescale separation
-    4.3 Wigner functions visualizing the decoherence of a wave packet
    in the Morse potential
-    4.4 Decoherence of an eigenstate of the Morse potential: Wigner
    functions
-    5.1 Scheme of an atomic Schrödinger cat state
-    5.2 Definition of the decoherence time in a system of two-level
    atoms
-    5.3 Decoherence time as a function of the parameters of the initial
    atomic Schrödinger cat state
-    5.4 A new measure of decoherence in the system of two-level atoms
-    5.5 Phase space scheme of a 4 component atomic cat state
-    5.6 Wigner view of the decoherence of the 4 component atomic cat
    state
-    6.1 Dicke ladders
-    6.2 The validity of the perturbative approach in the proposal for
    preparing decoherence-free states in a cavity

## Introduction

The discovery of the quantized nature of the electromagnetic radiation
and atomic energies followed by the foundation of Quantum Mechanics is
one of the greatest achievements in physics. Quantum theory is found to
provide excellent description of fields and elementary particles as
well, and it became a standard tool for investigating “microscopic”
physical objects.

Dirac postulated the superposition principle to be a fundamental concept
even before the canonical Hilbert-space formulation of the theory has
been established. Although the predictive power of quantum mechanics is
based on this principle, it is counter-intuitive for a human mind that
experiences a world of classical mechanics since the beginning of
consciousness. The most famous example showing the incompatibility of
the superposition principle with the usual way of thinking was given by
Schrödinger [ 1 , 2 ] , where the fate of a cat in a box is triggered by
the decay of a radioactive atom. If the duration of this gedanken
experiment equals to the half-life of the atom, it is obvious that the
survival probability of the cat is @xmath . More surprisingly, the
result will be an entangled state, the superposition of a dead cat with
a decayed atom and a cat alive with an undecayed atom. The two states
that form the superposition – as a matter of life and death – are
clearly distinct. Such a superposition of two classically
distinguishable states, which is usually called a Schrödinger-cat state,
is allowed in quantum systems, but never observed in everyday life. In
fact, the term “classically distinguishable states” means states that
can be interpreted in a classical world, where, due to the lack of the
superposition principle, their superposition is not present. (Note that
here and throughout this thesis the attribute “classical” stands for the
opposite of “quantum”.)

In fact, most of the quantum mechanical states have properties that are
unusual from the classical point of view, and therefore, in some sense,
they are nonclassical. On the other hand, Schrödinger-cat states are in
such a strong contradiction with the classical description of a physical
system, that they can be called highly nonclassical quantum states
without exaggeration. The Wigner function of these states is negative
over some regions of its domain, which is the signature of (high)
nonclassicality from our point of view.

An apparent implication of the quantum effects that are paradoxical from
the classical point of view is that there exists a classical and a
quantum realm in nature, with their respective laws. The quantum realm
is usually identified with microscopic particles, but sometimes it is
difficult to draw a non-flexible quantum-classical border. E.g.,
considering a fullerene @xmath molecule, there are experimental
situations, such as the scattering of highly charged ions on @xmath ,
when a fully classical model provides agreement with the measured
results [ 3 ] . On the other hand, this cage of @xmath carbon atoms
surrounded by @xmath electrons produces interference fringes on a screen
placed behind a grating [ 4 ] , that is, the molecule as a whole
exhibits genuinely quantum behavior.

Alternatively, we can assume that quantum mechanics is universal, and so
is the superposition principle. In this case, however, the emergence of
classical properties has to be explained in the framework of quantum
theory. There is a name for this fundamental problem: decoherence. In
other words, decoherence is the disappearance of the quantum
superpositions that distinguishes a Schrödinger-cat state from the
corresponding classical mixture describing a system that is either in
one of the classical states or in the other. Models for decoherence
usually describe it dynamically, that is, decoherence is considered as a
process that is extremely fast on everyday timescales.

Besides its fundamental importance, exploring the mechanisms of
decoherence can have practical applications as well. The recently born
and rapidly developing field of quantum information technology relies on
the quantum nature of the physical objects that store, carry and process
information. This is the very origin of the classically unreachable
computational power of quantum algorithms. From this point of view,
decoherence is the most serious obstacle still hindering the practical
use of quantum computation (QC) [ 5 ] . Knowing the way in which
decoherence destroys quantum superpositions renders it possible to find
promising decoherence-free states. These states are exceptionally
robust, they keep their quantum properties for a time hopefully long
enough for implementing quantum algorithms.

In this work we consider the decoherence model that is based on the
interaction of the investigated quantum system with its unavoidably
present (quantum) environment. In Chap. 1 we summarize the basic
concepts of this model, which is called environment induced decoherence.
Chap. 2 is devoted to the description of the methods that are useful in
setting up and solving the relevant dynamical equations, which, besides
realizing the conceptually important link between quantum and classical
mechanics, provide a realistic description of open quantum systems.

In the second part of the thesis we use these methods in order to
analyze nonclassicality and investigate the effects of decoherence in
concrete quantum systems. The presented results are based on the
publications [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] .

In Chap. 3 we investigate the time evolution of wave packets in the
anharmonic Morse potential, which can provide a realistic model for a
vibrating diatomic molecule. This chapter deals with the situation when
no environmental effects are present. Using the Wigner function of the
system, we show that for vibrations with amplitudes exceeding the limits
of the harmonic approximation, spontaneous formation of Schrödinger-cat
states occur. These highly nonclassical states are superpositions of two
distinct states that are localized both in position and momentum.

As a result of the environmental influence, the Schrödinger-cat states
are expected to disappear rapidly, and it is known that when the
potential is is approximated by a harmonic one, the result of the
decoherence will be the mixture of the constituent localized states. Our
analysis in Chap. 4 shows that this is not the case for the Morse
oscillator. We introduce a master equation for a general anharmonic
system in interaction with a thermal bath of harmonic oscillators. Using
this equation we find that decoherence drives the system into a density
operator that can be interpreted as the mixture of localized states
equally distributed along the phase space orbit of the corresponding
classical particle. That is, the information related to the position
along this orbit (“phase information”) is completely lost. On the
contrary, after the process of decoherence, the energy distribution of
the system is still quite sharp, in fact the expectation value of the
Hamiltonian is very close to its initial value. Because of the
separation of the time scales of decoherence and dissipation, these
processes can be clearly distinguished. We define the characteristic
time of the decoherence as the time instant when the transition between
the decoherence dominated and dissipation dominated time evolution takes
place.

In Chap. 5 the same definition is proven to be valid for a system of
two-level atoms interacting with the free radiational field. This model
offers the possibility of investigating the approach to the macroscopic
limit by increasing the number of atoms. We found that the larger is
this number, the more naturally ans sharply the time evolution splits
into two regimes. In this physical system the atomic coherent states [
14 ] can be given a clear classical interpretation, they correspond to
certain directions of the Bloch vector [ 15 ] . Therefore superpositions
of different atomic coherent states are rightly called atomic
Schrödinger-cat states. We show by analytical short time calculations
that the coherent constituents of these highly nonclassical states are
robust against the effects of decoherence. Consequently, the decoherence
of the atomic Schrödinger-cat states is expected to lead to the
classical mixture of the constituent atomic coherent states. We obtain
that this conjecture is true, unless decoherence is exceptionally slow.
In Chap. 5 we give a scheme of decoherence that remains valid also for
the so-called symmetric Schrödinger-cat states, which exhibit
exceptionally slow decoherence.

The basic object which is manipulated in QC algorithms is a qubit ,
which is an abstract two-level quantum system. A system of two-level
atoms can provide a physical realization of a sequence of qubits. The
usefulness of this realization depends on the extent to which the
difficulties related to the decoherence can be eliminated. In this
context the the possible preparation of decoherence-free states is
important, this issue is discussed in Chap. 6 . We consider the atoms to
be in a cavity, and propose a method that can prepare decoherence-free
states. Besides the free time evolution in the cavity, our scheme
requires the possibility of changing the state of one of the atoms on
demand. The analysis of these requirement shows that our scheme can be
implemented with present day cavity QED setups.

## Chapter 1 Environment induced decoherence

The apparent lack of a superposition of macroscopically distinct quantum
states (Schrödin-ger cats) has been an interesting and vivid problem
since Schrödinger’s famous papers [ 1 , 2 ] . A successful approach,
initiated by Zeh [ 16 ] and developed by Zurek [ 17 ] , obtains the loss
of quantum coherence as the consequence of the inevitable interaction
with the environment. Theoretical studies in this framework have
investigated a variety of model systems usually coupled to a collection
of harmonic oscillators as an environment. Fundamental work has been
done on this subject in Refs. [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ]
, for reviews see [ 26 , 27 ] . Important experiments have also been
carried out during the last years [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] .

We note that whatever successful is the approach of the environment
induced decoherence, it is not the only possible mechanism that can
explain the phenomenon of decoherence. Spontaneous collapse models are
conceptually different, they are based on an appropriately modified
Schrödinger equation, which automatically leads to classical behavior
for large systems. We shall not consider these models here, a review can
be found in Chap. 8 of Ref. [ 27 ] . The role of gravity is also often
discussed in both of the two main approaches, see [ 31 , 32 , 24 , 33 ]
.

### 1.1 Formation of system-environment entanglement

Apart from cosmology, we usually focus our interest on a specific part
of the universe. This distinguished subsystem (our “system”, @xmath )
is, however, unavoidably coupled to the “rest of the world”, called
environment ( @xmath ) in this context. Although the way in which we
single out our system can appear accidental or even artificial, it is
clearly necessary to obtain a useful, solvable model. Additionally,
measurements performed on @xmath are in most of the cases “local”, i.e.,
concern the degrees of freedom of the system only. (In fact, the
definition of the “system” in a theoretical model is closely related to
the possible measurements the outcomes of which are to be predicted.)
Neglecting the @xmath - @xmath interaction leads to results that are
good approximations only for very well isolated systems and for short
times. For a more realistic description of the necessarily open quantum
system @xmath , the effects of the environment have to be taken into
account. The system-environment interaction builds up entanglement (
Verschränkung ) between the the two quantum systems @xmath and @xmath .
In order to obtain results for the system only, we have to average over
the unobservable environmental degrees of freedom. This process of
“tracing out the environment” (see the next chapter) provides a density
operator of @xmath that usually describes a mixed state and contains all
the information that can be extracted by local measurements.

In order to illustrate this concept, we consider a simple but expressive
example [ 27 , pp. 41-42] with the interaction term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

connecting @xmath and @xmath . The states @xmath are assumed to form an
orthogonal basis in the Hilbert space of the system, while @xmath denote
(Hermitian) environmental operators. The operators @xmath act in the
Hilbert space of the system, and similarly @xmath stands for the
tensorial product of the identity @xmath with the environmental operator
@xmath . In what follows, when it is not necessary, the tensorial
product sign will be omitted in the notation.

Note that @xmath is special in the sense that it does not contain cross
terms like @xmath , @xmath , but it demonstrates the main effects well.
Later on we shall consider more general interactions as well. As a
further approximation, we neglect the self-Hamiltonians of @xmath and
@xmath for the moment. Assuming an initially uncorrelated state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the time evolution builds up @xmath - @xmath correlations and leads to
an entangled state:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This result can be verified by Taylor expanding the time
evolution operator @xmath . The local or reduced density operator of the
system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the operation @xmath means trace over environmental degrees of
freedom. Initially

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and as Eq. ( 1.3 ) shows, it evolves according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, in the basis defined by the interaction ( 1.1 ), the
off-diagonal elements of @xmath are multiplied by the overlap of the
corresponding (time dependent) environmental states, while the diagonal
elements remain unchanged. Depending on the form of the operators @xmath
, after a certain time the states @xmath can become orthogonal and hence
the interaction diagonalizes the reduced density operator of the system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This phenomenon, the decoherence, can be expressed as the apparent
collapse of the state of the system: @xmath at this time instant still
represents a pure state, but the phase relations of the states @xmath
are inaccessible for a local observer. The RHS of Eq. ( 1.7 ) is
formally identical with the density operator that would be the result of
a von Neumann-type measurement [ 34 ] corresponding to the operator
@xmath . The notion that the environment continuously measures, or
monitors the system, is understood in this loose sense, without assuming
the collapse of @xmath .

The essential reason for the disappearance of the interference terms of
@xmath in the above example was the entanglement of the two systems
@xmath and @xmath . Similarly to the case of an EPR pair [ 35 , 36 ] ,
where it is impossible to assign a pure state to one of the constituents
of the pair, @xmath , which initially described a pure state, turns into
a mixture. This feature of the system-environment interaction is present
also in more sophisticated models where there is an interplay between
the interaction and internal dynamics of @xmath and @xmath governed by
the self-Hamiltonians, see the second part of this work. Also in these
more general situations the (by assumption pure) system + environment
state @xmath can be written in the Schmidt representation [ 37 , 38 , 39
, 27 ] at any time as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the positive numbers @xmath add up to unity and @xmath and @xmath
are elements of certain orthonormal bases (Schmidt bases) of the system
and the environment, respectively. A comparison shows that Eq. ( 1.3 )
is a special case of this generally valid representation, with @xmath
and @xmath , apart from a possible phase factor. Note that if the
dimensionality of any of the involved Hilbert spaces is finite then the
number of nonzero terms in the sum ( 1.8 ) is necessarily also finite.
This holds even in the case when @xmath represents a continuum [ 37 , 40
] .

The participation ratio

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a real number “counting” the nonzero terms in Eq. ( 1.8 ), can
serve as a measure of entanglement [ 40 ] . For a summary of other
approaches in quantifying entanglement, see Ref. [ 41 ] . The
participation ratio is related to the so-called Schmidt number [ 42 ] ,
which is the integer number of the nonzero coefficients @xmath in Eq. (
1.8 ). However, @xmath is somewhat more practical, especially in
numerical calculations when exact zeros are difficult to identify. A
product state like the one given by Eq. ( 1.2 ), has a single term in
its Schmidt sum, i.e., @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath in this
case. Any interaction is clearly nonlocal (as it couples @xmath and
@xmath ) and thus has the capacity of creating entanglement and
consequently increase the participation ratio.

Having a product state @xmath at @xmath , the short-time dynamics of
entanglement formation can be characterized by the decrease of the
coefficient @xmath in the Schmidt decomposition ( 1.8 ). According to [
38 ] , in leading order in time we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the rate of entanglement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity can be used to test the stability of a quantum state in
the presence of a given interaction Hamiltonian @xmath : small value of
@xmath means that the initial system state @xmath becomes entangled
slowly with the environment.

We note that entanglement – although it is peculiar from the classical
point of view – is rather common in quantum systems. The mere statistics
of 2, 3, …partite random states shows that the relative number of
non-entangled states is rapidly disappearing by increasing the number of
the parties. More precisely, using an appropriate measure, numerical
evidence shows that the volume of the separable states decreases
exponentially as a function of the dimension of the composite system [
43 , 44 ] .

### 1.2 Dynamical stability of quantum states and the direction of the
decoherence

According to the previous section, the interaction of the investigated
quantum system @xmath and the environment @xmath builds up @xmath -
@xmath entanglement. If the reduced density operator of the system
initially represented a pure state, it turns into a mixture as a
consequence of the interaction. The direction of the decoherence is
related to the question how it is possible to determine this mixture for
a given initial system state.

Let start with a practical method that will be used in Chap. 5 , where
the dynamical equations are solved numerically. We consider a single
two-level atom, which is clearly a microscopic quantum system. A general
interaction with the environment has a twofold effect: It changes the
energy of the atom, and transforms an initially pure atomic state into a
mixture. A representative example can be the interaction of the atom
with the electromagnetic vacuum. In this case the time scale of these
processes, namely energy dissipation and decoherence, is roughly the
same, see Chap. 5 . However, if we add more two-level atoms and consider
their ensemble as the investigated system, usually it is possible to
distinguish decoherence and dissipation dynamically, because the
characteristic time of the second process is much longer than that of
the first. Then, soon after the fast decoherence, the reduced density
operator of the system is the density operator into which the
decoherence has driven the atomic system.

It generally holds, that in “macroscopic” quantum systems the ratio of
the characteristic times related to dissipation and decoherence is much
larger than in “microscopic” cases. (We note that depending on the
initial state, this ratio @xmath can be larger than unity even for
microscopic objects: For superpositions of microwave coherent states
@xmath can be controlled between 1 and 10, see Ref. [ 28 ] . According
to Ref. [ 29 ] , in the case of a single @xmath ion in a Paul trap, the
value of @xmath can be as much as 25.)

However, the characteristic time of the decoherence in a given model
(that is, @xmath , @xmath , and the interaction are specified) depends
on the initial state. The stable or robust states, for which this time
is exceptionally long, are of special interest. These states are usually
called pointer states, as they were introduced in the context of a
measurement process, where they correspond to the possible “classical”
states of a measurement apparatus [ 17 ] . Since the formulation of this
concept, pointer states have gained more general meaning, as the most
stable states of a quantum system, which does not need to be a
measurement apparatus. In this work the term “pointer states” is used in
this extended sense.

Recalling Eq. ( 1.7 ), it can be seen that in the example of the
previous section decoherence does not change the states @xmath ,
therefore they are stable indeed. The reason for this fact is that every
@xmath is an eigenstate of the operator @xmath that appears in the
interaction Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( 1.1 ). More generally, when
@xmath , the self-Hamiltonian of the investigated system can not be
neglected, but it has common eigenstates with the interaction term, like
@xmath in the phase relaxation of the harmonic oscillator [ 45 ] , the
pointer states will be these common eigenstates (that is, energy
eigenstates).

In more difficult situations, because of the interplay between the
self-Hamiltonian and the interaction, it is not a trivial task to
identify the stable pure states. One can even construct artificial
models, where it is impossible to find pointer states. However, e.g. the
so-called predictability sieve [ 46 ] , which is method based on the
relatively low entropy production of the pointer states, works well for
most of the physically relevant models. This approach shows that the
coherent states @xmath of a harmonic oscillator are pointer states in
different models [ 45 , 46 , and see also [ 47 ] ] . In Chap. 5 we shall
use Eq. ( 1.11 ) to find states for which the entanglement with the
environment builds up slowly.

Having determined the pointer states, an additional interesting question
is the time evolution of their superpositions. We consider pointer
states that can be labeled by a discrete index, but the possible answers
are qualitatively the same in more general situations as well. Recalling
again the example of the previous section, we can see that it is
possible that the pointer states form an orthonormal basis, the elements
of which are distinguished by the environment. (Formally, this means
that we have different environmental operators @xmath for each @xmath in
the interaction term @xmath .) That is, if @xmath denotes the pointer
basis, then, according to the previous section, we can calculate the
result of the decoherence for any initial system state @xmath in a
particularly simple way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath could have been expanded in terms of any basis, but in
this case the pointer states have the unique property of satisfying the
scheme ( 1.12 ). Thus, if the environment distinguishes the pointer
states, then their superposition rapidly transforms into a mixture.

The robustness of the pointer states implies that they can survive long
enough to be observed. In fact, the known results show, that these
states have a clear classical interpretation [ 45 , 46 ] . Therefore the
result ( 1.12 ) is in accordance with the observation that there are no
superpositions of classical states in our macroscopic world.

However, it is also possible that the interaction with the environment
does not draw a distinction between some robust system states @xmath ,
@xmath . (This can be achieved by setting @xmath in the interaction term
given by Eq. ( 1.1 ).) Now any superposition of these states are as
stable as the pointer states themselves. In other words, the states
@xmath span a decoherence-free subspace (DFS). This possibility is of
high importance when decoherence should be avoided, such as in a
physical realization of quantum computational methods. Clearly, there
are physical systems, where we do not need to find the pointer states in
order to characterize a DFS, simply because we have additional
information that leads directly to the wanted DFS, see Chap. 6 .

The concept of the pointer states and methods that allow us to determine
them, can provide explanations of emergence of classical properties in
an open quantum system. We note that superselection rules – stating that
certain quantum superpositions, such as superpositions of different
electric charge states, are not present in nature even in the
microscopic level – can also be investigated in the framework of
environment induced decoherence [ 18 ] . In fact, the aim of the program
of decoherence [ 16 , 18 ] is to explain all superselection rules under
the assumption of a universally valid quantum theory.

## Chapter 2 Description of a quantum system interacting with its
environment

In this chapter we give a brief overview of the usual mathematical tools
capable to calculate the dynamics of open quantum systems. In these
methods the basic object – the time evolution of which we are interested
in – can be the reduced density operator, or the state vector of the
system, but it is also possible that a quasiprobability distribution
(QPD) [ 45 ] of the system is to be calculated directly.

In the first case the reduced density operator of the system obeys
non-unitary dynamics that can turn an initially pure state into a
mixture. Considering the system and its environment as a single, closed
quantum system, the equation that governs the non-unitary time evolution
can be derived. One obtains in this way an integro-differential
equation, called pre-master equation that is nonlocal in time. In some
cases it is possible to introduce approximations which remove this
nonlocality and lead to a differential equation termed as master
equation. In section 2.1 we illustrate this process and analyze the role
of the Born and Markov approximations in a rather general example.

It is also possible to transfer a given master equation into stochastic
processes that involve the state vector of the system. Spontaneous
collapse decoherence models (for a review see [ 27 , Chap. 8] ) are
often make use of the stochastic differential equations (SDE) [ 48 ]
obtained in this way. If the reduced density operator of the system can
be represented by a quasiprobability distribution (QPD), it can be
possible to transform a given master equation into a partial
differential equation involving the respective QPD. These methods will
be discussed briefly in Sec. 2.2 .

Note that sometimes not all the information contained by the state of
the system is needed to answer a specific question, and it is possible
to apply a technique that directly leads to the required answer. E.g.,
in the case of spontaneous emission [ 49 , 50 , 51 ] from a two-level
atom, the quantity of interest is the population of the upper (or lower)
atomic level and the off-diagonal elements of the @xmath reduced density
matrix are in principle irrelevant (although in some models they can be
necessary in order to compute the populations). However, in the context
of decoherence, especially when our aim is to determine the pointer
states (Sec. 1.2 ), the complete state of the system itself is to be
calculated. Therefore we shall not consider methods that can be used to
obtain the time evolution of a specific physical quantity and focus on
more general approaches. Heisenberg picture methods, such as quantum
Langevin equations [ 15 ] , are not discussed here either.

### 2.1 Master equations

According to the general situation outlined in Chap. 1 , we consider a
quantum system ( @xmath ) interacting with its environment ( @xmath ),
which can be considered as a heat bath or reservoir. This means that
neither the energy, nor other macroscopic parameters of the environment
can change appreciably as a consequence of the system-environment
coupling. The environment as a reservoir is in most of the cases modeled
by a large number of harmonic oscillators, standing for e.g. the modes
of the free electromagnetic field or phonon modes in solids. A
different, often used model describes the reservoir as a set of atomic
energy levels. We note that the logical steps followed in this section
are not depending on the chosen reservoir model.

Let the total (system plus environment) Hamiltonian be written in the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the parameter @xmath in the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath
expresses the strength of the @xmath - @xmath coupling. The starting
point here is the von Neumann equation for the total density operator:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and our aim is to clarify the role of the different approximations
applied in deriving a master equation for the reduced density operator
of the system,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The rigorous way to proceed involves the projection techniques of
Nakajima [ 52 ] and Zwanzig [ 53 , 54 ] , where one splits the
information contained in @xmath into a “relevant” and “irrelevant” part.
In our case, if the system and the environment are initially
uncorrelated, i.e., @xmath , the relevant part would be @xmath . (Note
that while @xmath defines a proper projection, the map @xmath does not.
Besides @xmath a “reference state”, that is, an environmental density
operator is needed as a result of a projection. In the above mentioned
initially uncorrelated case the reference state acquires physical
significance as a part of @xmath .)

However, the physical meaning of the master equation approach is seen
more clearly by choosing a more transparent method. In the following we
consider a rather general example in a way similar to the derivation in
Ref. [ 55 ] , but having performed the Born and Markov approximations
the final equation will be the same as if it were calculated using the
projection method. In the current chapter we concentrate on the
generality of the discussion, we point out what the necessary
approximations are when obtaining a master equation. Later on, in Chap.
4 this method will be used to treat the specific problem of decoherence
of wave packets in the anharmonic Morse potential. It will be also shown
that if we assume that @xmath has equidistant spectrum (which is clearly
not the case in a general anharmonic system) a simpler master equation
is obtained that can describe a system of two-level atoms interacting
with the environment of a thermal photon bath, see Chap. 5 .

The von Neumann equation ( 2.2 ) in an interaction picture reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the interaction picture operators are defined in the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the unitary operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating the equation of motion ( 2.4 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Iterating this solution and performing the trace over reservoir
variables we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now the @xmath -th term in the sum is proportional to @xmath , see Eq. (
2.1 ). If we consider a weak interaction, it is sufficient to take into
account only the first two terms with @xmath and @xmath . This is
analogous to the usual approach of time dependent perturbation theory,
and also to the Born expansion of the scattering amplitude [ 56 ] .
Therefore the restriction of the interaction to at most second order is
a kind of Born approximation. Sometimes a different approximation, which
will be described later, is also called Born approximation, therefore
the neglection of higher order terms in Eq. ( 2.8 ) can be termed as the
first part of the Born approximation, yielding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming that the system and the environment is initially uncorrelated
@xmath , @xmath corresponds to thermal equilibrium and @xmath has no
diagonal matrix elements in the eigenbasis of @xmath , the first term
vanishes on the RHS of Eq. ( 2.9 ). With these realistic assumptions we
have

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.10)
  -- -- -- --------

The only approximation made so far was the step from Eq. ( 2.8 ) to
Eq. ( 2.9 ), which was justified by the weakness of the perturbation
induced by the interaction Hamiltonian. Clearly, this approximation (as
a perturbative result) introduces a limit of the applicability of Eq. (
2.10 ), because for a time @xmath too long, the neglected terms in Eq. (
2.8 ) could change the time evolution significantly. In principle this
difficulty could be circumvented by dividing the time interval @xmath
into @xmath smaller subintervals with sufficiently short duration of
@xmath and applying Eq. ( 2.10 ) successively. Within one of these short
time intervals @xmath , the replacement of @xmath with @xmath in the
integrand does not affect that property of the equation of motion that
it is correct up to second order in the interaction. In this way we
introduced a natural coarse graining of the time evolution, so that
@xmath does not depend on the density operators @xmath that belong to
earlier times. That is, the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

defines a Markovian sequence of density operators @xmath . This step is
the Markov approximation.

However, it is difficult to calculate the elements of this Markovian
chain according to Eq. ( 2.11 ), because in order to be able to perform
the trace over the reservoir, we have to know the total @xmath at the
starting point of each short time interval. The final approximation
follows from the assumption that the state of the reservoir does not
change appreciably due to the interaction. More precisely, we assume
@xmath to be long compared to the relaxation time of the environment.
Consequently, on the time scale defined by @xmath , the
system-environment correlation that builds up due to the interaction
affects only the system. Formally, this second part of the Born
approximation is performed by replacing @xmath with @xmath in Eq. ( 2.11
).

By setting @xmath and @xmath the equation of motion in the Born-Markov
approximation reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, the validity of the Born-Markov approximation is based on
the possibility of the separation of the environmental and system time
scales: If there are time intervals which are short enough to allow the
cutoff of the interaction at the second order terms, and,
simultaneously, long enough for the relaxation in the environment to
take place, then the Born-Markov approximation can be used. We note that
the considerations that led from Eq. ( 2.7 ) to Eq. ( 2.12 ) are rather
general, the only assumption concerning the interaction Hamiltonian was
that it has no diagonal matrix elements in the eigenbasis of @xmath . In
Chap. 4 the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath as well as @xmath will be
specified and the integration in Eq. ( 2.12 ) will be performed to
obtain a master equation that describes a vibrating diatomic molecule in
interaction with the environment of thermal photon modes.

### 2.2 Other methods

As an alternative of the method summarized in the previous section, it
is possible to “unravel” [ 57 ] the master equation into stochastic
processes that involve the state vector of the system. Solving the
stochastic differential equation (SDE) [ 48 ] several times, an ensemble
of pure states, i.e., rank @xmath density operators is obtained.
Properly renormalizing and summing up these projectors we arrive at a
density operator that describes the ensemble. The notion unraveling
means that in the limit of infinite number of ensemble elements the
corresponding density operator will be identical to the solution of the
master equation.

In this sense individual outcomes of the stochastic process have no
physical interpretation, but this not the only possible point of view.
Indeed, in spontaneous collapse models (for a short review see Ref. [ 27
, Chap. 8] ), the stochastic equation replaces the usual Schrödinger
equation, i.e., the former one is postulated to be the fundamental
equation describing the time evolution. This interpretation leads to
spontaneous collapse of the wave function of the system of interest
without referring to any disturbance due to the environment. The
parameters in these models are chosen such as to permit the same
dynamics to be valid for both microscopic and macroscopic systems but
leading to different observable behavior in the two cases. However, the
approach of this thesis is based on the universality of the Schrödinger
equation and describes the appearance of classical properties in quantum
systems as a consequence of inevitable interaction with the environment.
Therefore we shall not adopt the idea that physical interpretation can
be associated to individual outcomes of stochastic processes being the
unraveling of a master equation. However, these stochastic equations
undoubtedly must be considered as very useful tools to obtain
approximate solutions of the underlying master equation.

Additionally, if the reduced density operator of the system can be
represented by a quasiprobability distribution (QPD), it can be possible
to transform a given master equation into a partial differential
equation involving the respective QPD. The resulting partial
differential equation is often turns out to have the form of a
Fokker-Planck equation. After a brief overview of the quasiprobability
distributions (Sec. 2.2.1 ), a typical example will be shown in Sec.
2.2.2 .

#### 2.2.1 Wigner functions

Quasiprobability distributions (QPDs) are used extensively in quantum
physics for various problems, and are specially instructive in
visualizing the process of decoherence. These distributions map the
state of a quantum system on a continuous parameter space that can be
identified with the phase space of the system. From a more mathematical
point of view, this continuous parameter space can be considered as a
coadjoint orbit of the underlying Lie group [ 58 ] .

In the case of an oscillator, the phase space is a plane that is
traditionally parametrized by two real numbers, @xmath and @xmath . A
system of @xmath two-level atoms (see Chap. 5 ), if they are invariant
with respect to permutations, is identical to the subspace characterized
by the @xmath eigenvalue of the usual angular momentum operator @xmath .
In this system the relevant symmetry group is @xmath , and the phase
space is the surface of a 2-sphere. The usual coordinates on this
Bloch-sphere are the azimuthal and polar angles, @xmath and @xmath .

In the following the construction of the Wigner functions @xmath and
@xmath will be given in a way that points out the similarities. Note
that Wigner functions are not the only possible QPDs in either systems,
but as more general quasidistributions will not appear later in this
work, it sufficient to concentrate on @xmath and @xmath . The
construction of additional QPDs in the above systems can be found in
Refs. [ 59 ] and [ 60 ] , and the relation of these methods is discussed
in Ref. [ 6 ] .

Given a density operator of the system, @xmath , the corresponding
Wigner functions are defined as the expectation value of the respective
kernel operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, according to [ 61 , 60 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operators @xmath and @xmath are the dimensionless position and
momentum operators ( @xmath ), while @xmath denote the spherical
harmonics [ 62 ] and @xmath stand for the spherical multipole operators
[ 60 ] . Since the kernels given by Eqs. ( 2.15 ) and ( 2.16 ) are
Hermitian, both the spherical ( 2.14 ) and the “planar” ( 2.13 ) Wigner
functions are real. These functions are normalized with respect to the
appropriate (invariant) measures

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the value of these Wigner functions can be negative in certain
domains of the phase space, that is why they are called quasi
distributions. This is a manifestation of the fact that quantum
mechanics is not equivalent to a classical statistical theory.
Conversely, a state with non-negative Wigner function is rightly
considered as classical. Thus, for a given density operator @xmath , the
degree of nonclassicality can be characterized by the aid of the
corresponding Wigner function. The quantity [ 63 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is found to be an appropriate measure of nonclassicality [ 63 , 10 ] .
Here @xmath and @xmath are the moduli of the integrals of the Wigner
function over those domains of the phase space where it is positive and
negative, respectively. On using Eqs. ( 2.17 ), we obtain that @xmath .
The disappearance of nonclassicality is of course closely related to the
decoherence: as we shall see later in several examples, decoherence
drives the system into a state with positive Wigner function, implying
@xmath .

#### 2.2.2 Partial differential equations

In the case of a time dependent density operator @xmath , Eqs. ( 2.14 )
and ( 2.13 ) assign a Wigner function to @xmath at any time instant.
However, sometimes it is favorable (and more instructive) to calculate
the time dependent Wigner function directly. In this section we consider
the example of the amplitude damped harmonic oscillator (HO) which is
the special case of the model described in Sec. 2.1 , with @xmath
representing a distinguished oscillator with angular frequency @xmath
(our “system”) that is coupled to a set of environmental oscillators via
its destruction operator, @xmath . The environment is assumed to be in
thermal equilibrium at a given temperature @xmath . The calculations
that will be performed later in Sec. 4.1 can be adapted to this case,
yielding the interaction picture master equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the interaction picture reduced density
operator of the system and @xmath denotes the damping rate [ 45 ] .

Combining Eqs. ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.19 ) we can express @xmath in terms of
the operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . At this point it
worth introducing the complex variable @xmath . Then the identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and their adjoints inserted into the definition ( 2.13 ) lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This partial differential equation has the form of a Fokker-Plank
equation [ 48 ] . (Note that this is not a general consequence of the
procedure outlined above, there are situations when the resulting
equation is not so well-behaved as Eq. 2.21 .) Considering a Wigner
function with a single peak, the qualitative behavior of @xmath can be
seen even intuitively. There are regions on the complex plane @xmath ,
where the first term in Eq. ( 2.21 ), which contains only first
derivatives, has opposite sign. This causes @xmath to increase
(decrease) where the sign is positive (negative), resulting in the
overall motion of the peak. Therefore this first term is called the
drift term. On the other hand, the second (diffusion) term broadens the
distribution and – due to the normalization – decreases the peak value.

As an important application from the viewpoint of decoherence, we
consider the initial Wigner function that corresponds to the
superposition of two oscillator coherent states [ 64 , 65 ] @xmath , see
Fig. 2.1 a).

The positive hills represents the two coherent states, while the strong
oscillations between the hills are signatures of the quantum coherence
of @xmath and @xmath . These coherent states have clear classical
interpretation, and therefore their superposition can be called a
Schrödinger-cat state, see Ref. [ 66 , 67 , and references therein] .
Fig. 2.1 a) is a typical Wigner function for these nonclassical states.
The effect of the amplitude damping is shown in Fig. 2.1 b), it leads to
the disappearance of the quantum interference represented by the
oscillations. This is what we expect according to the Fokker-Planck
equation ( 2.21 ), because @xmath changes rapidly in the regions where
it oscillates, implying very fast diffusion that smears out the
oscillations. On the level of the master equation ( 2.19 ), this result
is the manifestation of the fact that coherent states of the HO are
pointer states (see Sec. 1.2 ) to a very good approximation [ 45 ] in
the case of the amplitude damping interaction.

A qualitatively different decoherence mechanism related to the HO is the
so-called phase relaxation [ 45 ] . Since our results in the anharmonic
Morse system has similarities with this process, it is worth summarizing
here the phase relaxation as well. Now the relevant master equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, as it has been already mentioned (Sec. 1.2 ), the eigenstates of
the HO Hamiltonian are pointer states in this case. This means that
according to the general scheme given by Eq. ( 1.12 ), the result of the
decoherence will be the a mixture of energy eigenstates with the weights
defined by the initial state. That is, the energy of the system remains
unchanged during the process of decoherence, but the phase information
is completely destroyed: The distance between the origin and the highest
values of the Wigner function shown in Fig. 2.2 b) is the same as it was
initially (Fig. 2.2 a)), but @xmath is cylindrically symmetric now.

## Chapter 3 Molecular wave packets in the Morse potential

Peculiar quantum effects of wave packet motion in anharmonic potentials
have been predicted in several model systems [ 68 , 69 , 70 ] . We are
going to investigate the role of anharmonicity in the case of the Morse
potential. This model potential is often used to describe a vibrating
diatomic molecule having a finite number of bound eigenstates together
with a dissociation continuum. Our initial wave packets will be Morse
coherent states [ 71 ] , and in the current chapter we consider the case
when the environment does not influence the dynamics of the system [ 10
] . We show that the Wigner functions of the system exhibit spontaneous
formation of Schrödinger-cat states at certain stages of the time
evolution. These highly nonclassical states are coherent superpositions
of two localized states corresponding to two different positions of the
center of mass. The degree of nonclassicality is also analyzed as the
function of time for different initial states. Our numerical
calculations are based on a novel, essentially algebraic treatment of
the Morse potential [ 72 ] .

The same system in the case when the environmental effects are present
will be analyzed in Chap. 4 .

### 3.1 The Morse oscillator as a model of a vibrating diatomic molecule

Our description of molecular vibrations is based on the Morse
Hamiltonian [ 73 ] , that can be written in the following dimensionless
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the shape parameter, @xmath , is related to the dissociation
energy @xmath , the reduced mass of the molecule @xmath , and the range
parameter of the potential @xmath via @xmath The dimensionless operator
@xmath in Eq. ( 3.1 ) corresponds to the displacement of the center of
mass of the diatomic system from the equilibrium position, and the
canonical commutation relation @xmath also holds.

The Hamiltonian ( 3.1 ) has @xmath normalizable eigenstates (bound
states), plus the continuous energy spectrum with positive energies. The
wave functions of the bound eigenstates of @xmath are @xmath , where
@xmath is the rescaled position variable, and @xmath is a generalized
Laguerre polynomial. The corresponding eigenvalues are @xmath @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the largest integer that is smaller than @xmath .

In the following we solve the Schrödinger equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where time is measured in units of @xmath , with @xmath being the
circular frequency of the small oscillations in the potential.

The initial states of our analysis will be Morse coherent states [ 71 ,
74 ] associated with the wave functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We expand these states in terms of a suitable finite basis:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the hypergeometric function of the variable @xmath . The
first @xmath elements of the basis @xmath are the bound states, and the
continuous part of the spectrum is represented by a set of orthonormal
states which give zero overlap with the bound states. The energies of
the states @xmath , @xmath follow densely each other, approximating
satisfactorily the continuous energy spectrum [ 72 ] .

We note that the states in Eq. ( 3.4 ) are “single mode” coherent states
in contrast to those of [ 75 ] , where the dynamics of two-mode coherent
states were investigated for various symmetry groups, including SU
@xmath , which is in a close relation to the relevant symmetry group of
the Morse potential [ 76 ] .

The label @xmath in Eq. ( 3.4 ) is in one to one correspondence with the
expectation values

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.5)
  -- -- -- -------

therefore we can use the notation @xmath for the state @xmath that gives
@xmath and @xmath . The localized wave packet corresponding to @xmath is
centered at @xmath ( @xmath ) in the coordinate (momentum)
representation.

In our calculation we have chosen the NO molecule as our model, where
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath [ 73 ] , yielding @xmath . That is, this
molecule has @xmath bound states, and we found that a basis of dimension
@xmath is sufficiently large to handle the problem. The absolute square
of the wave functions @xmath and @xmath is depicted in Fig. 3.1 , where
@xmath is also shown. Fig. 3.1 indicates that initial displacements,
@xmath , having the order of magnitude of unity will not lead to “ small
oscillations”.

The Morse coherent states [ 71 , 74 ] can be prepared by an appropriate
electromagnetic pulse that drives the vibrational state of the molecule
starting from the ground state into an approximate coherent state. An
example can be found in [ 77 ] , where the effect of an external
sinusoidal field is considered.

### 3.2 Behavior of expectation values as a function of time

Starting from @xmath as initial states, first we consider the dependence
of the @xmath curve on @xmath .

It is not surprising that for small values of @xmath ( @xmath ) these
curves show similar oscillatory behavior as in the case of the harmonic
oscillator, see Fig. 3.2 . However, when anharmonic effects become
important, a different phenomenon can be observed: the amplitude of the
oscillations decreases almost to zero, then faster oscillations with
small amplitude appear but later we re-obtain almost exactly @xmath ,
and the whole process starts again. Fig. 3.2 is similar to the collapse
and revival in the Jaynes-Cumings (JC) model [ 78 , 79 ] , but in our
case the non-equidistant spectrum of the Morse Hamiltonian is
responsible for the effect. There are important situations when revivals
and fractional revivals [ 68 , 80 , 81 , 82 ] of the wave packet can be
described analytically [ 69 ] , but in a realistic model for a diatomic
molecule the difficulties introduced by the presence of the continuous
spectrum implies choosing an appropriate numerical solution.

The expansion of the initial state in our finite basis @xmath shows that
for values of @xmath shown in Fig. 3.2 the maximal @xmath belongs to
@xmath . That is, the expectation value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is dominated by the bound part of the spectrum. Damping of the amplitude
of the oscillations is due to the destructive interference between the
various Bohr frequencies and we observe revival when the exponential
terms rephase again.

Quantitatively, we have determined the dominant frequencies in Eq. ( 3.6
) for @xmath and found that they fall into two families, see Fig. 3.3 .

The first family is related to the matrix elements @xmath and a has a
sharp distribution around @xmath . The contribution of the second family
to the sum in Eq. ( 3.2 ) is much weaker, these frequencies around
@xmath correspond to the matrix elements @xmath . The width the first
distribution @xmath allows us to estimate the revival time as @xmath ,
while @xmath is responsible for the partial revival at @xmath , see Fig
3.2 . Following Refs. [ 68 , 80 ] , we denote by @xmath the time when
the anharmonic terms in the spectrum induce no phase shifts, that is,
the initial wave packet is reconstructed. At @xmath all these phase
factors are @xmath , while @xmath corresponds to a quarter-revival,
i.e., to time @xmath .

### 3.3 Time evolution of the Wigner function of the system

In order to gain more insight concerning the physical process leading to
the collapse-revival phenomenon seen in Fig. 3.2 , one can look at the
coordinate representation of the wave function @xmath . In the
representative case of @xmath , the wave function is an initially well
localized wave packet that gradually falls apart into several packets
and then conglomerates again, see Ref. [ 10 ] .

Starting from the same initial state it is more instructive to visualize
the time evolution by the aid of the Wigner function @xmath that
reflects the state of the system in the phase space, see Sec. 2.2.1 .
The definition given by Eq. ( 2.13 ) can be reformulated for a pure
state that is represented by its wave function @xmath , yielding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fig. 3.4 a) shows the initial stage of the time evolution, while Fig.
3.4 b) corresponds to @xmath This second Wigner function is typical for
Schrödinger-cat states, compare with Fig. 2.1 . @xmath in Fig. 3.4 b)
corresponds to a superposition of two states that are well-localized in
both momentum and coordinate, and represented by the two positive hills
centered at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . The strong
oscillations between them shows the quantum interference of these
states.

According to the our calculations, there are a few periods around @xmath
, while the state of the system can be considered to be a phase space
Schrödinger-cat state. During this time the Wigner function is similar
to the one shown in Fig. 3.4 b), and it rotates around the equilibrium
position. Similar behavior of the Wigner function was found in [ 83 ]
for the JC model. This effect is responsible for the partial revival
around @xmath shown in Fig. 3.2 , where the frequency of the
oscillations is twice that of the oscillations around @xmath : in the
neighborhood of @xmath there are two wave packets moving approximately
the same way as the coherent state soon after @xmath .

### 3.4 Measuring nonclassicality

According to Sec. 2.2.1 , the Wigner function of a state @xmath can be
used to determine the nonclassicality of @xmath . Having calculated
@xmath , it is straightforward to obtain the quantity @xmath (defined by
Eq. ( 2.18 )), which is an appropriate measure of the nonclassicality [
63 ] .

Fig. 3.5 shows @xmath as a function of time for the same initial states
as in Fig. 3.2 . For the small initial displacement of @xmath , we see
that the Wigner function is positive almost everywhere, the state can be
considered as a classical one during the whole time evolution.

For larger initial displacements we can easily identify two time scales.
The shorter one is the period of the wave packet in the potential, while
the second time scale can be identified with the revival time. Looking
at the initial part of the curve @xmath , we observe that the state of
the system is the most classical at those turning points where @xmath ,
see Fig. 3.1 . On the other time scale, the collapse of the oscillations
in @xmath presents itself as the increase of @xmath , and the revival
turns the state into a more classical one. When the state of the system
can be considered as a Schrödinger-cat state, @xmath has a small local
minimum, but it still has significant values indicating strong
nonclassicality.

### 3.5 Conclusions

We have found that in the potential of the NO molecule, when anharmonic
effects are important, the time evolution naturally leads to the
formation of Schrödinger-cat states at certain stages of the time
evolution. These highly nonclassical states correspond to the
superposition of two molecular states which are well localized in the
phase space.

## Chapter 4 Decoherence of molecular wave packets

The correspondence between classical and quantum dynamics of anharmonic
systems has gained significant attention in the past few years [ 68 , 80
, 70 , 69 ] . A short laser pulse impinging on an atom or a molecule
excites a superposition of several stationary states, and the resulting
wave packet follows the orbit of the corresponding classical particle in
the initial stage of the time evolution. However, the nonequidistant
nature of the involved energy spectra causes peculiar quantum effects,
broadening of the initially well localized wave packets, revivals and
partial revivals [ 80 , 68 , 70 , 69 , 81 , 82 ] . As we saw in the
previous chapter, partial revivals are in close connection with the
formation of Schrödinger-cat states, which, in this context, are
coherent superpositions of two spatially separated, well localized wave
packets [ 84 ] . Phase space description of vibrational Schrödinger-cat
state formation using animated Wigner functions can be found in [ 10 ] .
According to Chap. 1 , these highly nonclassical states are expected to
be particularly sensitive to decoherence. The aim of this chapter is to
analyze the process of decoherence for the spontaneously formed
Schrödinger-cat states in the anharmonic Morse potential.

In the following we introduce a master equation that takes into account
the fact that in a general anharmonic system the relaxation rate of each
energy eigenstate is different. This master equation is applied to the
case of wave packet motion in the Morse potential that is often used to
describe a vibrating diatomic molecule. Considering the phase space
description of decoherence, we show how the phase portrait of the system
reflects the damping of revivals in the expectation values of the
position and momentum operators due to the effect of the environment. We
also calculate and plot the time evolution of the Wigner function
corresponding to the reduced density operator of the Morse system. The
Wigner function picture visualizes the fact that although our master
equation reduces to the amplitude damping equation ( 2.19 ) in the
harmonic limit, the anharmonic effects lead to a decoherence scheme
which is similar to the phase relaxation (see Sec. 2.2.2 and also Ref. [
45 ] ) of the harmonic oscillator (HO). It is found that the time scale
of decoherence is much shorter than that of dissipation, and gives rise
to density operators which are mixtures of localized states along the
phase space orbit of the corresponding classical particle. We illustrate
the generality of this decoherence scheme by presenting the time
evolution of an energy eigenstate as well. We also calculate the
decoherence time for various initial wave packets. We show that
decoherence is faster for wave packets that correspond to a classical
particle with a phase space orbit of larger diameter.

### 4.1 A master equation describing decoherence in the Morse system

We consider a vibrating diatomic molecule and recall the Morse
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is often used to describe this system, see Sec. 3.1 . The initial
wave packets of our analysis – similarly to the previous chapter – will
be Morse coherent states [ 71 ] , @xmath , which are localized on the
phase space around the point @xmath , see Fig. 3.4 . Although the
construction given in [ 72 ] would allow us to use arbitrary initial
states, for our current purpose it suffices to consider states @xmath
with negligible dissociation probability, i.e., coherent states that
practically can be expanded in terms of the bound states @xmath , @xmath
. This means that the relevant part of the spectrum of @xmath is
nondegenerate and discrete.

The environment is assumed to consist of the modes of the free
electromagnetic field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume the following interaction Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, for the sake of simplicity, the coupling constants @xmath were
taken to be real. Wishing to keep the derivation as general as it is
possible, the only necessary restriction on the operator @xmath is that
it must have a strictly upper triangular matrix in the eigenbasis @xmath
, i.e., @xmath transforms each eigenstate of @xmath into a superposition
of different eigenstates corresponding to lower energy values. @xmath is
the Hermitian conjugate of @xmath . This is the application of the
rotating wave approximation (RWA) to an anharmonic, multilevel system.
Well-known examples imply that from the viewpoint of decoherence RWA is
a permissible approximation. According to Ref. [ 51 ] , in the case of
spontaneous emission, RWA on the initial Hamiltonian modifies the level
shifts induced by the environment. This could be expected, because the
total Hamiltonian with and without RWA has usually different spectra.
However, the damping term that provides the time scale of the
spontaneous emission is practically unaffected by keeping the counter
rotating terms in the interaction Hamiltonian. A similar result was
found for the case of a spin- @xmath system in external magnetic field [
85 ] and also for a single two-level atom in electric field [ 86 ] .

Note that in the particular case of a vibrating diatomic molecule, the
operators @xmath and @xmath gain a clear interpretation: in the
eigenbasis of Morse Hamiltonian @xmath , they are the upper and lower
triangular parts of the molecular dipole moment operator, @xmath . We
will assume that @xmath is linear [ 87 ] , that is, proportional to the
displacement @xmath of the center of mass of the diatomic system from
the equilibrium position. Although in this chapter the resulting master
equation will be applied to describe the decoherence of a vibrating
diatomic molecule, we do not perform the @xmath @xmath substitution
during the derivation in order to indicate the generality of our
approach.

Using the specific operators above, we can return to Eq. ( 2.12 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and perform the integration in order to obtain a differential equation
that describes the time evolution of the reduced density matrix of our
system, @xmath . The interaction picture operator @xmath is defined by
Eq. ( 2.5 ), and its expansion in the eigenbasis @xmath of the system
Hamiltonian has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we invoked that @xmath if @xmath . @xmath denotes the ground state
energy, and the eigenvalues of @xmath follow each other in increasing
order: @xmath , whenever @xmath . Therefore the integrand in Eq. ( 4.4 )
contains @xmath terms. However, by assuming that the environment is in
thermal equilibrium at a given temperature @xmath , we can deduce that
the terms containing @xmath and its adjoint give no contribution,
because @xmath . (We note that for some specially prepared reservoirs,
such as squeezed reservoirs, this quantity need not be zero, see [ 55 ]
.) Moreover, since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the average number of quanta in the @xmath -th mode of
the environment. According to the assumption that the environment
consists of a large number of harmonic oscillators, we can convert the
sum over modes to frequency-space integral @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the density of states which is proportional to @xmath in our case. The
continuous version of Eq. ( 4.7 ) combined with Eq. ( 4.4 ) yields to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the superscript @xmath referring to the interaction picture was
omitted. Choosing the first term as a representative example, the
application of Eq. ( 4.5 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.9)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . Interchanging the order of the time and
frequency integral and introducing the variables @xmath , @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point it is worth recalling that @xmath is the duration of a
time interval which is short from the system’s point of view, i.e., the
interaction picture reduced density operator changes a little during
@xmath . However, since the interaction is assumed to be weak, the
relation @xmath also holds. This allows us to extend the upper limit of
the time integration to infinity in Eq. ( 4.10 ). Then the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Dirac- @xmath and Cauchy principal value distributions appear
on the RHS, allows us to evaluate the integral in @xmath . Eq. ( 4.11 )
shows that the effect of the environment is twofold: first it slightly
modifies the energy spectrum of the system. This effect is related to
the imaginary term in Eq. ( 4.11 ). If our aim is not the calculation of
the level shifts themselves, then they can be neglected, provided the
interaction is not too strong [ 51 ] . The second effect of the
environment (related to the first term in Eq. ( 4.11 )) is to induce
transitions between the (shifted) system energy levels, and this kind of
environmental influence is responsible for the decoherence. Therefore we
can use the approximation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we returned to the explicit notation of the interaction picture,
and the matrix elements of the operator @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The master equation in the Schrödinger picture, neglecting the terms
inducing level shifts, reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where each term following the unitary one (the commutator with @xmath )
is calculated similarly to @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subscript @xmath here and and @xmath in Eq. ( 4.13 ) refers to
emission and absorption, respectively. As we can see, the matrix
elements ( 4.13 ) and ( 4.15 ) of the operators that induce the
transitions depend on the Bohr frequency of the involved transition,
which is a genuine anharmonic feature. In the special case of the HO,
when @xmath has equidistant spectrum, and @xmath is identified with the
usual annihilation operator @xmath , both @xmath and @xmath are
proportional to @xmath , and Eq. ( 4.14 ) reduces to the amplitude
damping master equation ( 2.19 ) at a finite temperature.

In certain cases one can further simplify Eq. ( 4.14 ). When the
environment induced relaxation rates are much lower than the relevant
Bohr frequencies, the system Hamiltonian induces oscillations that are
very fast even on the time scale of decoherence and vanish on the
average. Ignoring these fast oscillations we arrive at the interaction
picture master equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

that has already been obtained in Refs. [ 88 , 89 ] in order to treat
the spontaneous emission of a multilevel atom. In Eq. ( 4.16 ), @xmath
denotes a relaxation rate, that is the probability of the @xmath
transition per unit time, while @xmath , where

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.17)
  -- -- -- --------

However, due to the elimination of the fast oscillations related to
@xmath , Eq. ( 4.16 ) is not suitable for investigating the wave packet
motion and decoherence simultaneously, therefore we propose to use Eq. (
4.14 ). On the other hand we note that Eq. ( 4.16 ) radically reduces
the computational costs of calculating the time evolution for long
times, which might be necessary when the system-environment coupling is
very weak.

Supposing that our knowledge is limited to the populations @xmath , both
Eq. ( 4.14 ) and Eq. ( 4.16 ) leads to the Pauli type equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Requiring the condition of detailed balance [ 90 ] in Eq. ( 4.18 ) leads
to the steady-state thermal distribution at the temperature of the
environment.

In the case of a diatomic molecule in the free electromagnetic field,
@xmath , and we assume that @xmath , thus the nonzero matrix elements in
Eqs. ( 4.13 ) and ( 4.15 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath            (4.19)
              @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the matrix elements of @xmath can be calculated using the
algebraic method summarized in [ 71 ] , and @xmath is an overall,
frequency independent coupling constant. For the sake of definiteness we
have chosen the NO molecule as our model.

In order to get insight into the interplay between wave packet motion
and decoherence, it is worth considering a stronger molecule-environment
interaction than the electromagnetic field modes can provide. Keeping
the structure of Eqs. ( 4.19 ), this can be done by increasing the value
of @xmath . Here we present calculations with two different coupling
constants, @xmath and @xmath which are chosen so that at zero
temperature @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , respectively. This
model allows for the numerical integration of the master equation ( 4.14
) (that provides more details of the dynamics than Eq. ( 4.16 )) in a
time interval that is long enough to identify the effects of
decoherence. These effects can be summarized in a decoherence scheme
(see Sec. 4.4 ) that has a clear physical interpretation, and which is
valid also in the weak molecule-environment interaction, when ( 4.16 )
is more efficient to calculate the time evolution.

### 4.2 Time evolution of the expectation values

Starting from @xmath as initial states, we saw in Chap. 3 that the
qualitative behavior of the expectation value @xmath draws the limit of
small oscillations. In the absence of environmental coupling (i.e.,
@xmath ), for @xmath , @xmath (as well as @xmath ) exhibits sinusoidal
oscillations.

For larger initial displacements from the equilibrium position, the
anharmonic effects become apparent. The collapse and revival in @xmath
and @xmath can be explained by referring to the various Bohr frequencies
that determine their time dependence: dephasing of these frequencies
leads to the collapse of the expectation value, and we observe revival
when they rephase again.

For the initial state of @xmath , with @xmath , the original phase of
the eigenstates is restored [ 68 , 80 ] around the full revival time
@xmath , where @xmath is the period of the small oscillations in the
potential. At @xmath and @xmath half and quarter revivals [ 68 , 80 ]
can be observed. Fig. 4.1 shows the damping of the revivals both in
@xmath and @xmath when interaction with the environment is turned on.
Note that the phase portrait of the corresponding classical particle
would be a helix with monotonically decreasing diameter, revivals are of
quantum nature. However, Fig. 4.1 does not provide a complete
description of the time evolution in the phase space, this can be given
by using Wigner functions, see Sec. 4.4 .

### 4.3 Decoherence times

Our master equation ( 4.14 ) describes decoherence as well as
dissipation. However, the time scale of these processes is generally
very different, providing a useful tool to distinguish the stages of the
time evolution that are dominated either by decoherence or dissipation [
8 ] .

In Fig. 4.2 an example is depicted showing how the method of time scale
separation works. We have calculated the entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as the quantity @xmath , which measures the purity of the
reduced density operator. Note that the @xmath operation without
subscript refers to the trace in the system’s Hilbert space. Decoherence
time @xmath is defined as the time instant that divides the time axis
into two parts where the character of the physical process is clearly
different. Initially both @xmath and @xmath change rapidly but having
passed @xmath (emphasized by a vertical line in Fig. 4.2 ), the moduli
of their derivative significantly decrease. After @xmath the entropy and
the purity change on the time scale which is characteristic of the
dissipation of the system’s energy during the whole process. The time
dependence of the participation ratio @xmath given by Eq. ( 1.9 ) is
found to be similar to that of the entropy and purity. We note that the
typical value of @xmath at the decoherence time was around @xmath , that
is, just a few modes of the environment were active. The same surprising
result was found in Ref. [ 40 ] , in the context of spontaneous emission
from a two-level atom.

In summary, decoherence dominated time evolution turns into dissipation
dominated dynamics around @xmath . In the next section we shall
determine the density operators into which the process of decoherence
drives the system. In connection with these results we have verified
that the states around the decoherence time do not change appreciably in
a time interval that covers the possible errors in determining @xmath .

An interesting question is the dependence of the decoherence time on the
initial state of the time evolution. We calculated @xmath as a function
of the initial displacement for the case of displaced ground states
(that is, coherent states with zero momentum, @xmath ) as initial
states. It was found that for all values of @xmath and @xmath , the
decoherence time is longer for smaller initial displacements.
Additionally, for fixed @xmath and @xmath the function @xmath can be
well approximated by an exponential curve @xmath . E. g., for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath the parameters take the values @xmath and @xmath .

It is known (see Chap. 3 and Ref. [ 80 ] ) that quarter revivals in an
anharmonic potential lead to the formation of Schrödinger-cat states,
i.e., states that are superpositions of two distinct states localized in
space [ 80 ] as well as in momentum [ 10 , 91 ] . On the other hand,
smaller initial displacements correspond to classical phase space orbits
with smaller diameter. Consequently the quantum interference related to
nonclassical states that are formed during the course of time cover a
smaller area in the phase space in this case. This means that our result
is a manifestation of the general feature of decoherence that increasing
the “parameter of nonclassicality”, which is the diameter of the
corresponding classical orbit in our case, causes faster decoherence [
27 ] . A similar result was found in [ 8 ] for the case of decoherence
in a system of two-level atoms [ 63 , 92 ] .

### 4.4 Wigner function description of the decoherence

In order to visualize the time evolution of the reduced density matrix
of the Morse system we have chosen the Wigner function picture, which
has been summarized in Sec. 2.2.1 . This description allows us to
investigate the correspondence between classical and quantum dynamics.

First we recall the ideal case without environment. Then, in the initial
stage of the time evolution, the positive hill corresponding to the wave
packet @xmath follows the orbit of the classical particle that has
started from @xmath at @xmath . However, due to the uncertainty
relation, the Wigner function as a quasiprobability distribution has a
finite width, and this fact combined with the form of the Morse
potential implies the stretching of the Wigner function along the
classical orbit in the course of time. (See Ref. [ 91 ] for similar
results with the Husimi @xmath function.) After a certain time the
increasingly broadened wave packet becomes able to interfere with
itself, and around the quarter revival time one can observe two positive
hills chasing each other at the opposite sides of the classical orbit.
The strong oscillations of @xmath between the hills represent the
quantum correlation of the constituents of this molecular
Schrödinger-cat state [ 84 ] . Later on the initial Wigner function is
restored almost exactly and Schrödinger-cat state formation starts
again. Detailed Wigner function description of these processes that are
related to the free time evolution can be found in [ 10 ] .

In the case when environmental effects are present, we found that
decoherence follows a general scheme. A representative series of Wigner
functions is shown in Fig. 4.3 . The snapshots correspond to the initial
state and time instants when the first and third Schrödinger-cat state
formation would occur in the absence of the environment. Consequently,
the Wigner function in Fig. 4.3 b) corresponds almost to a
Schrödinger-cat state, but this state is already a mixture. However,
there are still negative parts of the function in between the positive
hills centered at @xmath and @xmath . The “ridge” that connects these
hills along the classical orbit is absent in a pure Schrödinger-cat
state, see Fig. 3.4 b). Later on this ridge becomes more and more
pronounced and at the decoherence time we arrive at the positive (that
is, classical in the sense of Sec. 2.2.1 ) Wigner function of Fig. 4.3
c) and d). According to the contour plot Fig. 4.3 d), the highest values
of this function trace out the phase space orbit of the corresponding
classical particle. That is, @xmath , the reduced density matrix that
arises as a result of decoherence, can be interpreted as a mixture of
localized states that are equally distributed along the orbit of the
corresponding classical phase space orbit.

It is worth comparing this result with the case of the HO, when the
master equation ( 4.14 ) reduces to the amplitude damping equation (
2.19 ), see Sec. 2.2.2 . It is known that harmonic oscillator coherent
states are robust against the decoherence described by the amplitude
damping master equation (as well as against the Caldeira-Leggett [ 19 ]
master equation [ 46 ] ), the initial superposition of coherent states
turns into the statistical mixture of essentially the same states. This
is a consequence of the facts that these states are eigenstates of the
destruction operator @xmath , and the operators in the nonunitary terms
of Eq. ( 4.14 ) are proportional to @xmath and @xmath in the harmonic
case. None of these statements can be transferred to the anharmonic
system, where the Morse coherent states do not remain localized during
the course of time, even without environment. Therefore the scheme of
the decoherence is qualitatively different for the harmonic and
anharmonic oscillators: Our results in the anharmonic system are similar
to the phase relaxation in the harmonic case [ 45 ] , where the energy
of the system remains unchanged, but the phase information is completely
destroyed, see Sec. 2.2.2 . We note that a similar result was obtained
in Ref. [ 93 ] , where the rotational degrees of freedom were considered
as a reservoir for the harmonic vibration of hot alkaline dimers.

Our decoherence scheme is universal to a large extent. In the
investigated domain of the coupling constants @xmath and temperatures
ranging from @xmath to @xmath , it is found to be valid for all initial
states, not only for coherent states. Fig. 4.4 shows an example when the
initial state is not a wave packet, it is the fifth bound state,
corresponding to @xmath , which is very close to @xmath , so direct
comparison with Fig. 4.3 is possible. As we can see, although the two
Wigner functions are initially obviously very different, they follow
different routes (that takes different times) to the same state: Fig.
4.3 c) and Fig. 4.4 c) are practically identical. The final plot in Fig.
4.4 indicates how the Wigner function represents the long way to thermal
equilibrium with the environment: the distribution becomes wider and the
hole in the middle disappears.

It is expected that the loss of phase information has observable
consequences. According to the Franck-Condon principle, the absorption
spectrum of a molecule around the frequency corresponding to an
electronic transition between two electronic surfaces depends on the
vibrational state. The time dependence of the spectrum should exhibit
the differences between the pure state of an oscillating wave packet and
the state @xmath and the thermal state. More sophisticated experimental
methods based on the detection of fluorescence [ 94 ] or fluorescence
intensity fluctuations [ 95 ] , surely have the capacity of observing
the dephasing phenomenon considered in this chapter.

### 4.5 Conclusions

We investigated the decoherence of wave packets in the Morse potential.
The decoherence time for various initial states was calculated and it
was found that the larger is the diameter of the phase space orbit
described by a wave packet, the faster is the decoherence. We obtained a
general decoherence scheme, which has a clear physical interpretation:
The reduced density operator that is the result of the decoherence is a
mixture of states localized along the corresponding classical phase
space orbit.

## Chapter 5 A system of two-level atoms in interaction with the
environment

Two-level atoms are essential objects in quantum optics, several
important models rely on this notion [ 78 , 79 , 51 , 49 , 50 ] .
Clearly, most atoms have much more than two energy levels, i.e.,
considering only two of them is a simplification. However, in usual
(experimental) situations the initial conditions and the frequency of
the external electromagnetic field or the long lifetime of the lower
level supports the two-level view of the atomic system. Additionally, a
two-level atom provides a physical realization of a qubit , which is the
basic entity in quantum computation (QC) [ 5 , 96 , 97 ] .

In the present chapter we investigate a system which is a candidate for
the experimental study of decoherence and possibly also for practical
applications. The model consists of several identical two-level atoms
(the system) interacting with a large number of photon modes in a
thermal state (the environment). It has the advantage that it is simple
to make the correct transition from a microscopic system to a
macroscopic one by increasing the number of atoms. We point out how the
master equation ( 4.14 ) reduces to the equation appropriate in this
case [ 98 , 51 , 99 ] , and use it to analyze the evolution of the
reduced density matrix of the atomic system.

By analytical short-time calculations we show that the atomic coherent
states [ 14 ] of our system are robust against decoherence caused by the
realistic interaction we consider. The possibility of classical
interpretation and this behavior justifies that the superpositions of
atomic coherent states are relevant with respect to the original problem
of Schrödinger, and such a highly nonclassical superposition is rightly
called an atomic Schrödinger-cat state [ 100 , 63 , 101 ] . We also note
that there are several proposals for the experimental preparation of
these type of states [ 102 , 103 , 104 ] .

We present the decoherence and dissipation properties of atomic
Schrödinger-cat states based on numerical computations of their time
evolution. It will be seen that similarly to the case of the Morse
system (see Chap. 4 ), although the one and the same solution of the
master equation describes both decoherence and dissipation, the time
scales of these processes differ by orders of magnitude. Using this
fact, we show how one can make a clear distinction between these two
processes despite of the interplay between them, and define the
decoherence time. This decoherence time strongly depends on the initial
conditions, notably, it is particularly large for a special set of
initial cat states [ 63 , 92 ] . This will be termed as slow decoherence
in contrast with the general case which will be referred to as rapid
decoherence.

The interplay between decoherence and energy dissipation is the most
appreciable in connection with the concept of pointer states that has
been summarized in Sec. 1.2 . It will be shown that when the decoherence
is rapid, then the constituent coherent states of the initial state are
pointer states to a very good approximation. However, when there is
enough time for dissipation, i.e., when decoherence is slow, then the
initial atomic coherent states themselves evolve into mixtures, and
therefore a refined scheme of decoherence holds.

In order to underline the contrast between rapid and slow decoherence we
superpose four atomic coherent states corresponding to the vertices of a
suitably oriented tetrahedron. The time evolution of this four component
cat state will be studied by the aid of the spherical Wigner function
(Sec. 2.2.1 ). As it is expected, the interaction with the environment
selects that pair from the initial superposition which constitutes a
long-lived cat state.

### 5.1 Description of the model

We consider a system of identical two-level atoms interacting with the
environment of macroscopic number of photon modes. With dipole
interaction and in the rotating wave approximation the total system is
described by the following model Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the transition frequency between the two atomic energy
levels, @xmath denote the frequencies of the modes of the environment
and @xmath are coupling constants. The operators @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in the interaction term are dimensionless collective atomic
operators obeying the usual angular momentum commutation relations [ 105
] . On replacing @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively,
the process we followed in Sec. 4.1 leads to the interaction picture
master equation [ 98 , 51 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath is the mean number of photons in the environment, @xmath
denotes the damping rate, and for the sake of simplicity the subscript
@xmath of the reduced density operator of atomic system has been
dropped. Note that the same master equation can be obtained by
considering a low-Q cavity containing Rydberg atoms [ 99 ] .

If the state of the atomic system was initially invariant with respect
to the permutations of the atoms, i.e., it was a superposition of the
totally symmetric Dicke states [ 105 ] , the dipole interaction
described by @xmath in ( 5.1 ) would not destroy this symmetry.
Therefore we may restrict our investigation to the totally symmetric
@xmath dimensional subspace of the whole Hilbert-space of the atomic
system. This subspace corresponds to the first column in Fig. 6.1 and it
is isomorphic to an angular momentum eigensubspace labeled by @xmath .
This model has been proven to be valid in cavity QED experiments with
many atoms, as reviewed in [ 99 ] .

The environment as a static reservoir (represented by the thermal photon
modes) continuously interacts with the atomic system influencing its
dynamics. As it is obvious, the dissipation of the energy leads to
thermal equilibrium in the system, corresponding to the stationary
solution of the master equation ( 5.2 ). However, as it will be shown
here, the same master equation describes also a much more interesting
process. The continuous ”monitoring” [ 17 ] of the atomic system by the
environment results in the total loss of the coherence of the quantum
superpositions in the system. This decoherence process is generally
extremely fast compared to the dissipation, except for special initial
conditions which will be discussed in section 5.3 .

### 5.2 The initial stage of the time evolution

In this section we apply the general concepts introduced in Sec. 1 to
our system in order to find the initial states for the master equation (
5.2 ) which are relevant to the original problem of Schrödinger [ 1 , 2
] concerning the unobservability of macroscopic superpositions.

First we consider the short-time behavior of the total system. At zero
temperature the photon field of the present model is in its pure vacuum
state @xmath , therefore the initial state factorizes as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e., there is a single term in the Schmidt decomposition (see Sec. 1 )
of the compound state. Due to the interaction, this product state
evolves into a more general Schmidt sum like Eq. ( 1.8 ), or in other
words it turns into an entangled state. According to the summary in Sec.
1 , the rate of entanglement can be obtained as

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Using the explicit form of the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath in Eq. (
5.1 ), a straightforward calculation leads to

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.5)
  -- -- -- -------

i.e., in our system the rate of entanglement is the normally ordered
correlation function of the operators @xmath and @xmath .

Let us turn to the case of finite temperatures, when the total system
has to be represented by a mixed state even at @xmath . The linear
entropy, defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be regarded as a relevant measure of decoherence [ 27 , 26 ] .
Restricting ourselves again to the initial regime of the time evolution,
we can make use of the master equation ( 5.2 ) and calculate the time
derivative of the linear entropy at @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The normally (antinormally) ordered correlation function @xmath ( @xmath
), disappears in the eigenstate @xmath ( @xmath ) of @xmath ( @xmath ).
However, the collective atomic operators @xmath and @xmath have no
simultaneous eigenstates which would annullate the right hand side of
Eq. ( 5.7 ). Nevertheless, we are going to show that if the number of
atoms @xmath is large enough, then the correlation functions in Eq. (
5.7 ) are negligible in a class of states called atomic coherent states
[ 14 ] . These states are labeled by a complex parameter @xmath (for the
angles @xmath and @xmath see Fig. 5.1 ) and can be expanded in terms of
the eigenstates of the operator @xmath (Dicke states) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For large @xmath , the atomic coherent states are approximate
eigenstates of the operators @xmath and @xmath [ 14 , 92 ] . This
statement is understood in the sense that the square of the cosine of
the angle @xmath between @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

differs from unity by a factor which scales as @xmath . Thus @xmath
becomes negligible in the @xmath limit for finite @xmath [ 92 ] . The
same statement holds for the operator @xmath , therefore both
correlation functions in Eq. ( 5.7 ) are indeed negligible in the atomic
coherent states ( 5.8 ).

This suggests that the atomic coherent states are rather stable against
the decoherence induced by the photon modes, i.e., they can serve as a
model of classical-like macroscopic quantum states. This result is in
analogy with the stability of the oscillator coherent states obtained in
[ 26 ] .

Two such states, @xmath and @xmath can be considered as macroscopically
distinct, whenever the distance between the parameters @xmath and @xmath
is sufficiently large on the complex plane. This implies that the
coherent superposition of these states yields an appropriate model of
the original paradox of Schrödinger.

Based on these results, the superpositions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

will be called atomic Schrödinger cat states [ 100 , 63 , 7 ] , see Fig.
5.1 . Now we are going to present our results on the decoherence and
dissipation dynamics of these type of states.

### 5.3 Time scales

A typical result of the numerical integration of Eq. ( 5.2 ) is that the
time evolution of the states given by Eq. ( 5.10 ) can be characterized
by two different time scales, as illustrated by Fig. 5.2 , where the
linear entropy and the energy of the atomic system is plotted versus
time.

As we can see, there exists a time instant @xmath (marked with an arrow
in Fig. 5.2 ) when the character of the physical process changes
radically. (It is worth comparing this figure with Fig. 4.2 , which was
obtained in the case of the Morse system.) Initially @xmath increases
rapidly while the dissipated energy of the atoms is just a small
fraction of that part of the energy which will eventually be transferred
to the environment. On the other hand, for longer times @xmath both
curves change on the same time scale. The energy of the atomic system
decays exponentially as a function of time allowing for identifying the
characteristic time of the dissipation, @xmath , with the inverse of the
exponent. (We note that in Fig. 5.2 the plotted time interval is much
shorter than @xmath , thus the exponential behavior is not seen.) More
detailed calculations have shown that for high temperatures the energy
and the linear entropy exhibit similar exponential behavior in the
second regime of the time evolution. Their exponents coincide with 2-3%
relative error. This implies that the initial stage of the time
evolution is dominated by decoherence while after @xmath the dissipation
determines the dynamics. Accordingly, we define the characteristic time
of the decoherence – by the same token as we did in Sec. 4.3 – as the
instant when the slope of the curve @xmath decreases appreciably. We
note that @xmath defined in this way is in accordance with the
decoherence time defined previously in [ 63 ] for a specific initial
state.

It is remarkable that although a few hundred atoms do not really
constitute a macroscopic system, the difference of the time scales is
obviously seen in Fig. 5.2 . It is generally true that the larger @xmath
is, the more naturally and sharply the time evolution splits into two
regimes.

Now we turn to the investigation of the dependence of the decoherence
time @xmath on the initial conditions.

Fig. 5.3 shows the contour plot of the decoherence time versus the
parameters @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 5.1 ) of the initial atomic
Schrödinger cat state ( 5.10 ). We have set @xmath for simplicity. As we
can see, the effect of decoherence is remarkably slower when @xmath
which was expected since in this case the overlap of the two initial
coherent states is not negligible, so these states can not be considered
as “macroscopically distinct”. Much more surprising is the fact that cat
states which were initially symmetric with respect to the @xmath plane
(i. e. @xmath ) also decohere slower [ 63 , 7 ] , but it is in
accordance with the analytical estimations of Braun et.al. [ 92 ] . In
the following sections we shall refer to these states as symmetric ones.

### 5.4 The direction of the decoherence

We saw in the previous section that the interplay between decoherence
and dissipation is reflected in the time evolution of the superpositions
given by Eq. ( 5.10 ). In this section we shall focus on the direction
of the process resulting from the dynamics governed by the master
equation ( 5.2 ).

According to Sec. 1 , the interaction with a large number of degrees of
freedom selects naturally the so-called pointer basis [ 17 ] in the
Hilbert-space of the system subject to decoherence. This process favors
the constituent states of the pointer basis in the sense that the system
is driven towards a classical statistical mixture of these states. Thus,
from the present point of view @xmath is the relevant quantity to be
examined.

Recalling the analytical results of sec. 5.2 , it seems plausible to
expect that the atomic coherent states ( 5.8 ) will be pointer states.

By introducing the density matrix which corresponds to the classical
statistical mixture of the initial coherent states:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

the expected scheme of the decoherence reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We shall refer to @xmath as the classical density matrix.

The distance between the actual density matrix @xmath and @xmath ,
defined with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is always decreasing fast. Except for the case of slowly decohering cat
states which will be discussed below, @xmath reaches its minimal value
at the decoherence time , see Fig. 5.4 . This minimal value is very
close to zero implying that the density matrix of the system at this
instant is nearly the same as the classical density matrix ( 5.11 ).
This fact justifies the definition of the characteristic time of the
decoherence in section 5.3 , and it is in excellent agreement with the
decoherence scheme ( 5.12 ).

Due to the exceptionally slow decoherence, we have to modify this
picture if the initial state is a symmetric superposition. In this case
the decoherence time is so long that the atomic coherent constituents of
the initial state are also appreciably affected by the time evolution
until the decoherence time, @xmath . The state of the atomic system at
@xmath will be a mixture, which is the same as if the system had started
from @xmath at t=0. In other words the evolution follows the modified
scheme:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the time dependent classical density matrix @xmath is the one
which would evolve from the statistical mixture ( 5.11 ) @xmath
according to the same master equation ( 5.2 ) as the actual atomic
density matrix. The distance between the time dependent classical
density matrix, @xmath and @xmath becomes negligible at @xmath , and
asymptotically reaches zero for long times in the case of all the
initial conditions.

### 5.5 Wigner functions of four component Schrödinger cat states

The results of the previous section have shown that both the
characteristic time and the direction of the decoherence strongly depend
on the initial conditions. Now we illustrate this fact by tracking the
decoherence of the superposition of four atomic coherent states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since four points on the surface of a sphere are not distinguished with
respect to each other if and only if they are the vertices of a regular
tetrahedron inscribed in the sphere, we set the components of @xmath
according to this pattern. On the other hand, the @xmath axis is
distinguished in the present model because of the form of the Hamilton
operator ( 5.1 ), therefore we orient the tetrahedron with one edge
parallel to the @xmath axis and the opposite edge parallel to the @xmath
axis, see Fig. 5.5 . Although we have in principle two substantially
different ways of considering the state represented by Fig. 5.5 as the
superposition of two atomic Schrödinger-cat states, according to the
results of the previous section one expects that the environment
naturally selects one of these possibilities via the different time
evolutions: the quantum coherence between the components of the
symmetric pair @xmath disappears slowly, while all the other pairs are
rapidly decohering superpositions.

We are going to visualize the decoherence process of @xmath by the aid
of the spherical Wigner function. It is a real function over the unit
sphere (which is the appropriate phase space in the present case) being
in a linear one-to-one correspondence with the density matrix of the
atomic system, see Sec. 2.2.1 . For previous applications of this
function see [ 100 , 63 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 ] .

The Wigner function given by Eq. ( 2.14 ) suggestively maps the time
evolution of the state ( 5.15 ) onto the unit sphere, as shown in Fig.
5.6 . We plot the Wigner functions of the atomic system at three time
instants, both as a polar plot and as a contour plot. Dark shades mean
negative, light shades mean positive function values. The four positive
lobes, pointing from the center to the vertices of the tetrahedron shown
in Fig. 5.5 , correspond to the four atomic coherent states in ( 5.15 ).
Due to the dissipation all these lobes will move slowly downwards. The
initial interference pattern (Figs. 5.6 a) and b)) has the regularity of
the tetrahedron, there are equally pronounced oscillations along all the
edges, representing the quantum coherence between the coherent states.

Figs. 5.6 c) and d) depict the situation after a time which is short in
the sense that the the shapes of the lobes of the coherent states are
not appreciably affected (no dissipation), but the interference is
already negligible between them, except for the single pair along the
vertical edge of the tetrahedron. As it is seen from Fig. 5.5 this is
the pair which represented initially the symmetric atomic
Schrödinger-cat state @xmath in ( 5.15 ). The coherence between the
components of this pair of states is nearly unaffected as shown by the
strong oscillations.

A qualitatively different stage of the time evolution is shown in Figs.
5.6 e) and f) at a later time. The coherent constituents are already
affected by the dissipation, the uppermost one rather strongly, but the
quantum coherence between the components of the symmetric pair is still
present. On the contrary, the interference between all the other
components has already disappeared.

In view of the present results, if the initial state of the atomic
system is a superposition of coherent states so that there are symmetric
pairs of coherent states in the expansion, then the coherence between
the components of these symmetric pairs will survive much longer than
between any other terms.

### 5.6 Conclusions

We have investigated the decoherence of superpositions of
macroscopically distinct quantum states in a system of two-level atoms
embedded in the environment of thermal photon modes. Utilizing the
Schmidt decomposition and the linear entropy, we have shown that atomic
coherent states are robust against decoherence, both at zero and
non-zero temperatures. This result is in analogy with the harmonic
oscillator case and justifies the definition of atomic Schrödinger cat
states as superpositions of atomic coherent states.

By solving the master equation ( 5.2 ) we have identified two different
regimes of the time evolution with the help of the linear entropy. The
first one is dominated by decoherence while the second one is governed
by dissipation. Based on several computational runs focusing on the
characteristic times it was found that @xmath decreases much faster than
@xmath as the function of the number of atoms, @xmath . Consequently
@xmath becomes many orders of magnitude smaller than the characteristic
time of dissipation for macroscopic samples, and even for e.g. @xmath
atoms and an average photon number of @xmath the ratio @xmath is around
a few hundred depending on the initial conditions. However, there are
very important exceptional cases, called slow decoherence, when the
atomic coherent states constituting the initial atomic Schrödinger cat
state are symmetric with respect to the equator of the Bloch sphere.

Using a new measure @xmath , we have shown that at the characteristic
time of decoherence the system is always very close to the state
described by the time dependent classical density matrix. Apart from the
exceptional case of slow decoherence, the coherent states appearing in (
5.10 ) are approximate pointer states. When due to its symmetry the
initial cat state is a long-lived superposition, also its constituent
coherent states have time to transform into mixtures until @xmath . We
have given a modified scheme of decoherence which is valid also for slow
decoherence.

We have demonstrated the important difference between rapid and slow
decoherence by tracking the time evolution of a four component
superposition with the help of the spherical Wigner function. The
initial interference pattern having the symmetry of a tetrahedron
rapidly disappears except for the single slowly decohering pair.

## Chapter 6 Preparation of decoherence-free, subradiant states in a
cavity

Decoherence is a difficulty to overcome in the context of QC. Quantum
error correction codes [ 110 ] offer a possibility for this purpose. A
somewhat different approach relies on a specific decoherence-free
subspace (DFS) [ 96 , 111 , 112 ] . This idea is essentially a passive
error correction scheme: quantum operations are restricted to the DFS in
which all the quantum superpositions are much less fragile than in
subspaces strongly coupled to the unavoidably present environment.

Subradiant states of a system of two-level atoms [ 105 , 113 , 114 , 115
, 116 ] has recently gained wide attention because of their
exceptionally slow decoherence. This stability of quantum superpositions
inside the subradiant subspaces originates from the low probability of
photon emission, which means very weak interaction between the atoms and
their environment. Hence the subradiant states span a DFS in the atomic
Hilbert-space. We note that there are proposals that intend to perform
QC within this DFS [ 112 ] .

Here we propose a scheme that can be used to prepare subradiant states
in a cavity. Our method is based on second order perturbation theory but
the exact results verify the validity of the perturbative approach [ 11
] . We also investigate to what extent our scheme is independent of the
state of the cavity field. The analysis of the conditions shows that
this scheme is feasible with present day techniques achieved in atom
cavity interaction experiments [ 117 , 28 , 118 , 119 ] .

### 6.1 Description of the system

We investigate a system of @xmath identical two-level atoms in a single
mode cavity. Each individual atom is equivalent to a spin- @xmath
system, and the whole atomic ensemble can be described by the aid of
collective atomic operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath obeying the same
algebra as the usual angular momentum operators [ 105 ] . We consider
the following model Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the annihilation and creation operators of
the cavity mode, @xmath is the transition frequency between the two
atomic energy levels, @xmath denotes the frequency of the cavity mode,
different from @xmath , and @xmath is the coupling constant. We note
that the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) is written in the framework of Dicke’s
theory, i.e., with the assumption that all the atoms are subjected to
the same field, which is a good approximation when the size of the
atomic sample is small compared to the wavelength of the cavity mode. As
discussed later in detail, there are experimental situations where this
requirement is fulfilled. Our proposed scheme for preparing subradiant
states involves a detuned cavity. We shall assume that the detuning is
much larger than the resonant Rabi frequency:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now any state of the atomic system and the cavity field can be expanded
as a linear combination of the eigenstates of @xmath . These are
tensorial products of collective atomic states and number states of the
field: @xmath , where the indices @xmath and @xmath label the atomic
state (also called Dicke state [ 14 ] ), while @xmath refers to the
@xmath -th Fock state of the mode.

The quantum number @xmath corresponds to the eigenvalues of the operator
@xmath . This index is in one-to-one correspondence with the Young
diagram [ 120 ] that describes the permutation symmetry of the state.
The possible values of @xmath are @xmath , the smallest value being
@xmath if @xmath is even and @xmath if @xmath is odd. The index @xmath
of the @xmath Dicke state labels the eigenstates of the collective
atomic operator @xmath , that is essentially proportional to the energy
of the atomic subsystem. This is the index that is decreased (increased)
by one under the action of the operator @xmath ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

including the case when @xmath , when the result is the zero vector. The
states with @xmath are the lowest ones of the Dicke ladders [ 105 ] ,
they are called subradiant, because they have no dipole coupling to
other lower lying states, see Fig. 6.1 for the case of @xmath . Finally
the index @xmath distinguishes states with the same @xmath and @xmath .
For more details see Refs. [ 105 , 8 , 120 , 14 , 121 , 122 , 63 ] .

Besides the collective atomic states @xmath , we shall also use the
natural basis that assigns a well defined state to each individual atom.
These vectors will be labeled by a string of @xmath -s and @xmath -s
corresponding to the ground and excited sates, respectively. E. g., the
ground state of the atomic subsystem is written in this basis as @xmath
; this state (as well as the fully excited one) is also an element of
the Dicke basis, @xmath .

### 6.2 Preparation of subradiant states

The form of the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) implies that the time evolution of
the system shall exhibit two time scales: The first characteristic time
is due to the self-Hamiltonian @xmath and is approximately @xmath (or
@xmath ) and the second is proportional to @xmath . Generally @xmath and
the faster process induced by @xmath can be eliminated by going into an
interaction picture. However, if the frequency difference @xmath is
large enough, then the energy transfer between two adjacent eigenstates
of @xmath , differing in only one photon number, becomes negligible.
This means that the amplitude of the corresponding collective Rabi
oscillations will be very small, that is, the process on the second time
scale will be unnoticeable and even slower mechanisms will become
apparent. In this section we are going to show that this situation,
which is similar to the one considered in Refs. [ 123 ] and [ 124 ] ,
gives rise to the preparation of subradiant states.

Hereafter we shall focus on the solution of the Schrödinger equation in
the case when just a single atom is excited at @xmath . This initial
state can be prepared by starting from the state @xmath , and exciting
one well defined control atom. This excitation can be achieved via a
third much higher lying level, so that the wavelength of the addressing
pulse allows to focus it on the desired target atom [ 125 ] . For the
sake of simplicity we always consider the control atom as being the
first, hence the initial state will be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to find the complete analytical solution of the Schrödinger
equation induced by the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ), in principle one should
calculate all the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenstates of
@xmath . Although this problem can be solved analytically [ 126 ] , more
insight is given by a simple perturbative approach. The exact
nonperturbative numerical solution of the Schrödinger equation verifies
that results obtained via perturbation theory yield excellent
approximations, see section 6.3 .

The state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is in the completely symmetric subspace, and the subradiant
states:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , have the same unperturbed energy, they span the @xmath
-fold degenerate eigensubspace of @xmath corresponding to the eigenvalue
@xmath . For the case of @xmath , the atomic part of the states @xmath
is denoted by a circle in Fig. 6.1 .

It can be seen that first order degenerate perturbation theory is not
giving any correction to the energy, because all the matrix elements of
@xmath between the states above vanish: The action of @xmath on vectors
@xmath gives a linear combination of @xmath and @xmath that are
orthogonal to the states ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.6 ). In order to obtain nonzero
energy corrections we have to perform a second order degenerate
perturbation calculation [ 127 ] , and find the eigenvalues of the
matrix:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sum runs over all eigenstates of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath
. The only nonvanishing energy corrections in second order are the
following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

At this point we can formulate the requirements that assure the validity
of the perturbation theory: the magnitude of @xmath and @xmath must be
much smaller than @xmath , the minimum of the difference between @xmath
and all other unperturbed energy levels.

The most important consequence of Eqs. ( 6.8 ) is that the Bohr
frequencies that determine the time dependences of the subradiant and
non-subradiant states are different.

Now we expand the initial state ( 6.4 ) as the linear combination of the
fully symmetric (non-subradiant) state @xmath , and an appropriate
subradiant state:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

By assigning the symbol @xmath to the state in Eq. ( 6.9 ), we have
utilized the freedom of choosing a basis in the subradiant subspace. Now
the initial state reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the aid of this expansion and using the Bohr frequencies resulting
from ( 6.8 ), it is easy to calculate the time evolution of the state (
6.10 ). Discarding an overall phase factor, this time dependent state
has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, on using Eqs. ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.9 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we introduced the parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is independent of @xmath . Because of this latter fact, from now
on the state of the cavity field will be omitted in the notation. We
also note that the characteristic time of the time evolution, @xmath ,
is much longer than that of the free evolution due to @xmath , being the
consequence of the fact that the evolution described in Eq. ( 6.11 ) is
induced by a weak, nonresonant interaction.

Eq. ( 6.12 ) reveals that in @xmath the weight of the state @xmath and
those of the states with the first atom unexcited changes during the
course of time. As we can see, the moduli of the corresponding
coefficients in Eq. ( 6.12 ) are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively. Comparing these values to Eq ( 6.9 ), it can be shown that
for arbitrary @xmath , there exists a time instant @xmath when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which differs from the subradiant state @xmath only in the phase factor
@xmath of the first term. Combination of the previous two equations and
Eq. ( 6.9 ) yields the following requirement for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can find a solution of this equation for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and also obtain @xmath in Eq. ( 6.14 ).

Now it is clear that at the time instant given by Eq ( 6.16 ), an
appropriate rapid change in the phase of the state @xmath relatively to
all other states @xmath leads to the subradiant state @xmath .

On the other hand, Eq. ( 6.14 ) also shows that the required phase
transformation is equivalent to the elimination of the phase difference
@xmath between the @xmath excited and @xmath ground state of the control
atom. Therefore we consider the action of a strong laser pulse on the
control atom. In order to obtain precise addressing [ 125 ] , the laser
is to be tuned in resonance with an allowed transition @xmath , where
@xmath denotes a state of the control atom with much higher energy than
@xmath . E. g., by the appropriate choice of the phase of the complex
Rabi frequencies of two @xmath pulses leads to the phase transformation
required to prepare the subradiant state @xmath . Additionally, the
duration of a Rabi period due to the strong, resonant laser pulse is
much shorter than the characteristic time that governs the time
evolution ( 6.11 ). We note that the idea of introducing phase
transformation in a multilevel system by the aid of short laser pulses
has appeared in a somewhat different context in [ 128 ] .

Now we show that our scheme is independent of the state of the cavity
field, and write more generally the initial state as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the fact that the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath does not mix
states with different number of excitation (essentially @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

unless @xmath . This implies that the calculations based on second order
perturbation theory can be performed for each @xmath -fold degenerate
energy level of @xmath corresponding to different values of @xmath .
After replacing the state @xmath with @xmath in Eqs. ( 6.5 ) and ( 6.6
), we obtain the following result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is therefore also valid in this general case. Thus we have proven
that our scheme does not require special preparation of the cavity
field.

### 6.3 Comparison with experiments

Although the results above can be checked analytically, the scheme is
based on second order perturbation theory. Clearly, there are well
defined conditions limiting the validity of the perturbative approach
and the applicability of this scheme. Now we are going to analyze these
conditions in comparison with recent experimental results. As we shall
see, present day experimental techniques allow for the preparation of
decoherence-free, subradiant states in the proposed way.

The time instants @xmath (and the whole time evolution) is found to be
independent from the cavity field within the framework of our
perturbative approach. However, we must require the energy corrections
given by Eqs. ( 6.8 ) to be much less than @xmath , which is the minimal
difference between the eigenvalues of @xmath . According to Eqs. ( 6.8
), this can be achieved if the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds, and the average number of photons in the cavity field, @xmath ,
is not too large. By cooling the apparatus and sending a train of
absorbing atoms through the cavity before the experiment takes place [
129 ] , average photon numbers @xmath can be achieved. Therefore until
the relation ( 6.20 ) holds, the perturbative approach is valid.

In the following we shall compare the requirements of our proposal with
the parameters of the atom-cavity experiments of Haroche and co-workers.
First of all, as discussed in the review paper [ 99 ] , the interaction
of a number of Rydberg atoms with a single mode cavity is truly
described in the framework of the Dicke model. In more recent
experiments the time evolution of an entangled state of the cavity field
and an atom [ 28 ] and also the entangled state of two atoms [ 129 ] has
been found to be in agreement with theoretical predictions. From our
point of view, Ref. [ 129 ] is of special interest, because our proposal
is essentially the generalization (with an additional phase
transformation) of the two-atom experiment described in that paper to
@xmath atoms. In the experiment the atoms emitted by two single atom
sources propagate with different velocities and collide inside the
cavity. It is possible to apply classical RF pulses on the outgoing
atoms independently in order to analyze the final state of the collision
process. In our scheme such RF pulses can perform the desired single
qubit phase operation and consequently prepare a subradiant state.

In order to investigate the effect of the increasing number of atoms on
the applicability of our method we solve numerically the Schrödinger
equation induced by the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) and compare this exact time
evolution with the perturbative one. The realistic parameters [ 28 ]
@xmath and maximal detunings @xmath show that the relation ( 6.20 )
holds as much as for about hundred atoms. However, it is easy to see
that the smallest value of @xmath increases as the left hand side of
Eq. ( 6.20 ) decreases, and @xmath must clearly be shorter than the
interaction time which has the order of magnitude of @xmath [ 28 ] . To
elucidate the trade-off between this requirement and the validity of the
perturbative method, we calculate the minimal @xmath value for different
number of atoms. We use the above realistic value of the coupling
constant and choose @xmath , thus @xmath . The resulting graph is shown
in Fig. 6.2 , where the shortest @xmath is plotted versus the number of
atoms, @xmath . In the numerical calculation @xmath is defined as the
time instant when the distance (in the sense of the norm naturally
connected to the usual inner product) between the current state and the
state given by Eq. ( 6.14 ) is minimal.

With the parameters above the agreement between the numerical and the
perturbative results is convincing, this minimal distance is small, less
than @xmath . The validity of the perturbative approach can also be seen
by comparing the values of @xmath obtained in the two different ways.

The most interesting property of Fig. 6.2 is that @xmath is a decreasing
function. This means that once our scheme is implemented with two atoms,
the interaction time stipulates no additional conditions on the case of
more atoms. Concerning the numerical values appearing in the figure, the
conclusion is that the condition @xmath is too strict in the sense that
@xmath is longer than the interaction time reported in [ 129 ] . The
effects predicted by perturbation theory can also be observed in the
case of a weaker condition. Indeed, based on the agreement of
theoretical and experimental results, Ref. [ 129 ] draws the limit of
the perturbative regime at @xmath .

### 6.4 Conclusions

We have proposed a method to prepare decoherence-free, subradiant states
of a multiatomic system. We also compared the theoretical requirements
with the parameters of existing experimental setups and found that the
proposed scheme is feasible with presently available experimental
techniques.

## Summary

The phenomenon that is called decoherence and the correspondence with
classical mechanics is a fundamental question in the quantum theory
since the 1930s. Nowadays, due to the rapid development of experimental
techniques, it is possible to investigate the mechanisms of decoherence
also in laboratories. Controlled number of ions in a trap [ 29 , 125 ] ,
single Rydberg atoms traversing a cavity [ 129 ] or EPR pairs of
polarized photons [ 130 ] can shed new light on long-lived theoretical
questions. Besides this principal importance, state of the art
experiments in this field offer possibilities for practical applications
as well. Quantum cryptography protocols have already been implemented,
and there is a hope also for quantum computation to turn into reality.
All these facts underline the importance of understanding the role of
highly nonclassical quantum states and the process of decoherence in the
field of quantum optics.

In this work the focus was on concrete quantum systems, and the related
theoretical models were based on the approach of the environment induced
decoherence. That is, we assumed that the reason for the emergence of
classical properties in a quantum system is the interaction with the
environment. An overview of this concept was given in Chap. 1 , and
Chap. 2 dealt with the mathematical methods that are used to treat open
quantum systems. The most important properties of the Wigner functions
that are relevant from our point of view have also been given, because
these functions are found to visualize decoherence in an instructive
way. In Part II of the thesis we presented our own results that are
summarized as follows:

##### Molecular wave packets in an anharmonic potential

The realistic vibrational potential energy of a diatomic molecule in a
given electronic state can be approximated by the Morse potential. First
we investigated the time evolution of wave packets in this anharmonic
potential without the influence of the environment. For small
oscillations, the behavior of the wave packets are similar to the
harmonic case, but when anharmonicity plays an important role, peculiar
quantum effects can be observed. The Wigner function of the system shows
that in this case there are certain stages of the time evolution when
the vibrational state of the molecule can be considered as a highly
nonclassical Schrödinger-cat state: it is the superposition of two other
states that are well localized in the phase space.

##### Decoherence of molecular wave packets

The highly nonclassical Schrödinger-cat states that spontaneously form
in the Morse potential provide the motivation for the study of the
decoherence in a diatomic molecule. We introduced a model where the
environment is represented by a set of harmonic oscillators and took
into account that the rate of an environment induced transition depends
on the involved Bohr frequencies, which are different for different
transitions. This model led to a master equation, the final,
steady-state solution of which represents thermal equilibrium with the
environment. On the time scale of dissipation decoherence is a very fast
process, and the time instant when decoherence dominated time evolution
turns into dissipation dominated dynamics, naturally defines the
characteristic time of the decoherence. The behavior of the entropy of
the molecular system reflects the separation of the two time scales and
allows us to determine the decoherence time for different initial wave
packets. We found that keeping all other parameters fixed, decoherence
becomes faster by increasing the diameter of the a phase space orbit
corresponding to the wave packet. It has also been demonstrated that
decoherence follows a general scheme in this case, it drives the
molecule into the classical mixture of states that are localized along
the corresponding classical phase space orbit. This scheme is valid not
only for the case of wave packets as initial states, but also for energy
eigenstates.

##### Two-level atoms and decoherence

A system of two-level atoms provides a model in which the microscopic
@xmath macroscopic (mesoscopic) transition is straightforward: it means
the simple increase of the number of the atoms in the ensemble. In this
system, starting from superposition of atomic coherent states as initial
states, we have shown that the decoherence time can be determined in a
way similar to the case of a diatomic molecule: The behavior of the
linear entropy changes its character around the decoherence time. The
uncertainty of this operational definition decreases when we increase
the number of the atoms. We have found that certain superpositions of
atomic coherent states, the so-called symmetric Schrödinger-cat states,
exhibit exceptionally slow decoherence. We introduced a decoherence
scheme that is able to describe the time evolution of these symmetric
states as well.

##### Preparing decoherence-free states

The presence of a cavity around two-level atoms modifies the mode
structure of the electromagnetic field surrounding the atoms, and the
spontaneous emission rate can be different from that of in free space.
The system consisting of the cavity field and the atoms is coupled to
the environment also in this case. In order to avoid the decoherence of
the atomic state, we introduced a method that can prepare subradiant
states in a cavity. These states have recently gained wide attention,
because the interaction of the cavity field and the atoms in a
subradiant state is negligible, therefore cavity losses do not lead to
the decoherence of the atomic state. Therefore the subradiant states
span a decoherence-free subspace, which can be important from the
viewpoint of quantum computation. Our method for preparing
decoherence-free atomic states is based on the natural time evolution of
the atomic system in the cavity, and requires the individual
manipulation of an initially chosen control atom. The analysis of the
experimental requirements of our scheme shows that it can be implemented
with present day cavity QED setups.

## Acknowledgements

First of all I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Dr. Mihály
Benedict, my supervisor. He, as a master, gave me an excellent
introduction to quantum physics, and our common research was always full
of excitement and pleasure. His wisdom means an indispensable help, when
a young physicist faces difficult problems in various aspects of life
and work.

I have been enjoying the stimulating atmosphere of the Department of
Theoretical Physics for several years. It is a pleasure for me to thank
all the members of the Department for their help and encouragement
throughout the years. I enjoyed and will not forget the lectures of
Dr. Iván Gyémánt and Dr. László Fehér. I am grateful to Dr. Iván
Gyémánt, the head of the Department, for his continuous support.
Frequent friendly discussions with Dr. Ferenc Bartha and Dr. Ferenc
Bogár revealed me several important topics related to the physics of
molecules. Dr. Attila Czirják has always been listening to my ideas and
his kind criticism was very helpful. I enjoyed the discussions with my
friend Balázs Molnár on physics as well as on other important subjects,
which always helped me to see the happier side of the world.

I owe my parents and grandparents my warmest thanks for loving,
trusting, supporting and encouraging me since I was born. I am glad to
be able to thank Anikó for her love and patience. She and my brother
Gergely have outstanding sense for identifying the really important
things in life, and fortunately they never forget to warn me when I miss
one of these orientation points.

The scientific projects I participated were financially supported by the
Hungarian Scientific Research Fund (OTKA) under contracts Nos. T32920,
D38267, and by the Hungarian Ministry of Education under contract
No. FKFP 099/2001.