Bryan Webber and myself and cross checked for errors. Chapter 3 is the
result of my own independent work. Chapter 4 is a complete discussion of
Herwig++ which has been implemented by myself and Dr. Stefan Gieseke,
with other coding contributions from Dr. Alberto Ribon. Theoretical
contributions to Herwig++ have also been made by Prof. Bryan Webber and
Dr. Mike Seymour. Chapter 5 is the result of comparison studies of
Herwig++ to LEP data. This is the result of work done in conjunction by
Dr. Gieseke and myself. Chapter 6 is the extension of work done by Dr.
James Hetherington as part of his PhD thesis. His original idea of
Effective has been extended to include the renormalization group
equations and the correct one-loop mass corrections have been
implemented.

I would like to thank Dr. Stefan Gieseke for his continual help and
guidance throughout my time at Cambridge. I would also like to thank my
supervisor Prof. Bryan Webber and the rest of the members of the HEP
Group over the last three years, in particular Dr. Agustin Sabio Vera
and Dr. Jeppe Anderson for numerous fruitful discussions.

The work of chapter 6 would not have been possible if not for the time
and energy spent by Dr. James Hetherington helping me to understand the
ideas he had implemented in Effective .

I would like to thank Trinity College and the University Rugby Club for
membership and support. Also the Universities UK and the Cambridge
Overseas trust for their financial support. And Iâ€™d like to thank CERN
for allowing me to spend a summer there while attending the Monte Carlo
Workshop for LHC, during which discussions with the SHERPA team helped
me to understand the content of chapter 3 better.

Mostly I would like to thank my family, old and new. Thanks to my
parents for encouragement, support and belief that I would achieve this
goal. Thanks to my brothers and sister for constantly supporting me and
for their confidence in my abilities. Lastly I would like to thank
Jenna. This is the first step in our long life of happiness together.
