Quantum key distribution (QKD) has attracted great attention as an
unconditionally secure key distribution scheme. The fundamental feature
of QKD protocols is that the amount of information gained by an
eavesdropper, usually referred to as Eve, can be estimated from the
channel between the legitimate sender and the receiver, usually referred
to as Alice and Bob respectively. Such a task cannot be conducted in
classical key distribution schemes. If the estimated amount is lower
than a threshold, then Alice and Bob determine the length of a secret
key from the estimated amount of Eveâ€™s information, and can share a
secret key by performing the postprocessing. One of the most important
criteria for the efficiency of the QKD protocols is the key generation
rate, which is the length of securely sharable key per channel use.

In this thesis, we investigate the channel estimation procedure and the
postprocessing procedure of the QKD protocols in order to improve the
key generation rates of the QKD protocols. Conventionally in the channel
estimation procedure, we only use the statistics of matched measurement
outcomes, which are bit sequences transmitted and received by the same
basis, to estimate the channel; mismatched measurement outcomes, which
are bit sequences transmitted and received by different bases, are
discarded in the conventional estimation procedure. In this thesis, we
propose a channel estimation procedure in which we use the mismatched
measurement outcomes in addition to the matched measurement outcomes.
Then, we clarify that the key generation rates of the QKD protocols with
our channel estimation procedure is higher than that with the
conventional channel estimation procedure.

In the conventional postprocessing procedure, which is known as the
advantage distillation , we transmit a message over the public channel
redundantly, which is unnecessary divulging of information to Eve. In
this thesis, we propose a postprocessing in which the above mentioned
divulging of information is reduced by using the distributed data
compression. We clarify that the key generation rate of the QKD protocol
with our proposed postprocessing is higher than that with the
conventionally known postprocessings.
