##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 The heterotic string on orbifolds
    -    2.1 The world sheet action
    -    2.2 Classical strings on orbifolds
        -    2.2.1 The orbifold geometry
        -    2.2.2 Orbifold boundary conditions
        -    2.2.3 Classical solutions
    -    2.3 Quantization and the low-energy spectrum
        -    2.3.1 The Hilbert space
        -    2.3.2 Orbifold compatibility
        -    2.3.3 Conditions for massless states
        -    2.3.4 The generic spectrum
    -    2.4 Interactions
        -    2.4.1 Gauge invariance and discrete @xmath -symmetry
        -    2.4.2 Space group selection rule
-    3 A local GUT in six dimensions
    -    3.1 The @xmath orbifold
        -    3.1.1 The gauge embedding
        -    3.1.2 Space group selection rules for interactions
    -    3.2 The effective orbifold GUT
        -    3.2.1 Anisotropic limits of orbifolds
        -    3.2.2 Geometry of the effective GUT
        -    3.2.3 Generic projection conditions
        -    3.2.4 The gravity sector
        -    3.2.5 Gauge vectors
        -    3.2.6 Matter states
        -    3.2.7 The effective orbifold GUT field theory
    -    3.3 Anomaly cancelation
        -    3.3.1 The Stora–Zumino descent relations
        -    3.3.2 The bulk anomaly polynomial
        -    3.3.3 Anomaly polynomials at fixed points
        -    3.3.4 Green–Schwarz anomaly cancelation in six dimensions
        -    3.3.5 Green–Schwarz anomaly cancelation on the orbifold
-    4 Vacua and phenomenology
    -    4.1 The @xmath GUT superpotential
    -    4.2 Standard model families and a unique @xmath
    -    4.3 @xmath -terms and @xmath -terms
    -    4.4 Decoupling of exotics
        -    4.4.1 A minimal vacuum
    -    4.5 Unbroken symmetries
        -    4.5.1 Symmetries of the false vacuum
        -    4.5.2 Symmetries of physical vacua
        -    4.5.3 Symmetries and interactions
    -    4.6 Vacuum selection
        -    4.6.1 Maximal vacua for vanishing couplings
        -    4.6.2 Gauge-Higgs unification
        -    4.6.3 Partial gauge-Higgs unification
    -    4.7 The all-order superpotential
        -    4.7.1 The calculation of @xmath -terms
-    5 Connection with smooth geometries
    -    5.1 Compactification on the @xmath surface
    -    5.2 Identifying moduli
    -    5.3 Outlook: A local GUT based on @xmath
-    6 Conclusions
-    A Orbifold details
    -    A.1 Solving the fixed point equation
    -    A.2 Space group selection rules for @xmath
    -    A.3 The gamma phases
        -    A.3.1 The general case
        -    A.3.2 The @xmath example
-    B Lie Group Basics
-    C Anomalies with Abelian factors
    -    C.1 Bulk anomalies
    -    C.2 Fixed point anomalies
-    D The hidden brane
-    E Zero modes in four dimensions
-    F Discrete symmetry transformations

## 1 Introduction

The vast majority of experimental observations at high-energy facilities
in the pre-LHC era is described to very high accuracy by the standard
model of particle physics [ 1 ] . The latter is a phenomenological model
whose 19 parameters are deduced from the best fit to the available data.
Major drawbacks of the standard model are that it fails to describe
neutrino oscillations and the observed abundance of dark matter and dark
energy in the universe. Further issues concern the Higgs sector. The
sensitivity of the Higgs mass to the cutoff scale implies large
fine-tuning and suggests the existence of beyond standard model physics,
such as supersymmetry (SUSY). In addition, the triviality problem of the
quartic Higgs self-interaction at infinite cutoff, i.e. the expected
vanishing of the corresponding coupling constant at low energies in that
limit [ 2 , 3 ] , indicates that the standard model is not fundamental.
Attempts of treating gravity and the other forces of nature on the same
footing, namely as local gauge symmetries, lead to the same conclusion ¹
¹ 1 Asymptotic safety scenarios of gravity [ 4 ] and the Higgs/Yukawa
sector [ 5 ] provide an alternative viewpoint, giving up the premise of
perturbativity. . This is due to incurable ultraviolet divergencies,
which are also present for supergravity (SUGRA) extensions of the
standard model, i.e. for local supersymmetry.

The most popular candidate for a fundamental theory is string theory [ 6
, 7 , 8 , 9 ] . It is based on replacing the idea of elementary point
particles by the concept of fundamental strings. Due to their
one-dimensional nature, string interactions are not point-like and
therefore finite by construction. Consistency arguments then imply that
strings have to propagate in ten space-time dimensions. Since they
include a description of gravity, the sole scale @xmath of string theory
is set by the analogue of Newton’s constant in ten dimensions (up to the
string coupling @xmath , where @xmath denotes the dilaton). Effective
theories in four dimensions are obtained by assuming that six space-like
coordinates describe a compact geometry. Its size, the string coupling,
and the string scale then combine to the four-dimensional Planck scale
@xmath GeV.

As yet it remains an open question if string theory describes nature. It
is known to have ten to the hundreds different vacuum solutions, related
to assumptions about the geometry of the predicted extra dimensions, but
it is not known whether the standard model is accommodated in any of
them. However, explicit constructions have shown that one can get indeed
very close to the standard model and study quasi-realistic vacua.
Examples include heterotic string compactifications on smooth [ 10 ] or
singular [ 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] geometries (see [ 18 ] for
recent reviews), intersecting D-branes and orientifold models (cf. [ 19
, 20 , 21 ] and references therein), free fermionic models [ 22 ] , and
F-theory constructions [ 23 ] . All models have in common that they do
not fully match low-energy phenomenology, but almost, and it does not
seem impossible to discover the missing link.

A promising strategy for identifying a string theory vacuum whose
low-energy effective field theory coincides with the standard model may
be to require that the electroweak and the strong forces unify at an
intermediate scale. The existence of a grand unified theory (GUT) [ 1 ]
in nature is an assumption, backed by the group theoretical simplicity
of the early Georgi–Glashow @xmath [ 24 ] and @xmath [ 25 ] GUT
proposals, and a quantitative argument from the renormalization group
running of the coupling constants. For the minimal supersymmetric
standard model (MSSM), with SUSY partner masses of order of the
electroweak scale @xmath GeV, unification appears at @xmath , up to
@xmath threshold corrections (cf. [ 26 ] ). If a GUT is realized in
nature, this result suggests that also supersymmetry is likely to exist,
with a soft mass scale related to the electroweak scale. For GUTs in
accord with string theory, the phenomenological value of the gauge
coupling at the GUT scale @xmath implies a further relation between the
string scale @xmath , the volume of the compact internal dimensions, and
the string coupling [ 27 ] .

The simplest possibility for constructing supersymmetric grand unified
theories in higher dimensions from string theory [ 28 ] may be the
compactification of the heterotic string [ 29 ] on orbifolds [ 30 ] .
One version of heterotic string theory is equipped with the gauge group
@xmath , where the exceptional Lie group @xmath inherits standard GUT
groups, and may therefore provide a promising framework.

Orbifolds are simple examples for compact internal spaces. They are flat
except for singular boundary points, called ‘fixed points’, and thus
technically easy to handle. In field theoretical model building,
orbifolds became a popular approach for higher-dimensional GUTs more
than five years ago [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] (see [ 36 , 37 ] for
recent work on 5d orbifolds). Standard problems of four-dimensional
GUTs, like the breaking of the larger gauge group to the standard model
or the presence of exotics in the larger Higgs representations, have
simple solutions in orbifold models in terms of the boundary conditions
of the bulk fields. Furthermore, orbifold GUTs lead to the idea of
‘local grand unification’ at the fixed points [ 38 ] . The fact that
matter and Higgs fields may have different localization properties on
the compact space can lead to interesting phenomenology, like the
outcome of a heavy top-quark, or, more generally, non-trivial
predictions concerning flavor physics.

The phenomenological success of field theoretical orbifold SUSY GUTs in
higher dimensions led to a renewed interest in heterotic orbifold
models, twenty years after the first proposals of three-family orbifold
models [ 39 , 40 , 41 ] . The model [ 13 ] was found by requiring local
@xmath unification, and this approach turned out to be very fruitful.
For the first time it was possible to decouple all exotics in a
consistent string compactification, with quasi-realistic Yukawa
couplings and phenomenology. Once this model was found, a systematic
scan of the ‘mini-landscape’ of similar heterotic orbifold models could
be carried out, and approximately 300 standard model-like string
compactifications were identified [ 14 ] .

The motivation behind the model [ 13 ] , however, was the idea to
realize an orbifold GUT in six dimensions, similar to the field
theoretical model [ 34 ] , in string theory. The corresponding
anisotropic limit [ 42 ] was worked out in full detail in [ 16 ] ,
including the explicit cancelation of all anomalies. The construction
relies on the assumption that some of the compact internal dimensions
are considerably larger than others, reflecting the gap between the GUT
and the string scale. Note that anisotropic orbifolds seem to be
preferred by the perturbative heterotic string [ 43 ] (for work on
precision gauge coupling unification in similar models see [ 44 ] ). An
explicit mechanism to stabilize the large dimensions at the GUT scale
was addressed recently in [ 45 , 37 ] . The effective six-dimensional
orbifold GUT [ 16 ] has local @xmath unification, a unique @xmath ,
matter parity, a heavy top-quark, and a simple decoupling mechanism for
most of the exotics [ 16 , 17 ] . This model will be reviewed and
studied in detail in this paper, bearing in mind that it can be seen as
a representative of a full class of quasi-realistic string
compactifications [ 14 ] .

Most work in the literature has been concerned with compactifications
directly to four dimensions. One typically obtains a large number of
fields in heterotic orbifold models, and it is not straightforward to
distinguish matter fields, Higgs fields and exotics. In the favored
models exotic fields are vector-like, and can therefore be decoupled by
the generation of mass terms, after the transition to the supersymmetric
vacuum. The latter generically corresponds to non-trivial configurations
in field space. This is the consequence of a tachyonic direction that is
sourced by a loop-induced Fayet–Iliopoulos term (cf. [ 46 , 47 ] ). The
requirement of non-vanishing vacuum expectation values (vevs) for some
of the fields is an important point for orbifold model building, since
it leads to the simultaneous generation of infinitely many interaction
terms. The strength of the effective coupling then scales with the
number of involved vevs, analogue to the Froggatt–Nielsen mechanism [ 48
] . The generated interactions may be favored, like Yukawa couplings, or
disfavored, like proton decay operators or large @xmath -terms. The
phenomenology is therefore largely determined by the set of singlets
that acquire non-zero vacuum expectation values.

Up to now, finding quasi-realistic vacua in heterotic orbifold models
seems to be mainly an issue of computing power. In practice, one
truncates the superpotential at a chosen finite order in the singlet
vevs (typically this order is 6 or 8 [ 13 , 14 , 49 ] ), and scans for
vacuum configurations for which the @xmath -term and the @xmath -term
equations can be fulfilled, with satisfactory phenomenology. However,
one may ask if the search for vacua with phenomenologically preferred
properties could be improved by detailed studies of the connection
between the singlets which contribute to the vacuum, and the resulting
effective superpotential. We shall address this problem in this work by
considering symmetry arguments that may help to identify interesting
candidates for physical vacua. This extends the results of [ 17 ] ,
where the importance of unbroken discrete symmetries was noted first.
Since the symmetries in non-trivial vacuum configurations refer to the
full (perturbative) superpotential, they can be used to forbid
disfavored terms to arbitrary order in the singlet vevs ² ² 2
Alternatively, a sufficient suppression may be obtained if the
symmetries are broken at high order in the singlets, cf. [ 50 ] . . The
detailed discussion of this method and its application to the effective
orbifold GUT model in six dimensions is the main purpose of this work.

The transition to the supersymmetric vacuum is related to a consistency
issue which generically arises in orbifold compactifications. The
back-reaction of the vacuum expectation values of localized twisted
states on the geometry corresponds to ‘blowing-up’ the orbifold
singularities (cf. [ 51 , 40 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 ] and [ 56 ] for a
recent analysis of the @xmath case). The general observation is that the
resulting smooth compactification has less zero modes and reduced
symmetries. The claim that one may ignore this back-reaction in the
vicinity of the orbifold point, i.e. that the orbifold description
remains a good approximation nearby the origin in field space, still
lacks a rigorous proof. However, it seems plausible from the observation
that orbifolds correspond to specific points of the moduli spaces
associated with manifolds. The matching of spectra of the orbifold and a
smooth background geometry may then give insights on the role of the
orbifold states and thus lead to a better understanding of orbifold
vacua. Although this work is mostly concerned with orbifolds, we also
comment briefly on the interpretation of the bulk states in six
dimensions as zero modes of a smooth compactification.

This paper is organized as follows. Chapter 2 introduces the heterotic
string and reviews its compactification on an orbifold, clarifying the
role of lattice translations for the orbifold projection conditions in
Section 2.3.2 . The spectrum of the effective orbifold GUT model in six
dimensions is calculated in Chapter 3 , corresponding to an anisotropic
limit of the compactification. Section 3.3 explicitly confirms that all
appearing anomalies are canceled. In Chapter 4 , we discuss the model in
a non-trivial vacuum configuration. The superpotential of standard
@xmath GUTs is reviewed in Section 4.1 , before we turn to the local
GUTs with that gauge symmetry at the fixed points in the extra
dimensions. Section 4.2 identifies unique Abelian symmetries @xmath and
@xmath and the standard model families. A minimal vacuum that preserves
matter parity and implies a universal decoupling of many exotics is
defined in Section 4.4 . The symmetries of general vacua are analyzed in
Section 4.5 , furthermore it is shown for the above minimal vacuum
symmetries and vanishing couplings are in direct correlation. Section
4.6 describes an algorithm which allows one to enlarge the vacuum
without generating disfavored couplings, and two examples are discussed.
Section 4.7 then provides a method which can be used for the calculation
of superpotential interactions to arbitrary order in a given vacuum,
with improved efficiency compared to order-by-order scans. An outlook on
work in progress concerning a connection of the model with smooth
geometries is given in Chapter 5 , before we conclude in Chapter 6 .
Some technical details of orbifold compactifications are studied in
Appendix A , basic facts about Lie groups and Lie algebras are collected
in Appendix B . Appendix C gives details of the calculation of the
reducible anomalies of the model. The states at the hidden fixed points
and the four-dimensional zero modes are listed in appendices D and E ,
respectively. Finally, Appendix F summarizes the transformation behavior
of all fields at the GUT fixed points with respect to the unbroken
symmetries of the three studied vacua. From this information it can be
inferred whether a particular coupling may be present in the vacuum, or
is forbidden to arbitrary order in the singlets.

## 2 The heterotic string on orbifolds

This chapter briefly introduces the heterotic string [ 29 ] and
describes its compactification on orbifolds [ 30 ] . The results and
ideas presented here are neither new nor do they originate from the
author, except for the ansatz for the superposition of physical states
in Appendix A.3 . Instead they can be found in much more detail in
textbooks, e.g. [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] , or reviews [ 57 , 18 ] . Here we widely
follow the conventions of [ 58 , 13 ] . The main purpose of this section
is to fix the notation and to present the foundations of the model which
will be discussed in detail in this work.

### 2.1 The world sheet action

The heterotic string can be understood as a field theory on a
two-dimensional surface, called the ‘string world-sheet’, which is
parametrized by one time-like and one space-like direction @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The theory can be formulated in terms of 26
bosonic fields @xmath , and 10 fermionic fields @xmath , which play the
role of coordinates of a target space. Up to specification of the
metrics on the world-sheet and the target space, the action reads ³ ³ 3
Throughout this paper we follow the Einstein sum convention, if not
stated otherwise.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

Here @xmath is the string scale. On-shell, the string fields appearing
in this action can be written in terms of functions of the combinations
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where subscripts @xmath were introduced for left- and right-moving
fields , respectively. Due to the asymmetry between left-movers and
right-movers only closed heterotic strings exist, which implies specific
boundary conditions at @xmath and @xmath in our conventions.

The target space contains the physical four-dimensional Minkowski space
@xmath . A consistent quantum theory can be formulated if the latter is
embedded into its ten-dimensional analogue @xmath , labeled by the index
@xmath . Additionally, the index @xmath labels coordinates of a
16-dimensional internal compact space, which has to coincide with the
root lattice of either @xmath or @xmath , in order to obtain a
consistent (quantum) theory in ten dimensions. The corresponding fields
@xmath are then interpreted as gauge fields. Throughout the whole work
we shall consider the case of a gauge group

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

The field content of heterotic string theory is sketched in Figure 1 .
The presence of the labels @xmath and @xmath is a consequence of the
heterotic nature of the theory: While @xmath and @xmath form a
superstring in ten dimensions, @xmath are fields of a bosonic string in
26 dimensions. Thus supersymmetry charges are carried by right-moving
fields, gauge charges by left-movers. For quantization the product of
left- and right-movers will be relevant and this information is
combined, yielding states which form full multiplets of @xmath
supergravity in ten dimensions and of the gauge group ( 3 ), at each
mass level.

The theory which has been described so far does not describe nature as
we observe it. First, it requires ten space-time dimensions, and second,
it has too much supersymmetry, namely 16 supercharges. A common approach
is to replace the ten-dimensional target space by the product space of a
compact six-dimensional geometry and the four-dimensional non-compact
space,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

If @xmath has small volume, the effective theory at low energies is
four-dimensional. Furthermore, compactification on @xmath can be
responsible for supersymmetry and gauge symmetry breaking, possibly
yielding the standard model in four dimensions. However, for non-flat
manifolds @xmath the quantization of the theory is in general unknown.
In that situation one usually considers the ten-dimensional supergravity
on @xmath as an effective theory. Since in this work we are interested
in compactifications on orbifolds, which are flat except for singular
points at the boundary, we are in the comfortable position to directly
solve the dynamics of the string fields and then quantize canonically.

The canonical momenta which follow from the action ( 1 ) are not
independent. In light-cone gauge the unphysical coordinates are
expressed as combinations of the time-like direction ( @xmath ) and one
of the spatial directions (we choose @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

The independent directions are then the transverse coordinates @xmath ,
with equations of motion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath and @xmath . Solutions to these equations will then allow
straightforward canonical quantization. However, they depend on boundary
conditions of the fields, which eventually make the crucial difference
between toroidal and orbifold compactifications.

### 2.2 Classical strings on orbifolds

#### 2.2.1 The orbifold geometry

In the following we shall consider orbifold compactifications of the
type

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath denotes a two-dimensional torus and @xmath is an integer
number ⁴ ⁴ 4 For @xmath orbifolds see e.g. [ 18 ] . . The product form
of @xmath suggests to introduce three complex coordinates for the
internal space ⁵ ⁵ 5 In this section we do not explicitly show the
dependence of coordinates @xmath on the world-sheet variables @xmath .
All following transformation rules apply point-wise with respect to
these variables. ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

Similarly, we introduce another complex coordinate for the two
transversal directions in four-dimensional Minkowski space, @xmath .

#### The space group

The action of a generating element of the ‘point group’ @xmath in ( 7 )
on the toroidal coordinates @xmath can now be defined in terms of a
’twist vector’ @xmath , with entries of order @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

The zero in the last entry was included for later convenience. A
coordinate @xmath then transforms as (here no summation over @xmath is
implied)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Thus the coordinates of the internal tori are rotated by the point group
@xmath , and the latter is embedded into internal Lorentz
transformations. Since the on-shell degrees of freedom transform under
the little group @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

As it turns out, there are additional phenomenological constraints on
the twist vector, due to the requirement that the resulting low-energy
spectrum should have @xmath supersymmetry:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

These conditions will become transparent during the discussion of the
generic spectrum in Section 2.3.4 .

Further isometries of the geometry ( 7 ) are lattice translations of the
three tori. Each of them is defined as @xmath for a two-dimensional
lattice @xmath , with lattice vectors @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

with complex entries @xmath . The product of the three tori can then be
understood as @xmath , with @xmath . The compactness of the internal
space is expressed as invariance under translations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In summary the ‘space group’, which is the total isometry group of the
space under consideration, can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . @xmath is the discrete subgroup of the ten-dimensional
Poincaré group which corresponds to the crystallographic group of the
orbifold geometry. The transformation of the coordinates @xmath under an
element @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

The multiplication rule of the group ( 17 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

and inverse elements are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

For later usage we also introduce the ‘conjugacy class’ @xmath of an
element @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The set of vectors @xmath which appear in the bracket is denoted as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

and often referred to as the ‘sub-lattice’ associated with the twist
@xmath .

With the identification of the space group ( 17 ) the definition of the
orbifold in ( 7 ) becomes clear: It is a subset of @xmath onto which
every point can be mapped by group transformations ( 18 ), @xmath . Such
a subset is also called the ‘fundamental domain’, and all information of
the full space is contained in this region. The fundamental domain
itself is by definition invariant under all isometries.

#### Fixed points and fixed planes

The crucial feature of orbifold constructions is the appearance of
‘fixed points’ and ‘fixed planes’, or ‘fixed tori’. They are points
@xmath which are invariant under the action of a space group element
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Fixed points correspond to localization in all six internal dimensions.
Fixed tori on the other hand describe invariance of a full torus @xmath
under the twist, and localization in the other two complex dimensions.
This situation will occur regularly in the example of relevance for this
work. In general, the existence of invariant points or planes under
isometry transformations makes the crucial difference between toroidal
and orbifold compactifications, as we will see in the following.

Any element @xmath which does not act like a pure translation @xmath in
one of the planes fulfills a fixed point equation ( 23 ). This is
demonstrated in Appendix A.1 , where the explicit solutions for @xmath
are constructed.

However, not all space group elements generate independent fixed points.
The latter are only defined up to the conjugacy class of the generating
element @xmath . This can be seen by considering two fixed points @xmath
with generating elements @xmath , respectively, and @xmath for a @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

which states that @xmath fulfills the fixed point equation corresponding
to @xmath . Therefore the two fixed points @xmath and @xmath are related
by a symmetry transformation and thus identical on the orbifold. This
observation will lead to crucial projection conditions for physical
states after quantization.

#### 2.2.2 Orbifold boundary conditions

Heterotic string theory has only closed string solutions. This means
that the string fields, which are functions of the world-sheet
coordinates @xmath and @xmath , must obey appropriate boundary
conditions. In our conventions they relate the field values at @xmath to
the ones at @xmath .

#### Bosonic coordinates

Since the orbifold geometry identifies all points which are related by
space group transformations ( 18 ), the boundary conditions for the
coordinate fields read

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath labels different possible boundary conditions, corresponding
to different localization properties of the string. It is already
apparent that for non-trivial @xmath the constant part of the solutions
will be given by the corresponding fixed point coordinate, suggesting
that the string winds around that point and is trapped to its vicinity.

For later convenience, we can make the ambiguities of the phases in ( 25
) explicit. We introduce a vector of positive frequencies @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and rewrite the boundary condition as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The appearing combinations @xmath will appear as fractional frequencies
in the mode expansion of the on-shell fields @xmath , and carry over to
excitations after quantization.

#### Fermions and bosonized fermions

For the fermionic fields in complex notation,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

the transformation under a space group element @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Note that invariance of the term @xmath in the action ( 1
) forbids the appearance of shifts for fermionic fields. This leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where (R) and (NS) denote Ramond and Neveu-Schwarz boundary conditions,
respectively.

It is instructive to represent the fermionic degrees of freedom @xmath
by bosonic fields @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

which implies a transformation rule

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

and thus with @xmath leads to the following boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

These conditions can be expressed by a single equation,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath denotes the weight lattice of @xmath . In a canonical basis
the latter is spanned by elements @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath         (37)
  -- -------- -- -- ------

After quantization, this will imprint information about the
transformation behavior under the unbroken subgroup of the little group
@xmath onto the right-moving states.

#### Gauge fields

For a consistent string theory it is generically required that the space
group acts not only on the coordinate fields, but also on the gauge
degrees of freedom @xmath . This can be understood as a ‘gauge
embedding’ @xmath , expressed by a mapping

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with ‘shift vector’ @xmath and ‘discrete Wilson lines’ [ 32 ] @xmath .
The transformation under the space group element @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The embedding ( 38 ) is not arbitrary. First, @xmath and @xmath are of
finite order @xmath and @xmath , respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath denotes the root lattice of @xmath and there is no summation
over the index @xmath . Note that the @xmath are only defined up to
elements of @xmath , by construction of the heterotic string, and
therefore the right-hand side of each of the conditions expresses
trivial action on the fields @xmath .

For each @xmath , the integer @xmath denotes the ‘order of the lattice
vector @xmath ’. It is a divisor of the order @xmath of the orbifold
which is determined by the equation @xmath . This states that for @xmath
repeated transformations the effect of the lattice shift is trivial, as
long as twists are involved. For the Wilson lines this translates into (
40 ).

Further conditions on the Wilson lines arise if two lattice shifts are
equivalent on the orbifold, @xmath . Then also the two associated Wilson
lines have to agree up to root lattice elements. This restricts the
number of distinct Wilson lines in a given orbifold geometry.

Second, there are consistency conditions from string theory, namely the
requirement that the partition function is modular invariant [ 30 , 59 ,
41 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

As a consequence, the gauge embedding is generically non-trivial. Except
for special situations, like for example a @xmath orbifold with @xmath ,
this condition implies a non-vanishing shift vector @xmath . However, a
large ambiguity remains in the definition of the gauge embeddings ( 38
), especially for the choice of Wilson lines. This gave rise to
systematic scans over parts of the heterotic orbifold landscape [ 14 ] .

With non-vanishing Wilson lines, the above conditions generalize. Here
we state them in the form of ‘strong modular invariance conditions’ ⁶ ⁶
6 The counterparts are ‘weak modular invariance conditions’, as
discussed in [ 18 ] . Solutions of the weak modular invariance
conditions also fulfill the strong modular invariance conditions, after
adding appropriate elements of @xmath . ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The resulting boundary conditions for the fields @xmath read

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      @xmath   @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -- ------

The appearance of the vector @xmath in the boundary conditions of the
left-movers is crucial for all what follows. After quantization it will
determine the transformation behavior of a state with respect to the
present gauge symmetry.

#### 2.2.3 Classical solutions

The equations of motion ( 6 ) have straightforward solutions ⁷ ⁷ 7
Contributions @xmath are forbidden by world sheet supersymmetry. ( 2 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

for @xmath . From the boundary conditions ( 27 ), ( 36 ) and ( 43 ) one
can read off the mode expansions (recall that @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
                                                              
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45d)
     @xmath   @xmath                                          
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Similar solutions apply for the conjugate coordinate fields @xmath . The
appearing constants @xmath depend on the space group element @xmath that
defines the boundary condition. This is also the case for the functions
@xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

and their conjugates @xmath , @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath are
arbitrary constants, they describe a free center-of-mass motion of the
string over the bulk of the torus @xmath .

These solutions contain the localization properties of the string. We
distinguish between ‘untwisted’ strings, defined by @xmath , and
‘twisted’ strings, which have @xmath and fulfill a non-trivial fixed
point (or fixed torus) equation @xmath . Equations ( 46 ), ( 47 ) show
that untwisted strings are completely delocalized over the full
geometry. In contrast, twisted strings cannot move freely, they are
localized at least in one of the internal tori.

### 2.3 Quantization and the low-energy spectrum

#### 2.3.1 The Hilbert space

With the explicit mode expansions from the last section canonical
quantization in light-cone gauge is now straightforward. Here we first
summarize the results before we discuss conditions on physical states
due to the requirement of compatibility with the underlying orbifold.

The states of the quantized theory follow from promoting the appearing
coefficients to operators which obey appropriate canonical commutation
relations. Each fixed point on the orbifold is associated to a class of
space group elements @xmath and gives rise to distinct boundary
conditions. Thus the coefficients of the corresponding mode expansion
and hence also the operators of the quantum theory depend on this
conjugacy class. They are defined on an associated Hilbert space @xmath
, and the total Hilbert space is of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where the direct sum is taken over all disjoint conjugacy classes @xmath
. Each contribution @xmath is referred to as a ‘sector’. We stress that
inequivalent solutions of the classical field equations will thus give
rise to distinct states in the effective field theory after
quantization, with distinct localization properties and charges.

All states in a sector @xmath are subject to projections which define
the physical subset of states. They are ‘level matching conditions’,
which ensure that the masses of left-moving states are equal to the ones
of right-moving states, orbifold consistency conditions, which we will
discuss in some detail later, and ‘GSO projections’ [ 60 ] for the
fermions. The latter guarantee that there are as many bosons as fermions
in the theory. In practice, it restricts the quantum numbers @xmath to
lie either in the integer lattice of @xmath (cf. the upper line of ( 37
)) or the half-integer lattice (cf. the lower line of ( 37 )).

Operators which correspond to positive (negative) frequencies are
understood as creation (annihilation) operators,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

and ground states of the sector @xmath are defined as states which
vanish upon application of any of the annihilation operators. They carry
information about the internal discrete momenta @xmath and @xmath of
left- and right-movers, respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath unifies a set of quantum numbers which are related to the
localization of the state and will be specified shortly.

A general state in @xmath now takes the form ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

The oscillator numbers of excited states are counted by the number
operators ⁸ ⁸ 8 Only the notion of those which are associated with the
coordinate fields @xmath will be needed later. (here no @xmath
-summation)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and similarly for @xmath . Here @xmath are defined similar to @xmath ,
with replacement @xmath . These number operators have non-negative
integer eigenvalues, also denoted by @xmath in the following. The string
theory origins of the appearing quantum numbers of a state are
summarized in Figure 1 .

#### 2.3.2 Orbifold compatibility

Equivalent boundary conditions @xmath and @xmath lead to the same
Hilbert space @xmath , since on the orbifold the corresponding fixed
points are identical (cf. Equation ( 24 )). Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (53a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (53b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

have to lead to the same physical states, and likewise for the other
fields. This imposes important consistency conditions on the physical
states in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In the following, we will construct these states explicitly. For that we
first calculate a phase @xmath which arises due to properties of the
solutions ( 45 ). Then we will require that this phase is one for
physical states, thereby defining the orbifold projection.

For each @xmath one can solve the equations of motion with boundary
conditions given by ( 53a ). After canonical quantization they give rise
to Hilbert spaces @xmath , with ground states

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath collects quantum numbers which specify the localization
properties of the state:

  -- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath         (56)
  -- -------- -- -- ------

Thus the states in @xmath either have center-of-mass momentum @xmath and
possibly winding numbers @xmath along the directions @xmath , or they
are localized at the fixed point coordinate @xmath (compare to ( 46 )).

In the former case, non-vanishing momenta and winding modes will induce
massive states in the effective low-energy theory. For example, the
momenta @xmath take discrete values on the compact torus, which directly
map to the Kaluza-Klein mass of the state in the effective field theory
after dimensional reduction. Assuming a compactification scale much
above the low-energy scale, we can ignore such contributions and
restrict to @xmath for bulk states of the plane @xmath .

To keep the notation short in the following, we further introduce the
‘local twist vector’ @xmath and the ‘local shift vector’ @xmath , which
already appeared in ( 45 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

such that @xmath , @xmath .

#### Transformation rules for states

A general space group element @xmath has non-trivial action on the
states of @xmath . The constant parts of @xmath transform by shifts,
cf. ( 33 ), ( 39 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

For momentum eigenstates this corresponds to the following
transformation behavior:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

From the explicit mode expansions ( 45 ) one can infer the
transformation properties of the creation and annihilation operators,
for example

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The corresponding excitations are counted by the integer vectors @xmath
and similarly @xmath .

However, as we will see the relevant states for the low-energy effective
theory have @xmath , and we shall restrict to that case from now on. It
is then convenient to introduce a vector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath differ for bosons and fermions in a multiplet, as we
shall discuss in more detail later. A state with oscillator numbers can
then be expressed as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with transformation behavior

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Next we consider the transformation behavior of the center-of-mass
contribution @xmath , defined in ( 56 ). If @xmath has a fixed point
@xmath , then @xmath maps this to a fixed point of the conjugated
element (cf. ( 24 )),

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In general, this causes an inconsistency: For @xmath the state on the
right hand side is not contained in @xmath . This problem is solved in
@xmath by considering a superposition of states,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with coefficients @xmath . The states of interest are eigenstates with
respect to the action of all space group elements @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where the multiplicative form of the phase @xmath is a consequence of
the observation @xmath . Consistency with the group multiplication then
further requires for arbitrary @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The latter relation follows from the explicit inverse element ( 20 ).
Note that with ( 21 ) it also implies that elements from the same
conjugacy class lead to the same geometrical phase, @xmath .

Every state is invariant under the unit element, @xmath . However, also
for non-vanishing @xmath there is the possibility that one can find a
translation @xmath such that there is a cancelation between the two
factors, @xmath . If @xmath itself is among these elements @xmath in a
sector @xmath , invariance of @xmath under commuting elements (cf. ( 64
)) is lifted to the superposition @xmath .

In Appendix A.3 we make an explicit ansatz for the superposition ( 65 ),
and find eigenstates @xmath of all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath               (68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants that characterize the state, and
@xmath . The presence of the transformation phase due to @xmath is a new
result and and extension of what is usually done in the literature, cf.
[ 13 , 14 , 49 ] , but does not influence the particle spectra
calculated there. We will comment more on this in Sections 2.3 and 3.2.3
.

The constants @xmath are constrained by the conditions given in ( 418 )
in Appendix A.3 . One finds that consequently they must be of finite
order. For example

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is defined as the smallest positive integer with

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Note that @xmath is a divisor of @xmath . The @xmath are related to the
geometry of the lattice. Their order corresponds to the order of the
associated lattice vector. An explicit example will be discussed in the
next chapter.

The contributions @xmath to the phase @xmath are conventionally referred
to as ‘gamma-phases’ in the literature. However, we stress that
generically a superposition of states from the whole relevant
sub-lattice @xmath has to be considered in order to guarantee invariance
under the full space group @xmath . This induces an additional
contribution @xmath to the phase @xmath , which does not vanish for all
choices of @xmath .

In summary, in a sector @xmath , where @xmath , eigenstates with respect
to the action of arbitrary space group elements read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

Under transformation with an element @xmath they pick up a phase @xmath
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath was defined in ( 69 ).

#### Consistency conditions

The transformation rule ( 73 ) describes the effect of a transition from
boundary condition @xmath in ( 53a ) to boundary condition @xmath in (
53b ) on the states of the corresponding quantized theory.
Quantitatively, it is given in form of a phase @xmath . However, on the
underlying orbifold geometry it is impossible to distinguish between
conjugated space group elements. This translates into consistency
conditions for physical states in @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The phase @xmath from ( 73 ) can be decomposed into a universal
contribution for all superpositions of states at equivalent fixed
points, and a @xmath dependent geometrical factor @xmath . If the latter
phase is trivial, @xmath , the consistency condition is a non-trivial
constraint for the allowed Lorentz symmetry and gauge symmetry quantum
numbers, the familiar ‘orbifold projection’. For the superposition ( 68
), this is the case for all commuting elements @xmath .

For @xmath with @xmath , additional phases contribute to the projection
condition @xmath . The latter are then often referred to as the
‘modified orbifold projection conditions’. From all possible quantum
numbers @xmath they project out the unphysical combinations. Here the
observation is that for any pair of charges @xmath , one can find an
eigenstate of @xmath for which the condition is fulfilled, specified by
a choice of the finitely many distinct @xmath . Thus none of these pairs
is absent in the physical spectrum, but they are grouped into a finite
number of subsets, characterized by labels @xmath . The latter respect
gauge symmetry and supersymmetry, in the sense that all zero modes in a
subset form complete multiplets under these symmetries. Let @xmath
denote all elements which commute with @xmath , and @xmath the rest.
Then the above statement can be sketched as

  -- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath         (75)
  -- -------- -- -- ------

Note that ignoring the existence of the translational gamma phases
related to @xmath can only yield a spectrum with the correct charge
vectors, if for localized states the last step in the above mapping is
skipped. However, throughout this work we take the viewpoint that the
information on the superposition of states at the infinitely many
sub-lattice points is an additional quantum number for physical states,
and thus the full set of projection conditions ( 74 ) has to be
fulfilled in all sectors.

#### 2.3.3 Conditions for massless states

For the construction of an effective field theory as the low-energy
limit of the compactified heterotic string only massless states are of
interest,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

A state ( 51 ) from the sector @xmath has three contributions to the
above masses. One is due to its internal momenta @xmath . The second is
the zero-point energy, which has a universal contribution due to the
shifts @xmath in the twisted oscillator frequencies:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Third, oscillator excitations lead to mass contributions, given by the
fractional oscillator numbers

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- ------

The resulting conditions for massless states ( 76 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (79)
     @xmath   @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

These equations formulate further conditions for states which appear in
the low-energy effective field theory. All other states will have masses
of the order of the string scale, and will be neglected in the analysis.

#### 2.3.4 The generic spectrum

In general, the space group @xmath acts on all three complex internal
dimensions @xmath . The evaluation of the mass conditions ( 79 ), ( 80 )
and the orbifold projections ( 74 ) for all sectors yields all zero
modes which are fully compatible with the compactification. Thus the
resulting spectrum defines an effective theory in four dimensions,
assuming that the volume of all internal tori is small. Here we give a
brief overview over generic features of the low-energy spectrum of
heterotic orbifold models.

#### The gravity sector

Gravity lives in the ten-dimensional bulk. Thus corresponding states
arise from the untwisted sector @xmath . Furthermore, these states are
uncharged under gauge symmetries, @xmath , do not involve
superpositions, @xmath , and include two-tensors with respect to Lorentz
symmetry. The relevant solutions of the mass equations ( 79 ), ( 80 )
are

  -- -- -------- -- ------
        @xmath      (81)
  -- -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where underlines denote all possible permutations. The bosonic states
lie in the integer lattice of @xmath , they transform as a vector. The
fermions have right-moving momenta with half-integer entries, they
transform in the spinor representation @xmath . The oscillator
excitations transform like the coordinates @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Hence the uncharged solutions ( 81 ) of the untwisted mass equations can
be identified with the ten-dimensional supergravity multiplet:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the graviton (gravitino), @xmath ( @xmath
) the dilaton (dilatino) and @xmath the antisymmetric two-form in ten
dimensions.

The action of the space group on three of the four complex coordinates
breaks the @xmath to the point group @xmath and four dimensional
helicity @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In our conventions the fourth entry of the vector @xmath determines the
transformation properties of a zero mode state under helicity @xmath .
Furthermore, we choose @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ) to correspond to a
scalar and a left-handed (right-handed) Weyl fermion in four dimensions,
respectively.

Thus without the orbifold projections, the solutions ( 81 ) give rise to
four gravitinos, implying @xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions. The
requirement that this should be broken to @xmath results in constraints
on the choice of viable twist vectors @xmath . First, we note that also
in four dimensions gravitinos involve a vector and a spinor index. In (
81 ) the spinor arises from the right-moving momentum and the vector
from oscillators in flat space directions, @xmath , which do not
transform under the twist. Thus the orbifold condition ( 74 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

If we choose the vectors @xmath from the possibilities in ( 82 ) as
representatives for the two helicity states of the four-dimensional
gravitino, we recover the condition ( 12 ) for @xmath supersymmetry:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In summary, the four-dimensional supergravity multiplet is given by the
states ( 81 ), with @xmath and oscillator excitations in flat space
directions, @xmath .

Further zero modes arise from excitations in internal directions, @xmath
. They are again subject to the orbifold projection conditions, and the
number of solutions depends on the space group @xmath . These states are
‘geometrical moduli’, they describe fluctuations of the internal metric
around the fixed background.

#### The gauge sector

Further solutions of the mass equations ( 79 ), ( 80 ) in the untwisted
sector are ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with @xmath given by ( 82 ), and @xmath . The latter equation has 480
solutions, furthermore the oscillators above give rise to 16 uncharged
Cartan generators. In total, ( 88 ) forms the gauge vector multiplet in
the adjoint representation of @xmath in ten dimensions.

Application of the orbifold projection conditions ( 74 ) restricts the
allowed combinations of internal momenta @xmath and @xmath above. This
never influences the number of Cartan generators, and therefore the rank
of the gauge group cannot be reduced by orbifolding. However, some of
the states with @xmath , which correspond to vectors in four dimensions,
are projected out and thus the local gauge symmetry of the effective
theory is reduced to a subgroup of @xmath .

#### The matter sector

Matter arises from all twisted sectors @xmath , and also from the
untwisted sector. It is given by all charged massless states which
fulfill the orbifold projection conditions and transform as chiral
multiplets from the four-dimensional perspective ( @xmath , or as their
conjugates. The matter spectrum is very model dependent; we will discuss
a specific example in detail in the following chapter.

### 2.4 Interactions

For realistic model building not only the spectrum is important, but
also interactions between the various zero modes. They arise from
correlation functions of string vertex operators, which can in principle
be calculated for orbifolds with conformal field theory methods [ 61 ,
11 ] . The results show that a superpotential coupling of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a moduli dependent constant and @xmath , are chiral
multiplets of the low-energy effective theory, can only be present if
the associated quantum numbers fulfill a certain set of conditions, the
‘string selection rules’. Some of them have straightforward
interpretations in the effective field theory as gauge invariance and
@xmath -charge conservation. Additionally, it is required that the
string boundary conditions are such that they are consistent with string
interaction diagrams. The resulting constraint is often referred to as
the ‘space group selection rule’, it is sensitive to the localization
properties of the involved states.

#### 2.4.1 Gauge invariance and discrete @xmath-symmetry

Consider a term of @xmath fields, which arises from a superpotential
contribution ( 89 ) and couples two fermions to @xmath bosons. The
explicit form of the string vertex operators for such an interaction
then implies the following rules for the bosonic components of the
chiral multiplets @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (90)
     @xmath   @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Here the contributions from the multiplet @xmath are labeled by @xmath ,
and @xmath is the order of the sub-twist @xmath in the plane @xmath .

Equation ( 90 ) states gauge invariance of the superpotential.
Similarly, Equation ( 91 ) describes charge conservation of three
discrete @xmath -symmetries, acting as ⁹ ⁹ 9 Here no summation over
@xmath is implied.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

on chiral multiplets @xmath , where the @xmath are the bosonic @xmath
-charges that appear in ( 91 ), and @xmath denotes the Grassmannian
coordinates of four-dimensional superspace, transforming as @xmath . The
rule ( 91 ) can then be understood as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

whence the action @xmath is invariant under the three discrete @xmath
-transformations. Note that there is no continuous @xmath -symmetry in
the effective theory, as it is often assumed in field theoretical model
building.

As apparent from ( 92 ), the discrete @xmath -symmetries do not commute
with supersymmetry. This can also be seen from their definition ( 61 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

which implies a distinction between bosons and fermions in a multiplet.
Note that these @xmath -charges also appear in the transformation phase
( 73 ).

The @xmath -fold application of the transformation ( 93 ) together with
( 94 ) leads to a condition on the twist quantum numbers @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Since the appearing integers @xmath cannot be divisors of @xmath , this
implies the rule

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the order of the orbifold twist. The fact that this
well-known sum rule is related to the @xmath -symmetries was first noted
in [ 17 ] .

#### 2.4.2 Space group selection rule

A string interaction is only possible if the boundary conditions @xmath
associated to the @xmath in ( 89 ) multiply to the identity:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The conjugacy classes ( 21 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath and sub-lattices @xmath , which were introduced in ( 22 ).
This gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which we infer that ( 97 ) again gives the condition ( 96 ), and
additionally ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This follows from @xmath and invariance of ( 98 )
under @xmath for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This condition restricts the allowed contributions from different fixed
points to a superpotential coupling. It can thus be interpreted as a
constraint which is sensitive to localization properties of the involved
states on the orbifold geometry.

## 3 A local GUT in six dimensions

The phenomenological success of orbifold GUTs in five [ 31 , 32 ] or six
[ 34 , 33 ] dimensions was one of the main motivations to reconsider
orbifold compactifications of the heterotic string [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] ,
twenty years after their first proposal [ 30 ] . Here an effective
orbifold GUT of co-dimension two is described, which is associated with
an anisotropic orbifold compactification of the heterotic string [ 16 ]
.

The model which is presented here has the same geometry and gauge
embedding as the model [ 13 ] . The latter is an example for an
effective MSSM-like model in four dimensions, which follows from
compactifying the six internal dimensions of heterotic string theory on
a specific orbifold, with specific Wilson lines. It is a representative
of a full class of models, as discussed in [ 14 ] , its spectrum is
reviewed in Appendix E . Here we focus on the possibility that such an
orbifold compactification and the idea of supersymmetric grand
unification in the extra dimensions can be unified. This may be achieved
by assuming that one or two of the internal radii are considerably
larger than the others, yielding an anisotropic compactification [ 42 ]
. For heterotic orbifolds this is an attractive possibility to
incorporate higher-dimensional GUTs as an intermediate step of the
compactification [ 11 , 12 , 43 , 13 ] . In this picture, the GUT scale
is linked to the compactification scale of some large internal compact
dimensions. At the string scale, there is no effective field theory
limit and full string propagation on the ten-dimensional geometry has to
be considered.

In fact, there is some tension between the requirement that weakly
coupled heterotic string theory is applicable and precision gauge
coupling unification [ 43 ] . Here we shall assume that consistency with
this bound can be achieved in the present model ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 For related
work on this issue see [ 44 ] . , once the vacuum structure and the
stabilization mechanism are fully understood.

Apart from the phenomenological interest in the realization of a
supersymmetric GUT in higher dimensions within the framework of string
theory, the main benefit of our approach is a better understanding of
the structure of the model. This will then lead to a simplification of
the discussion of the vacuum (cf. Chapter 4 ), and it will provide a
link towards smooth Calabi–Yau compactifications without explicit
blow-ups (cf. Chapter 5 ).

### 3.1 The @xmath orbifold

We consider the compactification of six dimensions on the orbifold

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the two-dimensional root lattice ¹² ¹² 12
Throughout the work we will frequently use the term ‘ @xmath -plane’,
either referring to the two-torus @xmath or the corresponding
non-compact plane @xmath , depending on the context. of the Lie group
@xmath and we omit factors of @xmath . The action of the point group
@xmath is defined by the twist vector

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This orbifold was first suggested in [ 11 ] and became a widely studied
candidate for realistic model building [ 12 , 13 , 14 , 62 , 49 ] . Its
geometry is summarized in Figure 2 , the explicit lattice vectors are
given in Table 1 .

The most apparent property of the @xmath orbifold is the presence of
invariant tori under the sub-symmetries @xmath and @xmath , generated by

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (103a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (103b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

This shows that the @xmath - and the @xmath -plane are invariant under
the @xmath and the @xmath sub-twists, respectively. Consequently, states
which are localized in the @xmath -plane are bulk states in the @xmath
-plane, and vice-versa.

#### Fixed point structure

The geometry has 12 fixed points and 14 fixed tori, related to 44
sectors @xmath . Each of them corresponds to one of the twisted sectors
@xmath and is specified by the following labels:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                                                                   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (104a)
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                                          (104b)
        @xmath   @xmath                     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (104c)
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                                          (104d)
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (104e)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The localization of these fixed points is depicted in Figure 2 and
quantified in Table 2 , from which also the associated space group
elements can be inferred.

The number of different sectors coincides with the number of disjoint
conjugacy classes of the space group ¹³ ¹³ 13 We are grateful to
Christoph Lüdeling for pointing this out. . This follows from the
observation that the conjugacy class associated with an element @xmath
can be written as the product of all twists acting on the translation,
and the conjugacy class of the twist,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath collects all possible twists and @xmath denotes the @xmath
-th sub-lattice, defined in ( 22 ) and explicitly given in Table 3 . For
each @xmath , one can count the number of translations @xmath that
induce inequivalent sets and recover the above numbers.

Note that both the @xmath and the @xmath sub-twist act non-trivially on
the @xmath -plane. Fixed points of the covering space which are
invariant under only one of these twists are then mapped onto conjugated
fixed points by the other, cf. ( 24 ), ( 64 ). Since the string mode
expansions, which constitute the starting point of quantization, are
formulated in the covering space, conjugated fixed points give rise to
different Hilbert spaces. However, on the orbifold the two points agree
and the Hilbert spaces have to be united, as described in Section 2.3 .
Physical states are then superpositions of states at the different
conjugated fixed points. They are specified by quantum numbers @xmath
and take the form ( 68 ).

We illustrate this with the example of the non-trivial @xmath fixed
point in the @xmath -plane, labeled by @xmath . Table 2 specifies the
generating space group element @xmath and the coordinate @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath -th entry of the vector @xmath from
Table 1 . The action of @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

which does not lie inside the chosen fundamental domain of the orbifold.
This coordinate is the fixed point coordinate of the conjugated element
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (108)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- -------

Physical states are superpositions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

up to normalization. They are eigenstates of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

as discussed in ( 68 ). Similarly the @xmath fixed point gives three
eigenstates, with eigenvalues

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (111)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- -------

In summary, states with the same quantum number @xmath are localized at
the same point in the @xmath -plane of the orbifold. Furthermore, they
are grouped into two or three sub-classes of @xmath eigenstates,
specified by two or three possible eigenvalues @xmath in ( 109 ) or (
111 ), respectively.

The translational @xmath -phases under a transformation by @xmath for
the @xmath geometry are calculated in Appendix A.3 , with result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are independent integers. This directly corresponds to the
order of the lattice vector @xmath . For directions which are related by
symmetry transformations the entries coincide, in the case of unit order
of a lattice direction they have to be trivial.

Recall that @xmath and @xmath describe superpositions of states at fixed
points which are related to the constructing element @xmath by
translational and rotational conjugation, respectively, as apparent from
( 68 ). The phase which arises upon application of @xmath was given in (
69 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

For elements @xmath which commute with @xmath one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

such that the states @xmath have the property

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Also note that sub-lattice translations @xmath from Table 3 do not
contribute to the phase, @xmath . This is an important property, since
it has the consequence that it is sufficient to evaluate the consistency
condition for finitely many elements @xmath , which are representatives
of disjoint conjugacy classes.

As an example for the translational superposition, consider the fixed
point at the origin of the @xmath -plane. Its constructing element
@xmath does not commute with lattice translations in that plane, for
example

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The eigenstates of translations in the direction @xmath are then given
by the superpositions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with eigenvalues @xmath .

#### 3.1.1 The gauge embedding

For the gauge embedding ( 38 ) of the space group @xmath into the gauge
group @xmath , the independent Wilson lines have to be identified. They
correspond to the inequivalent lattice shifts contained in @xmath ,
which can be read off from the @xmath values in ( 112 ). There are no
Wilson lines in the @xmath -plane, one of order three in the @xmath
-plane, and two of order two in the @xmath -plane. We denote them by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are associated to the lattice vector @xmath , cf. ( 38
). The new subscripts @xmath correspond to the order @xmath of the
Wilson line.

Following [ 13 ] , we choose the gauge embedding

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (119a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (119b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (119c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (119d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this choice the strong modular invariance conditions ( 42 ) are
fulfilled.

The local shift vectors ( 57 ) for a fixed point element @xmath with
quantum numbers @xmath and @xmath can now be written in an economical
form,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

If @xmath corresponds to a fixed @xmath - or @xmath -torus, the above
formula applies with @xmath or @xmath , respectively.

The definition of the gauge embedding is the final input which is
necessary for the calculation of the spectrum. In summary, the model is
specified by the tori lattices (Table 1 ), from which the twist vector (
102 ) can be inferred, and the gauge embedding ( 119 ).

#### 3.1.2 Space group selection rules for interactions

The string selection rules for allowed superpotential couplings in the
general case were discussed in section 2.4 . While some of them have
straightforward interpretations in the effective field theory as gauge
invariance and @xmath -symmetry, this is not so clear for the space
group selection rule ( 100 ). For a coupling of @xmath chiral
multiplets,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with quantum numbers labeled by the index @xmath , it reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The sub-lattices that appear on the right hand side of this equation are
listed in Table 3 for the @xmath geometry.

The left hand side is determined by the number of states at a fixed
point @xmath , which can be represented by labels @xmath , cf. ( 104 ).

For the @xmath -plane, the sub-lattices @xmath do not coincide for all
choices of @xmath , cf. Table 3 . We thus consider each of them
separately. For @xmath , the sub-lattice @xmath and the root lattice of
@xmath are identical. Thus in that case there is no restriction from
space group selection rules; Equation ( 122 ) is always fulfilled.

If all states of a coupling are in the @xmath or @xmath sector, only the
sub-lattice @xmath appears, which implies a non-trivial condition for
the allowed combinations of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the number of
states that contribute to the coupling ( 121 ) and which are localized
at a fixed point of the @xmath -plane with the corresponding quantum
numbers. Inspection of Table 2 then gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This vector lies in @xmath if

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Similarly one can evaluate ( 122 ) for the case that all contributions
to a coupling come from the @xmath sector,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is in @xmath for

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In terms of the quantum numbers of the individual states, ( 124 ) and (
126 ) can be unified by the following rule:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that states with @xmath give no contribution to the sum since they
always have @xmath . We stress that the rule ( 127 ) only applies to
couplings which have the property that the contributing multiplets
either all come from @xmath and @xmath , or they all come from @xmath
and @xmath , or they all arise from @xmath . Any term with contributions
from at least two of these three branches will contain the sub-lattice
@xmath in the space group selection rule ( 122 ), which completely
covers the @xmath root lattice. In that case the rule ( 122 ) becomes
trivial and ( 127 ) does not apply.

A similar analysis is performed in Appendix A.2 for the @xmath - and the
@xmath -plane. In summary, the space group selection rules for a
coupling of @xmath multiplets are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These rules will be interpreted as discrete symmetries in the following
chapter.

### 3.2 The effective orbifold GUT

Effective orbifold GUTs can be derived from the heterotic string by
assuming that the six internal dimensions are compactified on an
anisotropic geometry. For the @xmath orbifold this can be realized by
taking some of the independent radii significantly larger than the
others. We now present the specific example which will then be studied
for the remainder of this paper. The main motivation for the work is to
understand more of the mechanisms behind the zero mode spectra and
couplings. If an intermediate effective GUT is realized in nature, the
knowledge of the details of a particular model can help to identify
generic features of such compactifications. The hope is that eventually
these may be related to testable predictions. However, orbifold models
appear to be rather ambiguous and first it is necessary to learn more
about their structure. On a technical level, the intermediate GUT
approach simplifies the discussion, since the local GUT model is
equipped with a larger symmetry than the four-dimensional effective
theory. We shall profit from that when we study the vacua of the model
in the next chapter.

#### 3.2.1 Anisotropic limits of orbifolds

The @xmath orbifold has four independent radii: One each for the @xmath
-plane and the @xmath -plane, and another two for the @xmath -plane.
Thus in principle many effective GUT models can be derived from this
geometry, with any dimension between five and ten. In each case the
anisotropy allows one to split the geometry into a small and a large
part (here embedded into six real dimensions),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . This leads to a specific spectrum, gauge group and number
of supersymmetry generators for the effective field theory on the @xmath
orbifold @xmath . The order @xmath of the effective orbifold is given by
the order of the @xmath twist in @xmath . The full list of possibilities
and the resulting bulk gauge groups is given in table D.13 of [ 13 ] .

The massless spectrum of the string on a given compact orbifold geometry
is independent of the size of the compactification. However, the masses
of the Kaluza-Klein modes will depend on the moduli that describe the
internal geometry. In the limit of infinite volume of @xmath , some of
these states become massless; they are zero modes of the
compactification of the small dimensions in @xmath , but not of the full
geometry @xmath at finite volume. In the effective intermediate model
@xmath , these states correspond to bulk states with odd boundary
conditions, which are projected out in the low-energy limit.

We derive the effective orbifold model in a two-step procedure:

1.  Treat @xmath effectively as flat space and compactify only the
    dimensions in @xmath on a compact geometry @xmath . In flat space
    all coordinates are independent, so the isometries of the latter
    coincide with the subset of the full space group @xmath which leaves
    @xmath invariant,

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (130)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    The resulting zero mode spectrum is the bulk spectrum of @xmath .

2.  For the local spectrum at a fixed point of @xmath , related to a
    space group element @xmath , calculate the zero modes of the full
    @xmath compactification to four dimensions which correspond to such
    a localization. These states should also be present in the
    anisotropic limit, and no new states should arise. For bulk states
    of the effective field theory, the corresponding local phase @xmath
    defines the behavior of the associated field under the local @xmath
    twist. Zero modes are then required to be compatible with all local
    boundary conditions, @xmath .

The latter requirement is indeed equivalent to the projection conditions
in the case of a one-step compactification to four dimensions. This
follows from the observation that arbitrary elements @xmath can be
decomposed into elements which represent the different twisted sectors.
Each of them has a unique description in terms of the labels @xmath , as
given in ( 104 ), and corresponds to a generating space group element,
which we choose as in Table 2 . With notation @xmath , where @xmath one
can write

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (131)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath runs over all 44 fixed point sectors. For a given @xmath
and the identification @xmath it is always possible to find an
appropriate set of exponents @xmath . For example,

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (132a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (132b)
     @xmath      @xmath      (132c)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Thus for any sector, the conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

are a reformulation of the projection conditions to the zero modes in
four dimensions. For the above bulk fields in the effective field theory
on @xmath , this statement coincides with the familiar orbifold boundary
conditions.

At intermediate scales between the compactification scales of the large
and the small dimensions of the anisotropic orbifold, the full string
compactification including all massive modes should be described by the
effective orbifold field theory on @xmath to good approximation. In the
following, we calculate the corresponding spectrum by solving

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (134a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (134b)
     @xmath      @xmath      (134c)
     @xmath      @xmath      (134d)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath correspond to one of the 44 fixed point sectors of the model
and @xmath are some representatives of the associated conjugacy classes.
Note that localized states as well as bulk states can arise from several
inequivalent sectors. Each of them has different phases @xmath and is
constrained by an independent set of conditions.

The last two conditions apply to bulk states and require that ( 134b )
is fulfilled simultaneously. If the projection ( 134c ) is evaluated for
all fixed point elements in the plane, the solutions are zero modes of
the orbifold.

Alternatively to the condition ( 134a ) for states localized at @xmath
in @xmath , which is the same as the projection to zero modes in four
dimensions, one could discuss the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

The difference to ( 134a ) is that there, compatibility with other fixed
point elements with localization in @xmath is required. This assigns the
corresponding translational phases @xmath to the states. One observes
that the assignment does commute with the four-dimensional gauge
symmetry, but not with the larger local gauge symmetries at the orbifold
fixed points. The reason for that is that precisely the lattice
translations which imply the difference between the local gauge
symmetries and the effective gauge symmetry in the low-energy limit are
also responsible for the choice of @xmath , for a state with given
charge vectors. However, what we are aiming at is an effective
description for the compactification of the string on a six-dimensional
orbifold, so the assignment cannot be avoided for a consistent
description. We conclude that the @xmath values in the directions of
@xmath are properties of the four-dimensional zero mode limit, rather
than quantum numbers of the local theory at a fixed point.

#### 3.2.2 Geometry of the effective GUT

Starting from the @xmath geometry, described in Section 3.1 , we now
propose an effective co-dimension two orbifold model. In the language of
( 129 ) it corresponds to the choice (we now switch back to complex
coordinates, but still label tori by their real dimension)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subscripts ‘large’ and ‘small’ refer to a scale comparable to
the GUT scale, and a much smaller scale, related to the string or the
Planck scale, respectively. The exact choice should eventually be
compatible with precision gauge coupling unification in the resulting
model, and the perturbative string description.

The @xmath twist contains a @xmath and a @xmath sub-twist, cf. ( 103 ),

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (137a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (137b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The entries @xmath correspond to rotations in the @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath -plane, respectively. The @xmath -plane is invariant under the
@xmath in @xmath , and we can thus understand the effective 6D orbifold
GUT limit as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Everything in the effective orbifold model is fixed by the underlying
@xmath model, specified by the twist ( 102 ) and the gauge embedding (
119 ). Note that the states at the fixed points of @xmath are invariant
under @xmath , while bulk states arise from modding out the @xmath
subgroup.

The effective @xmath orbifold is sketched in Figure 3 , where also the
non-vanishing Wilson line in the @xmath direction is indicated. This has
the effect of shifting the local embedding of the @xmath at the fixed
points with quantum number @xmath against the one at @xmath . Since
there is no second Wilson line in the @xmath direction, fixed points
with the same label @xmath are equivalent, in the sense that their
spectra are identical.

#### 3.2.3 Generic projection conditions

Every sector @xmath is characterized by a set of labels

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following we shall use the convention that @xmath either
corresponds to the untwisted sector, or to localization at the origin of
the @xmath -plane, cf. Figure 2 . We write

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath otherwise, which means if the localization in the @xmath
-plane is described by @xmath or @xmath . Furthermore, states which are
delocalized in the @xmath - or the @xmath -plane have @xmath or @xmath
in all formulae, respectively. This is a consequence of the trivial
sub-lattices for the states in these planes, which do not give rise to
superpositions.

A general @xmath is related to states which are characterized by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (141a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (141b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (141c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now aim to evaluate the projection condition @xmath for these states.
This we evaluate for all @xmath or from a relevant subset, for example
@xmath , defined in ( 130 ). The elements @xmath also have a specific
set of labels,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

associated with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (143a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (143b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (143c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In a first step, one can solve the condition for @xmath . This is a
non-trivial projection of all available states onto physical subsets of
charge vectors,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, one has to consider @xmath . In that case there may be a
non-trivial geometrical phase,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With ( 143 ) one finds from @xmath for @xmath , taken from a subset of
@xmath , that the additional geometric projection conditions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (146a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (146b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (146c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (146d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath that specify the considered elements @xmath . Invariance
under the full space group then corresponds to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (147a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (147b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (147c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (147d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that for bulk states in a plane the corresponding geometrical
quantum numbers @xmath are zero. This may imply further projection
conditions for the charge vectors @xmath , @xmath . Since localization
in the @xmath -plane requires @xmath , one always finds @xmath in our
model. We can thus completely ignore this quantum number in the
following. This is a consequence of the vanishing Wilson line @xmath ,
associated with the lattice vector @xmath .

The geometrical projection conditions fix the phases @xmath for physical
states. A sketch of this two-step projection procedure was given in ( 75
). The result states that non-trivial phases in translational
superpositions only appear if Wilson lines are present. On first sight,
the introduction of @xmath enlarges the physical Hilbert space since the
phases correspond to new eigenstates of the space group operators, which
are overseen if one restricts to the case of unit coefficients. This
larger multiplicity is then reduced by the consistency conditions in the
presence of Wilson lines, and in the end the number of solutions is not
increased due to the new phases. However, we stress that for orbifolds
with non-vanishing Wilson lines all geometrical phases are present and
take non-trivial values ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 If one is only interested in the
results for the spectrum, one can decide to ignore the translational
@xmath -phases for localized states from the start, and simultaneously
also the projection conditions for elements @xmath in a sector @xmath .
However, for bulk states one still requires the rules @xmath . This is
indeed a popular approach in the literature, cf. [ 13 , 14 , 49 ] . .

#### 3.2.4 The gravity sector

The gravity sector of the six dimensional effective theory consists of
the supergravity multiplet, a dilaton multiplet (also called tensor
multiplet) and gravitational moduli related to the four small compact
dimensions. All these states are uncharged under gauge symmetries and
arise from the untwisted sector. As discussed in section 2.3.4 , they
are of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and oscillator numbers @xmath . They correspond to
excitations associated to operators @xmath , respectively. The
right-moving momenta @xmath are constrained by the conditions ( 79 ), (
80 ), which state that the states have to be massless. Solutions for
@xmath take the form ( 82 ) and correspond to representations @xmath of
@xmath , the oscillators form another @xmath .

These states are now subject to the projection condition ( 134b ). It
has to be evaluated for all fixed point elements @xmath for which the
@xmath -plane is a fixed torus. These are the ones with @xmath , since
that property is related to the @xmath which leaves @xmath invariant.
Untwisted states have @xmath , and the conditions ( 146 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

First, consider solutions with excitations @xmath in the large planes,
@xmath . These operators will again transform in the vector
representation of the little group of the Lorentz group for the six
large dimensions. The latter is given by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the right-moving momenta are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the fermionic states correspond to a left-handed Weyl fermion in
six dimensions. Thus in total, one recovers the contents of the
supergravity multiplet and the dilaton multiplet in six dimensions [ 63
, 8 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (152a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (152b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the antisymmetric two-form, which can be split into
an anti-self-dual part @xmath and a self-dual part @xmath . These
contributions appear in the supergravity multiplet and the tensor
multiplet, respectively, where the latter multiplet contains also the
dilaton @xmath . The fermions are given by the gravitino @xmath in six
dimensions and the dilatino @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the number of bosonic degrees of freedom equals the number of
fermionic ones within each of these multiplets.

Second, the projection condition ( 149 ) also has solutions with
excitations in the internal directions,

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

For each of these pairs of choices for @xmath , the right-moving momenta
of four bosonic degrees of freedom and a right-handed Weyl fermion in
six dimensions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These @xmath represent the eight degrees of freedom that are contained
in one hypermultiplet in six dimensions ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This is twice the
content of a half-multiplet @xmath , cf. appendix B.7 of [ 8 ] . . Note
that the oscillator numbers of two states with opposite momenta
correspond to excitations in complex conjugated directions, @xmath . The
above solutions give rise to two hypermultiplets,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are related to excitations in the planes @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The associated eight bosonic degrees of freedom are the
two corresponding volume moduli and off-diagonal fluctuations of the
metric and the antisymmetric tensor. Note that there are no complex
structure moduli, since the geometry of the model is fixed to the
orbifold.

#### 3.2.5 Gauge vectors

The gauge symmetry in the six-dimensional bulk is identified by analysis
of the massless vector representations of the @xmath Lorentz
transformations, which survive the orbifold projection. These states
come from the untwisted sector and hence have @xmath . There are 16
Cartan generators which survive the projection, as it was the case for
@xmath , but with right-moving momenta restricted by ( 149 ),

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (156)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These @xmath vectors describe a vector multiplet in six dimensions [ 8 ]
.

Next, we find the states with the same right-moving momenta, but also
non-vanishing left-moving momenta @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The latter condition is the projection condition ( 134b ), @xmath ,
evaluated for fixed point elements @xmath which leave the @xmath -plane
invariant. Their local shift vectors were defined in ( 120 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus ( 158 ) is a set of six conditions on the vectors @xmath . They are
equivalent to two equations, @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath . The same
conditions follow from ( 146 ), with @xmath . There are @xmath
solutions,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the notation @xmath for @xmath subsequent entries of
zero.

The solutions ( 160 ) are a subset of the roots of @xmath . In fact,
they are the roots of a subgroup, whose embedding is a consequence of
the specific form of the shift vector and the Wilson line. We now
identify this subgroup by standard methods, as collected in Appendix B .
For that we isolate the simple roots @xmath among the above set of
left-moving momenta,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and read off the group from the corresponding Cartan matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (162)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Here the blank off-diagonal parts have zero entries. The Cartan matrices
can be understood as definitions of the corresponding Lie groups. We
conclude that the six-dimensional bulk theory has the gauge group

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The @xmath factors have to be present since the total number of
uncharged Cartan generators is unchanged by the orbifold projection
condition, cf. ( 156 ). For example, @xmath has rank five, and five
Cartan generators together with the 30 states from ( 160 ) form the
@xmath of @xmath , the adjoint representation. The remaining three
Cartan generators can only generate three additional @xmath ’s in the
visible sector (which means with origin in the first @xmath ).
Similarly, two extra @xmath ’s arise from the hidden sector (which means
with origin in the second @xmath ). The generators @xmath of the five
@xmath factors have to be orthogonal to the simple roots ( 3.2.5 ). We
choose a basis as specified in Table 4 , which also shows a number of
other Abelian factors that will become important later. The charge of a
state @xmath under one of these @xmath ’s with generator @xmath is then
calculated by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the vector of the 16 Cartan generators of @xmath .

Recalling that the @xmath vectors in ( 158 ) imply a transformation as a
vector multiplet in six dimensions, we have found the ingredients of a
Super-Yang-Mills theory in the bulk, with gauge group ( 163 ). Note that
the group factor @xmath is large enough to inherit all standard model
gauge fields.

#### Gauge vector projections

All gauge symmetry of the orbifold model has its origin in the vector
multiplet of @xmath , which arises from the untwisted sector. However,
at the orbifold fixed point the symmetry is generically reduced and some
of the bulk states are projected out. This is required since at fixed
points, supersymmetry is reduced and its breaking is related to the
orbifold twist, in complete analogy to the local breaking of the gauge
group.

For the fixed points @xmath of the effective GUT in @xmath , this
follows from the additional local projection conditions ( 134c ). Let
the elements @xmath which lead to a localization at @xmath be
characterized by labels @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Then the additional conditions ( 146 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we are only interested in states which after the projection form
vector multiplets at the fixed points, the remaining states will be
discussed later. Local gauge vector states fulfill the additional
constraint @xmath , with solutions

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The left-moving momenta are then constrained by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which has 50 solutions for @xmath and 28 for @xmath . They again can be
interpreted as simple roots of non-Abelian gauge groups, given in Table
5 .

The corresponding gauge groups are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (169)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the intersection in the visible sector contains the standard model
gauge group,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The Abelian factors have generators @xmath which are defined in Table 4
. Note that the inequivalent fixed points @xmath and @xmath share the
five @xmath factors from the bulk, but extend it by one more factor,
with generator denoted by @xmath or @xmath , respectively. The latter
are neither collinear nor orthogonal in @xmath weight space.

The spontaneous breakdown of all Abelian groups, except for hypercharge,
under the constraint of a quasi-realistic phenomenology is the topic of
the next chapter. Here we are interested in the spectrum of the model
and the transformation of physical states under the full gauge groups
given above.

In particular, we shall be interested in the @xmath GUT which arises at
the fixed points with @xmath . Even though the underlying orbifold model
[ 13 ] was designed to contain two generations of the standard model as
@xmath -plets of @xmath , as will be apparent later, the anisotropic
limit under consideration results in a local @xmath model. The breaking
to the standard model gauge group is due to the non-trivial Wilson line
@xmath , or in other words, due to the existence of a second pair of
inequivalent fixed points, corresponding to @xmath . Since that is the
only purpose of this second pair, and since it turns out that all matter
which is localized at these fixed points is exotic and has to be
decoupled, we do not expect that models with different Wilson lines
@xmath are fundamentally different in this class of compactifications.

#### 3.2.6 Matter states

Matter states @xmath are in general charged under all or some of the
generators associated with the relevant gauge group. We now describe how
these states can be combined into multiplets.

As summarized in Appendix B , a representation is fully specified by its
Dynkin labels @xmath , where @xmath is the total rank of the gauge group
@xmath . The vector @xmath arises from multiplication of the weight
@xmath with the simple roots @xmath , taken from ( 3.2.5 ) in the case
of bulk states or from Table 5 for localized states. We evaluate the
Cartan--Weyl labels @xmath for arbitrary weights, defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Dynkin labels of a representation are then given by the vector
@xmath of the highest weight state. Our approach here is to calculate
@xmath for all present states, and then identify the ones which belong
to the same representation of the relevant gauge group.

The @xmath are integer numbers. Recall that every simple root @xmath is
associated with a specific @xmath subgroup of the gauge group, which can
be associated with raising and lowering operators. The fact that all
these @xmath factors are interrelated is encoded in the off-diagonal
entries of the Cartan matrix @xmath . The labels @xmath can then be
understood as the number of times the lowering operator (or raising
operator for @xmath ) which corresponds to @xmath can be applied to the
state, before it gives zero. The action of these operators on a state
@xmath is given by subtracting (or adding) column number @xmath of the
Cartan matrix, which we denote as @xmath . In summary, a representation
of dimension @xmath consists of @xmath states ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The adjoint
representation is an exception, since the Cartan generators are not
covered by the presented method. In that case, @xmath has to be replaced
by the dimension of the group minus its rank. with labels @xmath , which
are related by the action of @xmath . A sketch of this relation is given
in Figure 4 . A simple example is the @xmath of @xmath ,

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      (173)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

Similarly, we now calculate the representations that make up the sets
@xmath , which we obtain from solving the projection conditions for bulk
matter and localized states.

#### Bulk matter from the untwisted sector

Not all states from the untwisted sector are contained in vector
multiplets. The projection conditions @xmath for states with @xmath then
give rise to hypermultiplets in six dimensions. With elements @xmath
determined by the quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
the conditions ( 146 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath for untwisted states was used. The conditions (
174 ) have 384 solutions @xmath , which form 48 hypermultiplets with
right-moving momenta @xmath as in ( 154 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

As described above, one can now calculate the labels @xmath by
evaluating Equation ( 172 ) for each of the appearing left-moving
momenta @xmath . For example, consider @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The resulting @xmath is the Dynkin label of the @xmath of @xmath . In
fact, there are exactly 19 other non-trivial @xmath vectors with respect
to the simple roots of @xmath among the 48 solutions, which transform as
expected and complete the representation. We can now also calculate the
five @xmath charges of the multiplet. According to ( 164 ) this is done
by multiplying the vector @xmath from ( 176 ) with the generators @xmath
, from Table 4 , with result

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We have thus found a hypermultiplet @xmath of @xmath , with charge
vector @xmath . The charge conjugated states have momenta @xmath , and
therefore inverted @xmath charges, @xmath .

The 28 remaining @xmath vectors can be treated similarly. In summary,
the untwisted matter states @xmath are given by combinations of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the vector representation @xmath of @xmath with Dynkin labels
@xmath appears, as well as the two spinor representations @xmath , with
Dynkin labels @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The corresponding @xmath
charges of the states can be inferred from Table 6 .

#### Bulk matter from the twisted sectors

We now consider bulk states @xmath of @xmath which are localized in
@xmath . They correspond to twisted sectors, which are generated by
space group elements @xmath with @xmath , cf. Table 2 . The localization
of the states on the orbifold is specified by the labels

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

Additionally, states at @xmath have the geometrical quantum numbers
@xmath and @xmath , specified by integers @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.

The projection condition for bulk states ( 134b ) requires @xmath for
all fixed point elements @xmath which leave @xmath invariant. Here we
follow the two-step projection procedure presented in section 3.2.3 . We
first solve the condition ( 144 ) for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For all @xmath from ( 180 ), this in total gives 6480 massless
solutions. They form 810 hypermultiplets, which transform under the
non-Abelian gauge group @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath                        (182)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath                        (183)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , for @xmath , respectively. Here the overall
multiplicities arise from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , or
@xmath otherwise.

However, according to ( 134b ) consistent bulk states are additionally
constrained by @xmath , for other fixed point elements @xmath . They
also arise from the twisted sectors @xmath and @xmath , and have @xmath
, @xmath . This leads to the additional projection condition ( 146 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For a given vector @xmath that is a solution of ( 181 ), this condition
specifies the superposition in the @xmath sub-lattice which is
compatible with the orbifold symmetries, cf. ( 75 ). Thus the
multiplicity of three in ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.2 ) which is related to @xmath
is reduced to one. For each multiplet, one value of @xmath is selected
by ( 184 ).

Note that there is no similar restriction as ( 184 ) on the rotational
superposition quantum number @xmath in this sector, neither do new
constraints for the @xmath -charges arise.

In total, we have found 270 hypermultiplets from the @xmath and @xmath
twisted sectors, which are bulk states of the six-dimensional effective
theory. Their quantum numbers and gauge charges are summarized in Table
7 .

#### Matter states at @xmath

We now consider matter states from a sector @xmath which are localized
at the fixed point @xmath in the large plane @xmath . These are massless
states ( 79 ), ( 80 ), which fulfill the projection conditions ( 134a ),

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (185)
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- -------

These states are also zero modes in four dimensions. The representative
space group element @xmath , which characterizes the localized states,
can be chosen as in Table 2 . It is defined by the labels @xmath , with
@xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The corresponding states @xmath involve superposition quantum numbers
@xmath which are specified by integers @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

such that @xmath .

The above conditions can be solved by the two-step procedure of Section
3.2.3 . First, one solves for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and finds 3872 solutions, forming 968 chiral multiplets. These enormous
numbers include multiplicities of three and four for @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, related to the constants @xmath from ( 187 ). We expect
that this multiplicity is reduced by the additional constraints ( 147 )
due to @xmath . These conditions are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and indeed, for each solution they select specific values for the
superposition quantum numbers @xmath . However, for @xmath the value of
@xmath is fixed to zero by ( 187 ), and a projection condition for
@xmath arises from the above:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that for @xmath the value of @xmath is also fixed, but in that case
( 189 ) is identical to the projection condition ( 188 ), and not a new
constraint.

With the full set of consistency conditions, 88 chiral multiplets
survive at fixed points with @xmath . Recall from Figure 3 that there
are two equivalent fixed points with @xmath in the geometry. Since there
is no Wilson line in the direction @xmath , their spectra are identical
and thus consist of 44 chiral multiplets each. Up to the value for
@xmath , they form complete gauge representations with respect to the
local gauge group ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 @xmath is a quantum number of the
four-dimensional theory and not of the local @xmath GUT, since the
simple root @xmath from Table 5 is not orthogonal to @xmath , cf. the
discussion below ( 135 ). , as listed in Table 8 . All listed states
also appear in the four-dimensional zero mode spectrum. The latter was
already studied in [ 13 ] . Appendix E repeats the findings in our
notation, including the translational superposition quantum numbers
@xmath .

The most striking feature of the local spectrum is the appearance of one
complete standard model quark-lepton generation at each of the two fixed
points with @xmath . Recall from ( 169 ) that the local non-Abelian
gauge group at these points is the unifying group @xmath in the visible
sector. The only contribution with @xmath to the spectrum with respect
to that group is

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (192a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (192b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes a right-handed neutrino and @xmath is a family
index. The third generation is combined from bulk states, as discussed
in the next chapter.

#### Matter states at @xmath

The fixed points with localization label @xmath play the role of ‘hidden
branes’ in our model. This is meant in the sense that it is physically
separated from the GUT fixed point, and all degrees of freedom which are
localized there are exotics and have to be decoupled from the low-energy
spectrum. The states at these fixed points are determined by the Wilson
line @xmath , whose main purpose is to break the gauge group to the
standard model gauge group in the low-energy limit. It has no direct
effect on the spectrum at the @xmath GUT fixed point. However, it does
influence the zero modes of bulk fields and hence cannot be chosen
arbitrarily for a valid phenomenology.

Here we take the viewpoint that there is much less to learn from the
hidden brane than from the physical one. Once the details there are
understood satisfactorily, we expect that a further adjustment of @xmath
can lead to further improvements.

In the following we shall thus restrict our attention mainly to the bulk
and the GUT fixed points, characterized by @xmath . However, for the
sake of completeness the spectrum at the hidden brane for the chosen
gauge embedding ( 119 ) is given in Appendix D . Here we just state the
presence of exotics with non-vanishing charges under the electroweak
@xmath and the hypercharge @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (193)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

It is known that these states can be decoupled from the effective theory
in four dimensions [ 13 ] . We assume that this is also possible in the
situation discussed in this work, but do not study this issue any
further.

#### 3.2.7 The effective orbifold GUT field theory

In the previous sections, bulk and brane states on the geometry @xmath
were calculated by solving the string mass equations and the relevant
orbifold projection conditions. The assumption behind this construction
was that the @xmath -plane is much larger than the @xmath - and @xmath
-planes, whose scale is given by the string scale in our setup. Below
that scale, one then has the effective description in terms of an
orbifold field theory on @xmath . Note that the introduction of
six-dimensional fields goes beyond the zero mode description and
includes Kaluza-Klein modes of the two large compact dimensions.

All states which were found before are now interpreted as states which
arise from corresponding fields on the six-dimensional space @xmath .
For the @xmath vector and hypermultiplets of the six-dimensional bulk we
shall find it convenient to use a decomposition into @xmath multiplets [
64 ]

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (194)
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (195)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath transforms in the adjoint representation of the bulk gauge
group ( 163 ), and @xmath as a multiplet from Tables 6 , 7 . The gauge
interaction Lagrangian in the six-dimensional bulk can then be written
as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (196)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath are the charge conjugated fields.

The @xmath orbifold projection conditions at the fixed points @xmath in
the @xmath -plane can now be formulated for the above bulk fields. For
@xmath and a coordinate @xmath in @xmath one has

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The local projection condition at @xmath for a generic bulk field @xmath
is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (198)
     @xmath   @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for untwisted fields is understood. The above phase @xmath
has to be evaluated for the quantum numbers of the states associated
with the field @xmath . It follows from evaluating the condition ( 134c
) for the bulk states with @xmath , and @xmath , as found before. The
corresponding projected matter states at the fixed point with @xmath are
given in Tables 10 , 11 and 12 . A similar projection to the fixed
points with @xmath is done in Appendix Projection of bulk states .

The local parities of the vector fields with respect to the local @xmath
twists are summarized in table 9 . This demonstrates how gauge symmetry
breaking and supersymmetry breaking are linked. Consider for example the
@xmath of @xmath , the adjoint representation. In the six-dimensional
bulk, the corresponding degrees of freedom can be expressed by a
four-dimensional @xmath vector multiplet @xmath and a chiral multiplet
@xmath , cf. ( 194 ). The parities in Table 9 now state that either the
vector multiplet or the chiral multiplet survive the projection to one
of the fixed points. Since at @xmath the gauge symmetry is broken to
@xmath , with adjoints @xmath , this implies the presence of two
additional chiral multiplets whose origin lies in the six-dimensional
gauge sector,

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (200)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

These fields will play an important role in the discussion of the
phenomenology of the model in the next chapter. The term ‘gauge-Higgs
unification’ describes a situation where these two fields are
interpreted as the two Higgs multiplets of a supersymmetric @xmath GUT
at @xmath . Note that they have four-dimensional zero modes which
transform as weak doublets, so they may be suitable. If only one of them
is associated with a Higgs multiplet, one refers to that as ‘partial
gauge-Higgs unification’. As we shall see, the interpretation of
multiplets as Higgs or matter fields is a question of the choice of
vacuum of the scalar potential.

### 3.3 Anomaly cancelation

The effective orbifold GUT field theory which was developed in the last
sections is a complicated interacting theory. Additionally to the
supergravity multiplet, the dilaton multiplet and the 76 vector
multiplets, there are 320 hypermultiplets in the six-dimensional bulk,
and 136 localized chiral multiplets. All fields participate in the
gravitational interaction. Furthermore, the theory has local gauge
symmetry which contains non-Abelian and Abelian factors, and the matter
fields are in general charged under both the visible and the hidden
sector @xmath ’s.

The statement that the associated quantum theory is consistent up to its
cutoff at the string scale is highly non-trivial. Here we explicitly
check that all anomalies vanish or can be canceled by the Green–Schwarz
mechanism [ 65 ] . This shows that the spectrum of the effective GUT
model as derived from the heterotic string leads to a consistent gauge
theory at the quantum level. Furthermore, an important outcome of the
calculation is the presence of two distinct anomalous @xmath factors at
the inequivalent fixed points. They exactly add to a single anomalous
@xmath in the effective four-dimensional model, as it was found in [ 13
] .

Here we do not give a broad review of the topic of anomalies, but
restrict to a brief introduction. The interested reader is referred to [
66 , 67 ] for more details and further references.

A quantum field theory with classical action @xmath and a symmetry
transformation @xmath with parameter @xmath is anomalous if its one-loop
effective action @xmath is not invariant under the symmetry,

  -- -- -- -------
           (201)
  -- -- -- -------

In gauge theories, the loss of gauge invariance due to an anomaly is
accompanied by the loss of unitarity and renormalizability, and
therefore the available description as a quantum field theory breaks
down. It is thus a standard requirement for field theoretical model
building that the spectrum has to be anomaly-free. This requirement also
applies to string theory in ten dimensions. String theories are as well
anomaly free by construction, and since our effective model is derived
from one of them we shall benefit from this fact also in six dimensions.

Anomalies are known and studied since the end 1960’s, and they have had
important impact on the understanding of the standard model. Pion to
photon decays could only be consistently described after the discovery
of the chiral anomaly [ 68 ] , also other hadronic and semileptonic
decays as well as meson masses [ 69 ] and the QCD @xmath problem [ 70 ]
are related to anomalies. Note that these refer to global symmetries,
such as the axial symmetry in QCD, and do not harm the quantum
consistency of the standard model. With respect to its local symmetries,
the latter is anomaly-free.

In general, anomalies can arise in any model with even dimensions. They
are a consequence of the presence of Weyl fermions, which have a
non-invariant measure of integration in the path integral [ 71 ] .
Additionally, in @xmath dimensions gravitational anomalies may appear,
related to local coordinate transformations. Their complete calculation
was done in [ 72 ] . In six dimensions, we thus have to deal with both
types of anomalies, and also combinations of gauge and gravitational
anomalies appear, called mixed anomalies.

Anomalies in @xmath dimensions can be related to divergent one-loop
Feynman diagrams with @xmath external gauge boson legs and chiral
fermions running in the loop. In four dimensions the relevant diagram is
the triangle diagram, in six dimensions it is the box diagram, as shown
in Figure 5 . These diagrams are divergent and the anomaly is related to
the finite part of the corresponding expressions.

#### 3.3.1 The Stora–Zumino descent relations

For local symmetries, the transformation parameter @xmath in ( 201 ) is
space-time dependent. Furthermore, it takes values in the Lie-algebra of
the symmetry group. Thus two successive transformations have to be
compatible with the corresponding non-Abelian group structure:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This basic requirement implies the Wess–Zumino consistency relations [
69 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and an anomaly is called consistent if this relation holds. The general
solution in even dimensions @xmath for an arbitrary local symmetry can
be deduced from the Stora--Zumino descent relations [ 73 ] , which will
also be the main tool for the calculation of the anomalies in the
six-dimensional orbifold model under investigation. They read ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18
The following results are obtained in Euclidean space. It is expected
that they can be Wick-rotated to Minkowski space.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and will be explained in the following.

The main observation is that they relate the anomaly @xmath in @xmath
dimensions to a @xmath -form @xmath . This @xmath -form is a gauge
invariant function of the field strength @xmath and the curvature @xmath
. In fact, it describes the chiral anomaly in @xmath dimensions [ 74 ]
and can be calculated by topological methods. This means that the
quantity @xmath is known, and the appearing invariants can be evaluated
for the given spectrum.

Chiral anomalies in @xmath dimensions arise from Dirac fermions @xmath ,
in contrast to the local gauge and gravitational anomalies, that we are
originally interested in. The latter rely on the presence of Weyl
fermions. The chiral anomaly corresponds to global chiral
transformations of the Dirac spinors, generated by the chirality matrix
@xmath . It has the classically conserved current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an euclidean space-time index and @xmath labels the
states of the gauge representation @xmath of @xmath . This current is
not conserved in the quantum theory,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is identical to the statement that the chiral symmetry is
anomalous. The quantity on the right hand side can then be related to
topological quantities of the gauge bundle and the tangent bundle, which
are associated with gauge and gravitational interactions [ 72 ] . They
are constructed from the Yang-Mills field strength and the Riemann
curvature two-form,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (207)
     @xmath   @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the gauge and spin connection,
respectively. Note that matrix indices were suppressed, @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath label states of the gauge representation @xmath ,
and @xmath correspond to the vector representation of the Lorentz group
in @xmath dimensions. For the case of spin @xmath the chiral anomaly is
expressed by the product of the Chern character @xmath and the Dirac
genus @xmath . One can then obtain the result for @xmath from a power
series expansion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (209a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (209b)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (209c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath denotes the trace evaluated in the representation @xmath of
dimension @xmath , and wedge products are understood. Similar
expressions arise for fermions of higher spins. By the use of the
Stora–Zumino relations ( 204 ) one can now calculate the gauge and
gravitational anomalies in @xmath dimensions from the above result for
the chiral anomaly in @xmath dimensions. However, the analogy between
the two anomalies holds up to a minus sign, which is related to the
chirality of the fermions on the side of the gauge and gravitational
anomaly. Furthermore, the total @xmath -form is the sum of the
contributions of all fermions in the spectrum. We will now evaluate the
corresponding anomalies for the six-dimensional model of interest.

#### 3.3.2 The bulk anomaly polynomial

In six dimensions, the gauge and gravity anomalies (cf. [ 35 , 75 ] )
can be deduced from an eight-form, studied in [ 76 , 77 , 78 ] . It is
convenient to introduce the anomaly polynomial @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

since the factor @xmath appears throughout the calculation. The result (
209 ) corresponds to the contribution of a single fermion of spin @xmath
. In total, the anomaly polynomial arises from the sum of all fermionic
contributions,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the multiplicity of the representation @xmath of
the bulk hypermultiplets. Note that the effect from the self-dual
antisymmetric two-form @xmath is canceled by the terms due to its
anti-self dual partner, @xmath , so they do not appear in the anomaly
polynomial. The different signs for the contributions of the dilatino
and the hyperinos as compared to the gravitino and the gauginos stem
from the fact that they have opposite 6d chirality, cf. ( 151 ), ( 157
), ( 175 ).

For the spin @xmath gravitino, the contribution to the anomaly
polynomial is [ 72 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and therefore the sum of all purely curvature dependent terms is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath counts the total number of gauginos, and @xmath the number
of hyperinos in the six-dimensional bulk. This demonstrates that the
gravitational @xmath anomaly cancels in the model. This is a necessary
requirement, since there are no alternative mechanisms to the direct
cancelation, for example by additional counter terms. Anomalies with
that property are called ‘irreducible’, in contrast to reducible ones
which can for example be canceled by the Green–Schwarz mechanism, which
will be discussed later.

All remaining terms in the anomaly polynomial involve traces over the
representation indices of powers of the field strength two-forms. Recall
that the bulk gauge group is given by ( 163 ). Let @xmath and @xmath
label the non-Abelian and the Abelian gauge factors, respectively,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (214)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

One can then convert all traces @xmath into expressions proportional to
the trace in the fundamental representation, denoted as @xmath . This is
summarized in Table 13 for @xmath and @xmath , which collects trace
identities as given in [ 77 , 78 ] .

According to ( 209a ), the anomaly polynomial for the spin 1/2 fermions
is given by all combinations of terms from ( 209b ) and ( 209c ) which
lead to an eight form. We can collect them into expressions @xmath ,
where @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (215)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The number of hyperinos in the representation @xmath is denoted as
@xmath . From Tables 6 and 7 one can read off

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which implies the numerous cancelations denoted above. They are
necessary for a consistent model, since the corresponding anomalies are
irreducible.

What remains to be studied are the contributions to the anomaly
polynomial which involve @xmath factors, denoted as @xmath and @xmath
above. They can be parametrized by constants @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (218a)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (218b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the field strength two-form which is associated with the
canonically normalized generator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the literature, to our knowledge only cases with a single Abelian
factor were studied (for example in [ 77 ] ). However, the bulk spectrum
of the orbifold model derived before has five @xmath factors, which
leads to a complication of the analysis. Especially the cancelation of
the related anomalies by the Green–Schwarz mechanism is a non-trivial
check of the consistency of the model, as will be discussed later. Due
to its technical nature we evaluate the (partly) Abelian traces in
Appendix C.1 , and directly state the result:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (220a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (220b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (220c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (220d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a symmetry factor, which is one if all its variables are
distinct, and equal to the number of possibilities to assign the
identical labels to the four @xmath ’s otherwise. Furthermore, @xmath is
a symmetric @xmath matrix,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

demonstrating that the model has non-trivial (partly) Abelian anomalies
in the bulk. However, as we will demonstrate in the next section, all
anomalies can be canceled by a classical term in the action.

Summarizing the results ( 213 ), ( 216 ) and ( 218 ) with ( 220 ), the
total remaining anomaly polynomial in the six-dimensional bulk is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with vector notation @xmath for the Abelian field strength two-forms.

#### 3.3.3 Anomaly polynomials at fixed points

Similarly to the bulk case, we can now evaluate the anomaly polynomials
@xmath which are related to the spectra at the fixed points, labeled by
@xmath . In that case two dimensions are fixed. Hence the localized
fields only propagate in four dimensions and the anomaly polynomial is a
six-form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath follows from ( 209 ).

Following the same program as before, it can be parametrized as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are coefficients, and @xmath and @xmath label the
non-Abelian and the Abelian factors at the fixed point, respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The coefficients in ( 224 ) are determined in Appendix C.2 , with
results

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (226)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath                        (227)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote field strength two-forms associated with
the canonically normalized generators @xmath and @xmath , whose
non-canonically normalized versions can be found in Table 4 . They are
linear combinations of the local @xmath factors,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (228)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

All generators of the Abelian groups in ( 226 ) and ( 3.3.3 ) are chosen
orthogonal to each other, furthermore the generators @xmath and @xmath
correspond to one of the indices @xmath and the corresponding
contributions also appear inside the bracket.

The above vectors @xmath and @xmath are the generators of the local
anomalous @xmath ’s at the inequivalent fixed points @xmath and @xmath .
We stress that they are neither collinear nor orthogonal. It is an
interesting observation that the model provides two different anomalous
@xmath factors, localized at different fixed points, since it is a
well-known fact that there can be at most one anomalous @xmath in the
four-dimensional low-energy theory, after compactification of six
dimensions of heterotic string theory. However, this is not contradicted
by our findings. Summing over the zero modes, one finds that there is
only one anomalous @xmath in the effective four-dimensional theory, with
generator [ 13 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is given by the sum of the localized anomalous generators, weighted
by the size of the anomalous traces.

#### 3.3.4 Green–Schwarz anomaly cancelation in six dimensions

The Green--Schwarz mechanism originally refers to string derived
supergravities in ten dimensions [ 65 ] . It states that models with an
anomalous spectrum can be anomaly free, due to the variation of counter
terms in the action which are related to an antisymmetric tensor field.
This is a remarkable statement, since it means that a one-loop quantum
effect is balanced by a classical term in the action. The
six-dimensional version of the mechanism is studied in [ 77 , 79 , 67 ]
. Here we closely follow [ 66 ] , for the special case of six
dimensions.

In our model, the antisymmetric two-form is called @xmath and arises
from the gravitational sector, cf. ( 152 ). Its kinetic term is
determined by the three-form field strength

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a dimensionless parameter. The introduction of the
three-form @xmath is necessary if @xmath transforms inhomogeneously
under gauge transformations ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Here and everywhere else in this
work, @xmath unifies gauge transformations and diffeomorphisms. In the
following we refer to the combined transformations as gauge
transformations. ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath was introduced since it will appear in calculations soon.
Thus the extra term in the definition of the field strength @xmath in (
231 ) is responsible for invariance of the latter under local symmetry
transformations.

The Green–Schwarz action in six dimensions is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are parameters and @xmath is a four-form, related to @xmath
and another two-form @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The above action is not invariant under gauge transformations. One can
calculate the variation as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where partial integration was used. The action ( 233 ) can thus cancel
the anomalous variation of the quantum contribution to the effective
action @xmath , if the anomaly is described by @xmath , where @xmath
takes the form which appears in the bracket.

This is the case if it descents from an eight form which factorizes into
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a free parameter and all field strengths are treated
symmetrically.

Now reconsider the anomaly polynomial ( 3.3.2 ), which we found for the
bulk theory in our model. It can be factorized as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and thus we have shown that all anomalies either cancel among
themselves, or are canceled by the variation of the Green–Schwarz action
( 233 ).

In fact, the coefficients @xmath in the first bracket are generic and
related to the dual Coxeter number of the gauge group [ 77 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (238)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where the latter corresponds to canonical normalization of the @xmath
generator, as in ( 219 ). The second factor in ( 237 ) carries model
dependent information, condensed into the matrix @xmath . Note that the
identification of the factors @xmath also determines the classical
action ( 233 ) of the antisymmetric tensor field @xmath , as well as its
gauge transformation ( 232 ), up to two free constants @xmath .

#### 3.3.5 Green–Schwarz anomaly cancelation on the orbifold

So far we have demonstrated that the bulk theory of the effective
orbifold GUT field theory is a consistent gauge theory with respect to
quantum fluctuations. However, at the fixed points additional matter is
generated, originating from twisted sectors, and the local consistency
of the spectrum remains to be checked.

The Green--Schwarz action ( 233 ) can be extended to include fixed
points @xmath , associated with delta-functions @xmath and local
two-forms @xmath [ 66 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are two dimensionless parameters which may be
chosen arbitrarily without affecting the anomaly cancelation mechanism.
The variation of this action contains local contributions,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath was defined before in ( 235 ), and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The action ( 3.3.5 ) is thus suitable for the cancelation of reducible
anomalies with an anomaly polynomial of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The factorization of the bulk anomaly polynomial was discussed in the
previous section, with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

At the fixed points some of the field strength forms vanish due to the
boundary conditions of the fields. The localized anomalies from ( 226 )
and ( 3.3.3 ) thus only contain a projection of this factor,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (244)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath                        (245)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the definitions of the @xmath factors are different here, as
discussed below ( 3.3.3 ).

We have thus shown that all anomalies of the model cancel. Either among
the fields of the spectrum, in the case of irreducible anomalies, or by
classical counter terms, in the case of reducible anomalies. With
respect to quantum corrections, the model is a consistent gauge field
theory on an orbifold in six dimensions.

## 4 Vacua and phenomenology

The six-dimensional GUT model, as discussed so far, does not describe
the visible world. It is obvious that it contains many exotic particles,
which are inconsistent with observations. Furthermore, even though all
anomalies are canceled by a bulk field, the non-vanishing traces of
anomalous @xmath factors imply that supersymmetry is broken radiatively
by induced Fayet–Iliopoulos @xmath -terms at a large scale [ 46 ] , if
the vacuum expectation values of all fields are zero. What was described
in the last chapter thus cannot be a stable vacuum solution of a
compactification of perturbative string theory, which should be
supersymmetric. One rather expects the presence of a tachyonic direction
in the effective potential which drives the system towards its physical
vacuum.

The main point of this chapter is to establish a relation between the
unbroken symmetries in this new vacuum, which are mainly discrete
symmetries, and the interactions in the effective GUT theory. The latter
arise from higher-dimensional operators, after integrating out singlet
fields. The symmetries will guide us to an algorithm which determines
vacuum configurations with the property that phenomenologically
disfavored couplings are forbidden to all orders in the singlet fields,
as long as supersymmetry is unbroken. This result and its application to
the @xmath -term [ 17 ] is reviewed in Sections 4.5 and 4.6 .
Furthermore, Section 4.7 discusses the reverse argument, namely the
generation of the superpotential terms to all orders in the singlets, in
a given vacuum.

The abovementioned problems, the presence of exotics and supersymmetry
breaking Fayet–Iliopoulos terms @xmath , are by no means specific to our
model. They generically arise in orbifold compactifications of the
heterotic string. The usual approach to overcoming them is to assume
expectation values of singlet fields, thereby guessing the location of
the supersymmetric vacuum in the potential,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (246)
     @xmath         (247)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

However, due to the size of the supersymmetry breaking @xmath -term this
new vacuum is not necessarily nearby the origin, and it is not clear
that the findings from the false vacuum can be extrapolated. This worry
is linked to the observation that vacuum expectation values of localized
fields imply a resolution of the orbifold singularities (cf. [ 51 , 40 ,
52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 ] ). The orbifold result, shifted to a vacuum
remote from the origin, may then correspond to an effective description
of a compactification on a smooth manifold. Here we shall take the
optimistic viewpoint that orbifolds, even after the transition to the
supersymmetric vacuum, are a first-order approximation to the results
one would obtain in a fully dynamical calculation, if the latter was
doable.

We therefore now turn to the study of possibly interesting physical
vacua of the model at hand, and return to the issue of contact with
smooth geometries in the following chapter. Here our analysis is guided
by phenomenological requirements. We thus hope to reveal some of its
mechanisms which determine the role of the various fields in the
spectrum. We furthermore hope to understand the presence or absence of
couplings among the fields of the local GUT theory, and consequently
also of the low-energy zero modes.

### 4.1 The @xmath GUT superpotential

The effective orbifold GUT in six dimensions which was derived in the
previous chapter contains fixed points with @xmath gauge symmetry,
localized and bulk-projected matter. What we are aiming at in this
chapter is the construction of a viable local @xmath GUT theory at these
fixed points. For that it is instructive to recall the ingredients and
interactions of standard @xmath GUTs.

The group @xmath was the first simple group which was suggested for
grand unification ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 The first proposal for extended gauge
symmetry by Pati and Salam was based on a non-simple Lie group [ 80 ] ,
corresponding to three independent gauge couplings. , by Georgi and
Glashow in 1974 [ 24 ] , and it is somehow the simplest choice. In the
following we will need its supersymmetric version, therefore we
associate every gauge multiplet with a chiral multiplet of @xmath
supersymmetry in four dimensions.

One matter generation consists of one antisymmetric tensor
representation of rank two and one anti-fundamental representation,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (248a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (248b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the decomposition is given with respect to the standard model
gauge group @xmath . Note that the right-handed neutrino is not
automatically included and has to be added as an extra singlet. This is
in contrast to the GUT group @xmath [ 25 ] , where a single @xmath
contains the above matter as well as the right-handed neutrino, @xmath .

In addition to the matter fields two Higgs multiplets are required for
the generation of masses for the standard model particles,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (249a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (249b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the fact that the exotic triplet and anti-triplet have to be
decoupled from the low-energy theory is the doublet-triplet splitting
problem. In orbifold models it is solved by the fact that the exotics
have odd boundary conditions, while the doublets correspond to zero
modes in four dimensions.

In the language of @xmath supersymmetry, interactions are then expressed
by the superpotential

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we included dimension-five operators but no higher
non-renormalizable couplings. @xmath and @xmath yield the well known
renormalizable baryon (B) and lepton (L) number violating interactions,
and the coefficients @xmath and @xmath of the dimension-five operators
are usually obtained by integrating out states with masses @xmath .

In supergravity theories also the expectation value of the
superpotential is important since it determines the gravitino mass. One
expects

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

if the scale @xmath of electroweak symmetry breaking is related to
supersymmetry breaking.

Experimental bounds on the proton lifetime and lepton number violating
processes imply

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, one has to accommodate the hierarchy between the
electroweak scale and the GUT scale, @xmath . On the other hand, lepton
number violation should not be too much suppressed, since @xmath yields
the right order of magnitude for neutrino masses.

Convincing realizations of the above bounds can be found from symmetry
arguments. Exact symmetries completely forbid the presence of couplings,
while ‘mildly broken’ symmetries induce ‘approximate symmetries’ [ 50 ]
and may lead to sufficient suppression.

Dimension-four proton decay operators can be forbidden by ‘matter
parity’ [ 81 ] , which arises as an unbroken @xmath subgroup of @xmath
in the standard model. This mechanism can be lifted to the @xmath GUT
description by the extension of the symmetry by the additional Abelian
factor @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -- -------

with charge assignments

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -- -------

This symmetry has the consequence @xmath . Together with the hypercharge
in @xmath it yields @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The wanted result, @xmath , @xmath , can be obtained with a @xmath
subgroup of @xmath , which contains the matter parity @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -- -------

Matter parity, however, does not solve the problem @xmath , and also the
hierarchy @xmath remains unexplained.

Note that the effective model, as derived from the heterotic string,
does not contain a continuous @xmath symmetry which forbids the @xmath
-term or dimension-five proton decay operators. Instead, three discrete
@xmath -symmetries are present, and in principle they can be sufficient.
However, as we shall see, the phenomenology of a model strongly depends
on the chosen vacuum and it is difficult to fulfill all low-energy
constraints simultaneously. It is a main motivation for the present work
to get a better understanding of the relation between orbifold vacua and
phenomenology, and to explore new tools for the selection of candidates
for physical vacua.

### 4.2 Standard model families and a unique @xmath

In the previous chapter, the spectrum of an effective orbifold GUT in
six dimensions was calculated, which followed from a specific
compactification of the heterotic string. The latter was an orbifold
which was designed to produce the content of a @xmath of the grand
unifying group @xmath , localized at two fixed points [ 13 ] . The
effective local GUT at the fixed points @xmath is a @xmath theory, and
therefore these two families take the form (cf. ( 192 ), ( 248 ))

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (257a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (257b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

They arise from the first twisted sector and are localized at the origin
of the compact @xmath -plane, described by @xmath , cf. Figure 2 . The
charges of the chiral multiplets under the six local @xmath factors at
the fixed points are listed in Table 8 .

The fields which combine to the third standard model family in four
dimensions have to come from the bulk. This is interesting, because also
the Higgs multiplets have to be bulk fields, since they should couple
directly to both localized families. One can then expect that the bulk
family is naturally heavier than the two localized ones, which matches
with the structure of the low-energy standard model. Table 10 shows that
at @xmath , there are in fact two ten-plets with origin in the bulk,
both coming from the untwisted sector,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath is the left-handed chiral multiplet component @xmath of
the bulk hypermultiplet @xmath , while @xmath denotes the charge
conjugated right-handed component @xmath . This then contains a
left-handed fermion and transforms as a @xmath of @xmath . Also the
Abelian charges of this field are the inverse of those given for the
hypermultiplet @xmath in Table 10 .

The interesting observation now is that both of these ten-plets are
split multiplets and only the sum of their zero modes combines to the
expected content of a @xmath of @xmath , given in ( 248a ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is explicitly shown in Table 30 in Appendix E . The representations
are here given with respect to the non-Abelian part of the standard
model gauge group, @xmath . One also observes that all @xmath -plets of
@xmath in the projected bulk spectrum are split multiplets. Thus we
conclude that the model requires not three but four families in the
six-dimensional description. This avoids the mostly incorrect mass
relations of standard four-dimensional @xmath GUTs and gives room for an
interesting flavor structure of the Yukawa couplings.

The identification of quark-lepton @xmath -plets is more complicated.
For the left-handed chiral bulk multiplets @xmath , associated with the
states from Tables 10 , 12 and their charge conjugates, respectively, we
introduce the notation

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (261a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (261b)
     @xmath      @xmath      (261c)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The local @xmath GUT at @xmath provides a hypercharge generator @xmath ,
under which the standard model lepton @xmath , the quarks @xmath and the
Higgs doublets @xmath have the following charges:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (262)
     @xmath   @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Inspection of the zero modes, listed in Table 30 in Appendix E , then
suggests the following classification for the @xmath -plets at @xmath ,
cf. ( 248b ), ( 249 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (264a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (264b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (264c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (264d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

So far the spectrum still seems to be rather ambiguous. However, we can
now benefit from the local @xmath GUT structure at @xmath . As it was
described in Section 4.1 , dangerous dimension-four proton decay
operators can be forbidden in the @xmath language by an additional
Abelian factor, called @xmath . This symmetry plays the role of @xmath
and in fact only differs from it by hypercharge. Such a symmetry should
also be present at @xmath . We can make an ansatz for the generator (
255 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (265a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (265b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (265c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with coefficients @xmath . We have already identified two localized
families in ( 257 ), and two @xmath -plets of two bulk families in ( 258
). This fixes four of the coefficients, @xmath , and leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (266)
     @xmath   @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From the list of candidates for @xmath -quarks in ( 264a ), only @xmath
and @xmath can be consistent with such a symmetry. These fields have
identical charges, and the requirement that both the charge under @xmath
and @xmath should take the physical values fixes the remaining two
coefficients, @xmath . We have thus found a unique @xmath at @xmath ,
implying a unique @xmath in four dimensions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (268)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The embedding of these generators into @xmath can be found in Table 4 .

Consistency with @xmath and @xmath reshuffles the list of physical and
unphysical @xmath - and @xmath -plets,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (270a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (270b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (270c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (270d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (270e)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Up to the doubling due to @xmath , we have uniquely identified the
missing matter @xmath -plets of the two bulk families.

### 4.3 @xmath-terms and @xmath-terms

The driving force for non-zero vacuum expectation values of fields
present in the model are the conditions for unbroken supersymmetry (cf.
[ 47 ] ). As stated before, the false vacuum ( 246 ), which was obtained
compactifying the heterotic string on an orbifold, does not maintain
supersymmetry since the corresponding symmetry transformations do not
close in the presence of non-vanishing Fayet–Iliopoulos @xmath -terms.
The latter correspond to auxiliary fields of the vector multiplets that
are associated with the @xmath factors which locally have non-zero
traces. The corresponding generators and the traces were calculated in
Section 3.3.3 .

The @xmath vector multiplet has in fact three auxiliary fields @xmath
which form a triplet under @xmath and must all vanish in the bulk.
However, at the fixed points half of the supersymmetry is broken and the
local @xmath vector multiplet has an effective @xmath -term @xmath ,
where @xmath is the associated field strength in the @xmath direction.
Thus the local @xmath -term cancelation condition at @xmath (cf. [ 46 ,
79 , 82 ] ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath charge of the singlet @xmath , has always a
solution, even for non-vanishing right-hand-side. This means that in
principle localized FI-terms do not necessarily induce singlet vevs and
the corresponding @xmath can remain unbroken. However, since our model
has distinct anomalous @xmath factors at the inequivalent fixed points
@xmath and a non-vanishing net anomalous @xmath in four dimensions, its
global @xmath -flat solution cannot be of that kind. We rather expect a
mixture of singlet vevs and a nontrivial gauge background @xmath .

Note that the Fayet--Iliopoulos term in ( 271 ) is of GUT scale size,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

and appears as an explicit scale in the effective model. In fact, the
abovementioned expectation value of a bulk hypermultiplet can in
principle be used to transfer this scale to the effective potential of
the volume modulus. After supersymmetry breaking, this contribution in
combination with the Casimir energy can indeed stabilize the size of the
effective orbifold at the GUT scale [ 45 , 37 ] .

Further conditions arise from the @xmath -terms. Using the formulation
in terms of @xmath superfields, which was introduced in Section 3.2.7 ,
the @xmath -term conditions are ²¹ ²¹ 21 These are @xmath -terms with
respect to global supersymmetry transformations. All vacua that we will
study in the following have the property @xmath , such that they
coincide with the @xmath -terms of a supergravity description.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the following we shall assume that the equations ( 271 ) and ( 273 )
can be solved by giving expectation values to a selection of singlets in
the model. The collection of the latter is denoted by the symbol @xmath
and called a vacuum of the model. However, the proof that this can be
done for the suggested sets will not be given in this work. Due to the
large number of contributing fields this is difficult to study,
especially in the six-dimensional setup. One may hope that
phenomenological requirements are a good guide towards solutions, since
the physical vacuum, if existent among all possibilities within the
model, has to be supersymmetric ²² ²² 22 Note that the scale of the
Fayet–Iliopoulos term in ( 271 ) is too large for a phenomenologically
interesting supersymmetry breaking scenario via the above @xmath -terms.
. We will only briefly return to the explicit calculation of the @xmath
-terms at the end of this chapter.

### 4.4 Decoupling of exotics

The most severe phenomenological requirement at this point is the
decoupling of the exotic fields at the GUT fixed points @xmath . Namely,
these are 16 @xmath - or @xmath -plets of @xmath from the list ( 264 )
which have unwanted zero modes, additionally to the required third
matter generation.

The exotics in the model are vector-like. One thus has the possibility
to decouple pairs of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s by generating
supersymmetric mass terms for these fields,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This requires that the fields @xmath are singlets of the gauge group
that should remain unbroken in this process, which contains the local
@xmath in the case of interest. Furthermore, one assumes that the scalar
potential has a supersymmetric minimum which corresponds to
non-vanishing vacuum expectation values (vevs) for the @xmath , as
discussed in the previous section.

The analysis of the local decoupling at the @xmath fixed points is much
easier than its analogue in the effective four-dimensional field theory.
The reason is that many exotics can be decoupled in one step, by the use
of only three singlets. From Table 12 we read off that for each
left-handed chiral multiplet from the bulk, there is also at least one
right-handed chiral multiplet with exactly the same charges. They only
differ by the superposition quantum number @xmath . One can thus build
the complete gauge invariants

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (275)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we dropped the sub-label @xmath and gave the @xmath -charges of
the bosonic components. Allowed superpotential terms have to fulfill the
rule ( 91 ), @xmath for bosonic components, up to the order of the twist
in the three planes. One can thus generate a universal mass term for all
above pairs by one monomial of singlets, of order three:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This combination is allowed by all selection rules ( 128 ). Note that
this is not the only possible choice, the complete list at order three
is given in Table 14 .

For each choice, a specific combination of the six local @xmath factors
is broken ²³ ²³ 23 In [ 16 ] we chose the combination @xmath . As it
turned out, this does not allow the definition of a @xmath which is
spontaneously broken to matter parity. .

The mass ( 276 ) leads to a universal decoupling of six pairs of
vector-like exotics:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we suppressed the @xmath values of the decoupled fields, and from
now on we shall also drop them for the remaining combinations. In
Section 4.5.1 it will be shown that this is justified, since they do not
influence any of the relevant couplings in @xmath .We are now in the
position to summarize the four quark-lepton families which are present
in the model:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
              @xmath   @xmath      (278a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (278b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (278c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (278d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The right-handed neutrinos @xmath are omitted in the discussion, due to
the large number of singlets in the model. Recall from ( 270 ) or from
Table 30 in Appendix E that the two bulk families give rise to only one
standard model family in four dimensions. For the Higgs multiplets
@xmath an ambiguity remains,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, one is left with one single pair of vector-like exotics
@xmath , which can again be decoupled with a set of three singlets,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In summary, the local @xmath GUT structure at the fixed points @xmath
leads to a significant simplification of the discussion. In ( 268 ) and
( 269 ) we identified uniquely the generators of @xmath and @xmath .
After a first step of universal decoupling ( 277 ) using only three
singlet fields, these symmetries fixed the definition of four standard
model families in the @xmath language, as given in ( 278 ). One
remaining pair of exotics could again be decoupled by a singlet monomial
of order three, extending the list of singlets needed for the decoupling
to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

So far unsolved is the question which combination of fields from ( 279 )
plays the role of the two Higgs multiplets @xmath . The remaining
multiplets will then constitute another pair of exotics, and
consequently require the generation of another mass term.

#### 4.4.1 A minimal vacuum

The transition from the false vacuum, @xmath for all @xmath , to the
physical vacuum @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

is required for three reasons: Supersymmetry has to be maintained in the
perturbative vacuum solution, all exotics have to be decoupled, and the
additional gauge symmetry has to be broken, under which the standard
model fields transform in the effective theory.

The latter point states that a Higgs mechanism is needed in order to
make the gauge fields heavy, which are associated with the nine extra
@xmath factors in four dimensions, including the six at @xmath . This
implies the spontaneous breaking of @xmath and @xmath . However, the
dimension-four proton decay operators only remain absent if a global
matter parity survives the breaking. In the present model, this can be
achieved by assuming vevs of singlets with charges @xmath under @xmath .
This leads to the breaking of the latter factor to a parity (or a group
of even order), denoted as @xmath . From Table 32 in Appendix F one
finds that there are only two such singlet fields in the model, @xmath
and @xmath from the untwisted sector,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some even integer @xmath . Note that these fields do not have zero
modes in four dimensions, but are present as bulk fields of the
six-dimensional theory, which have positive parity at the GUT fixed
points @xmath . Their corresponding mass term is then expected to be of
the size of the compactification scale. However, if this is of the order
of the GUT scale it coincides with the size of the Fayet–Iliopoulos
scale, and vevs of the fields can contribute to vacua.

With the above requirement, we can formulate a minimal vacuum @xmath
which leads to the desired decoupling of exotics ( 277 ), ( 280 ), and
breaks @xmath to the parity @xmath , which yields matter parity in four
dimensions. We shall thus demand that the vacuum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

is contained in all sets of singlets which are studied as candidates for
physical vacua in the following ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 It is not minimal in the strict
sense: Only the presence of one of the fields @xmath is required to
fulfill the constraints. However, we will not study complete scans over
all possibilities in the following, but only focus on some interesting
examples. .

### 4.5 Unbroken symmetries

The phenomenology of a string model is determined by the spectrum and
the interactions of the low-energy effective theory. The knowledge of
the unbroken symmetries in a given vacuum @xmath is essential for an
understanding of the latter. In the present setup, couplings among
fields of the effective theory arise from higher-dimensional operators,
after the transition to the physical vacuum,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the fields @xmath can play the role of matter multiplets, for which
the effective Lagrangian is desired. Furthermore, the mass terms ( 277
), ( 280 ) are examples of couplings which have to be generated for a
viable phenomenology.

In the following we describe how the unbroken symmetries in a physical
vacuum can be determined, and study the minimal vacuum @xmath from ( 284
) as an example. The methods introduced here enable us to identify it as
a vacuum which does not suffer from dimension-four proton decay
operators ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 The absence of dimension-five proton decay operators
in the vacuum @xmath is shown in Section 4.6 . , but contains two light
Higgs pairs in the spectrum.

#### 4.5.1 Symmetries of the false vacuum

As discussed in Sections 2.4 and 3.1.2 , the terms which appear in the
superpotential are subject to a set of constraints, the string selection
rules. They arise from string theory calculations, but can be
interpreted in terms of symmetries of the effective field theory.

In the present model, the rules give rise to an effective symmetry

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where, at @xmath , the gauge part is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and the discrete symmetry can be identified as (cf. ( 91 ), ( 96 ), (
128 ))

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (288)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Here we use the notation that the group @xmath acts on a state with
charge @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (289)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The tilde in @xmath indicates that the @xmath -fold application of the
generating element does not reproduce the identity, but some other
transformation which is generated by the remaining group factors. For
example, the symmetries @xmath , with elements @xmath , give for the
choice @xmath an element of @xmath . This follows from the observation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

and allows us to identify

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This is a consequence of the statement that the selection rule @xmath
can be understood as part of the discrete @xmath -symmetries, cf. the
discussion before ( 96 ).

The last three factors of ( 288 ) resemble the order of the sub-lattices
in the planes @xmath and @xmath , respectively. A peculiarity arises
from the @xmath -plane. There, the twists @xmath and @xmath correspond
to two different sub-lattices @xmath , whose sum is equivalent to the
sub-lattice of full @xmath rotations, @xmath . This leads to an
additional symmetry factor, which only applies to couplings with the
property that all its contributing fields come from equivalent twisted
sectors,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The additional restriction does not apply to all couplings in the
superpotential. Therefore, it cannot be interpreted as an additional
symmetry of the full system. However, physical interactions have to
fulfill this constraint, and thus we are forced to write the total
superpotential @xmath as the sum of two terms,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

All couplings which only involve fields with equivalent twists, in the
sense of ( 292 ), are collected in @xmath . The rest, which is the
majority of the couplings of interest, is contained in @xmath . Note
that the form ( 293 ) is the outcome of a string calculation for the
effective low-energy field theory. The split structure is a direct
consequence of the fact that the @xmath twist has two sub-twists, which
both affect the torus @xmath , and therefore seems to be unavoidable.

However, in the following analysis of the symmetries we shall ignore the
contributions from @xmath . This is justified, since order-by-order
scans show that the latter play practically no role. For example, direct
Yukawa-couplings among fields of one generation only arise through
couplings which involve singlets from other twisted sectors. We will
comment more on the terms in @xmath in Section 4.7 , when we discuss the
superpotential to all orders.

#### 4.5.2 Symmetries of physical vacua

We now study the question which of the symmetries ( 286 ) remains
unbroken after the transition form the false vacuum to the physical
vacuum,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For simplicity, we shall assume that the non-Abelian gauge symmetry in
@xmath is not broken during this process, and focus on the Abelian
factors and the discrete symmetries ( 288 ) in the following.

Consider the transformation of a singlet @xmath under the symmetries of
the false vacuum. We can collect the relevant charges of the continuous
and the discrete symmetries in two vectors @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the charge with respect to the @xmath which is
generated by @xmath . The transformation of @xmath can then be written
as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with two parameter vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that this way of writing the transformation ignores the
identifications ( 291 ) and thus double-counts the common factors of the
@xmath -symmetries and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath .

The symmetry group of the vacuum @xmath is then given by the set of
transformations which act as the identity on each of the individual vevs
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we characterized the unbroken subgroup of the symmetries of the
false vacuum by @xmath .

#### Example: The minimal vacuum @xmath

As an example, consider the vacuum @xmath , defined in ( 284 ). The
physical vacuum is an extension of this set and its symmetry will be
given by a subgroup of @xmath .

The generating elements of the unbroken symmetry directly follow from (
298 ). From Tables 8 , 10 and 12 one reads off that none of the singlets
in @xmath is charged under the @xmath with generator @xmath , thus this
will remain a continuous symmetry of the new vacuum. However, all other
Abelian factors are broken to discrete subgroups. For the total
symmetry, acting on all fields present at @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The enlargement of the orders of the appearing @xmath -symmetries is due
to the mixing of the latter with generators of the six @xmath factors.
The list of generators of @xmath is given in Table 15 . It shows the
complicated embedding of the present discrete symmetries into the
symmetries of the false vacuum. The tables in Appendix F explicitly
confirm that the given symmetry is unbroken in the vacuum, furthermore
they list the corresponding transformation phases for all fields present
at @xmath .

Note the appearance of the large factor @xmath . Up to the entry
corresponding to the unbroken @xmath , its generator is proportional to
the generator @xmath of @xmath , defined in ( 268 ). We will see that
this factor is indeed responsible for the absence of dimension-four
proton decay operators, as argued in ( 283 ). In fact, allowed couplings
should be invariant under all possible symmetry transformations,
including combinations of the discrete generators and arbitrary choices
for the continuous parameter @xmath , for example @xmath . Together with
the generator of the @xmath , the latter choice adds to @xmath ,
associated with a @xmath . The naive guess for the matter parity
generator would then be @xmath . However, as it turns out this @xmath
acts trivially on all singlets of the hidden @xmath gauge group,
including the standard model families. The symmetry which corresponds to
matter parity for the singlets of the hidden sector is in fact a @xmath
symmetry with respect to the full spectrum,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -- -------

This definition yields the correct parity assignments for the matter
generations ( 278 ) and the Higgs candidates ( 279 ), as shown in Table
31 in Appendix F . Together with the other unbroken symmetries in ( 299
), it determines whether a coupling may be allowed in the effective
theory in the vacuum @xmath , or not. As will become apparent, large
unbroken symmetries can be very restrictive and forbid
phenomenologically favored interactions.

#### 4.5.3 Symmetries and interactions

The origin of the symmetries that we study in this chapter are the
string selection rules ( 91 ), ( 128 ) for couplings in the
superpotential @xmath . Expressed in terms of the @xmath -charges of the
bosonic components of chiral multiplets, a coupling which consists of
two fermions and bosons otherwise, has to fulfill

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the notation of ( 295 ), the full set of constraints can be expressed
as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

for all possible choices of the parameters @xmath and @xmath which
describe the symmetry of the vacuum. Once the explicit form of these
parameter sets is known, the above formulation of the selection rules
allows for a fast and easy check if a given coupling is present in the
superpotential, or forbidden by an exact symmetry of the vacuum. In the
latter case it will be absent to all orders in the involved singlet
fields.

#### Example: The minimal vacuum @xmath

We illustrate this with the simple six-field vacuum @xmath from ( 284 ),
whose symmetries were discussed in the previous section. Consider the
@xmath -terms of the Higgs candidates from ( 279 ), which now is a
@xmath matrix,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where each entry of @xmath consists of expectation values of monomials
of singlets,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The generators of the unbroken symmetries @xmath can be found in Table
15 . Be definition of the latter, @xmath is invariant under all symmetry
transformations. The condition ( 302 ) thus only depends on the
transformation of the Higgs candidates @xmath . For the generator of the
@xmath -symmetry @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

the condition ( 302 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From this we conclude that all @xmath -terms are forbidden by a discrete
@xmath -symmetry,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (308)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This states that all four Higgs candidate fields are massless in the
vacuum @xmath . This is a two-Higgs model, which may be
phenomenologically acceptable, but is inconsistent with gauge coupling
unification.

Similarly, one can study the dimension-four and dimension-five proton
decay operators

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath labels the four families, defined in ( 278 ). As expected,
the generator of the @xmath , which is related to @xmath , forbids the
presence of the dimension-four term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

The dimension-five operators are also forbidden in the present vacuum,
@xmath , but this does not fully follow from the unbroken symmetries.
This is discussed in Appendix F and in the following section.

Furthermore, we can study Yukawa interactions, which now depend on the
choice of Higgs fields @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The appearing matrices are related to the Yukawa couplings of the three
standard model families of the effective four-dimensional theory,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -- -------

by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath                        (313a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (313b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the vacuum @xmath , the couplings are forbidden for the choice @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, for @xmath and @xmath they are (partly) allowed,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (315)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where primes denote localization at @xmath and the matrices contain
examples for lowest order monomials. Note that all zeros are present up
to infinite order in the singlets, since they are protected by
symmetries, cf. Appendix F . The up-type Yukawa coupling between the two
bulk families is proportional to the gauge coupling. This is an
important consequence of the choice @xmath , due to the origin of that
multiplet in the six-dimensional gauge vector. The unification of gauge
interactions and Yukawa couplings in six dimensions will imply a large
mass for the top quark of the four-dimensional effective theory, and is
thus phenomenologically desired. However, the down-type Yukawa
couplings, which are also responsible for the lepton masses in four
dimensions, are obviously not satisfactory. It seems that the generation
of the latter with acceptable entries also for the light families, and
the simultaneous vanishing of the @xmath -term is difficult to realize.
This appears to be a generic problem of @xmath orbifold models. If the
symmetries which protect the zeros in @xmath are completely broken, we
expect that also the @xmath -term will be generated.

The lessons that we learn from the vacuum @xmath are twofold. First, new
@xmath -symmetries with a complicated embedding can be responsible for
vanishing @xmath -terms and dimension-five proton decay operators.
Concerning the Yukawa couplings, the Higgs choice @xmath (and @xmath )
seems to be preferred, where @xmath is part of the gauge vector
multiplet in six dimensions.

Second, more generally, one finds that the restriction to a small set of
singlets implies a large unbroken symmetry, which forbids many of the
interactions. This can have positive effects for the phenomenology, like
stability of the proton, but also negative, like vanishing down-type
Yukawa couplings. We expect that adding more singlets to the list breaks
more symmetry and thus allows the generation of more terms in the
superpotential. However, also dangerous or disfavored terms, like the
@xmath -term, may then be generated at a high scale. The art of orbifold
model building is thus to find the best compromise between desired and
problematic terms, or in other words, too much or too little unbroken
symmetry. In the following, we will study this issue more and develop an
algorithm which enables one to find the largest vacua for which a choice
of properties of the superpotential remains intact, thereby exploring
the phenomenological limits of a given orbifold compactification.

### 4.6 Vacuum selection

Pure guesswork is an unsatisfactory approach for the definition of a
physical vacuum. At the GUT fixed points there are 67 non-Abelian
singlets (and 72 in four dimensions), leading to an enormous number of
different possibilities. On the other hand, a dynamical approach
starting from the explicit scalar potential is excluded for the same
reason, there are too many degrees of freedom in order to handle the
full problem. Furthermore, the numerical coefficients of the various
terms in the superpotential have to be calculated from string theory for
the explicit approach, which is a non-trivial task.

One therefore usually assumes that there is a supersymmetric vacuum
which can describe the MSSM to some accuracy. If that is the case, the
list of singlets contributing to it should be constrained by
phenomenological requirements:

-   The low-energy spectrum contains the supersymmetric standard model,
    and no exotics.

-   Supersymmetry is unbroken: @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

-   The model has non-vanishing Yukawa interactions.

-   The proton is stable (or has a sufficiently long lifetime).

-   The @xmath term vanishes (or is strongly suppressed).

-   The gravitino is massless, @xmath .

The list could be enlarged by many more details, but, as we will see,
the above constraints are already quite restrictive. Typically, the
vacuum expectation values of singlets are of the order of the localized
Fayet–Iliopoulos terms, which means they are comparable to @xmath . For
that reason it is difficult to generate a @xmath -term of the weak scale
by higher dimensional operators. Also the breaking of supersymmetry is
expected to arise from some additional mechanism, which we do not study
in this work. If the latter is linked to the electroweak scale, one
expects the relation ( 251 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -- -------

after supersymmetry breaking, and @xmath before.

An important guideline for the definition of the vacuum is the
decoupling of exotics. In Section 4.4 we described how the definitions
of a unique @xmath and a unique @xmath selected between physical
multiplets and exotics, up to an additional doubling due to the orbifold
breaking of the @xmath supersymmetry in the six-dimensional bulk. The
embedding of the corresponding generators into @xmath is expected to
depend on the choice of the Wilson line in the @xmath -plane, which is
also linked to the presence of complete standard model families at the
fixed points. There is also only little choice in the breaking of @xmath
to a matter parity, since only two singlets in the model have the
required even charge under this symmetry. These arguments lead to the
definition of the minimal vacuum @xmath in ( 284 ), which we take as a
starting point for further steps.

The ambiguity in the model up to this point consists mainly in the
identification of the Higgs multiplets @xmath and @xmath . Here the
crucial issue is the vanishing @xmath -term in the effective
superpotential. We shall now describe how a maximal vacuum can be
defined, which contains the maximally possible number of singlets, such
that @xmath holds up to infinite order. However, the arguments are
general and can be used to forbid also any other disfavored interaction.

#### 4.6.1 Maximal vacua for vanishing couplings

Consider a vacuum @xmath and a superpotential term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . This coupling is allowed in the false vacuum
by the string selection rules, provided

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (319)
     @xmath   @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the notation from ( 295 ) and ( 303 ) was used. These two
conditions can now be solved separately. Equation ( 319 ) has multiple
solutions, which can be written as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (321)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Here @xmath corresponds to a particular solution, and the infinite
multiplicity is contained in the homogeneous solutions @xmath . The
latter form the ‘charge kernel’

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (322)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

which is spanned by a set @xmath of basis monomials. Here by convention
@xmath denotes a singlet with negative charge vectors @xmath , as
compared to the singlet @xmath . Note that the @xmath is a module, not a
vector space, due to the requirement of integer exponents @xmath . In
the end, a projection onto physical monomials @xmath with integer
exponents will be necessary,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -- -------

Keeping this in mind, we can also allow negative exponents for the
particular solution @xmath in ( 321 ). In fact, the solution of systems
of linear integer equations with positive integer solutions are the
subject of a branch of applied mathematics, called linear programming.
The details of this are beyond the scope of this work. In the following,
all results will be formulated with projectors @xmath and elements of
the above basis @xmath .

Once the particular solution @xmath is fixed, covariance of the
superpotential under the discrete symmetries ( 320 ) selects a subset of
the elements in the charge kernel,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This condition is easily evaluated. Since @xmath only depends on the
vacuum @xmath , and not on the interaction @xmath , it has to be
calculated only once. Given its basis @xmath , one can then consider
solutions of the condition ( 324 ) term by term, for each coupling
@xmath .

In the following, we will turn the argument around and study unwanted
couplings, such as the @xmath -term. It is then possible to use ( 324 )
as a tool for the definition of maximal vacua, in which the disfavored
interaction is forbidden to infinite order in the singlets. For this one
starts with a small enough set of singlets, which either does not
contain a particular solution, or whose charge kernel is too small to
fulfill ( 324 ). These sets can then be subsequently enlarged by more
singlets, until it is impossible to circumvent the fulfillment of the
constraints. This will now be illustrated by two phenomenologically
interesting examples.

#### 4.6.2 Gauge-Higgs unification

Recall from ( 279 ) that after the first step of decoupling, the local
GUT theory at the fixed points @xmath contained two pairs of candidate
multiplets for the Higgs fields. We now consider the case of gauge-Higgs
unification,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

corresponding to a vacuum @xmath that extends the minimal vacuum from (
284 ), @xmath . The vacuum @xmath is now constructed as a maximal vacuum
with respect to the constraints

-   Matter parity @xmath is unbroken,

-   The @xmath -term vanishes to all orders,

since we want to keep the feature that the dimension-four proton decay
operators remain forbidden. The @xmath -term can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

leading to @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From ( 277 ) one infers that the combination @xmath is a basis monomial
of the charge kernel of the minimal vacuum @xmath . In fact, the
addition of @xmath does not give rise to new uncharged combinations, and
the dimension of @xmath is one. Since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

the condition ( 327 ) is violated and the @xmath -term is absent in the
vacuum @xmath , in agreement with ( 308 ). As a second example, consider
the dimension-five proton decay operator

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath involves a negative exponent which cannot be canceled by the
singlets in @xmath . Thus the projection ( 323 ) yields zero for any
possible term, and the coupling vanishes. This cannot be explained by
the unbroken symmetries, since invariance of @xmath automatically
implies invariance of @xmath .

We now aim to extend the vacuum @xmath , without generating a @xmath
-term or breaking matter parity. The latter requires to consider only
such singlets for the enlargement which are uncharged under @xmath , or
have even charges. Table 32 from Appendix F shows that these are the
singlets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (330)
  -- -------- -- -------

We find that a maximal vacuum is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with a charge kernel of dimension four. The corresponding basis
monomials are listed in table 16 . Note that from the basis monomials it
is clear that the condition @xmath is violated for all monomials in
@xmath . Table 17 shows that further addition of singlets indeed
generates mass terms for the Higgs fields. On the other hand, we checked
to order 500 in the singlets that the @xmath -term is absent in the
vacuum @xmath .

For the case of gauge-Higgs unification, any monomial which appears as a
contribution to @xmath also contributes to @xmath [ 49 ] , whence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -- -------

This follows from the observation ( 326 ), which states that @xmath is
invariant under all symmetry transformations.

We can furthermore study the possibilities to generate a mass term for
the pair of exotics @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (333)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With the choice @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The latter condition is by definition not fulfillable by singlets from
the vacuum @xmath . Hence the two Higgs pairs property of the vacuum
@xmath is also present here. We conclude that gauge-Higgs unification is
impossible in the present model. The absence or presence of mass terms
for @xmath is closely linked, even when going beyond the vacuum @xmath ,
as demonstrated in Table 17 . This table also shows that the generation
of @xmath -terms at high order seems possible, when starting from a
maximal vacuum ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Any symmetry breakdown corresponds to an
approximate symmetry, valid up to some finite order [ 50 ] . Here the
latter may be large enough for an interesting phenomenology. .

#### Unbroken symmetries and interactions

The vacuum @xmath suggested that @xmath is preferred over @xmath as the
up-Higgs from the viewpoint of the Yukawa couplings, which vanish for
the latter in that vacuum, cf. ( 315 ). Here we repeat the same analysis
for the vacuum @xmath , and find ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 The differences to [ 17 ] are
due to the inclusion of hidden sector multiplets in the analysis. We
recover the generators given there, but here they are associated with
larger symmetries. Furthermore, additional symmetry factors arise.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with generators as in Table 18 .

Note that the symmetry @xmath is generated by @xmath , where @xmath is
the generator of @xmath from ( 268 ). The symmetry thus contains the
matter parity ( 300 ), as expected.

The dimension-four proton decay operators from ( 309 ) are therefore
absent. However, dimension-five operators which lead to rapid proton
decay are generated, for example

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This follows from the basis monomial @xmath from Table 16 , which was
not present in the vacuum @xmath and allows for the cancelation of the
negative exponent in ( 329 ).

A further difference of the vacuum @xmath compared to @xmath arises for
the Yukawa couplings. In the vacuum @xmath all couplings for the choice
@xmath and @xmath were forbidden by symmetry, while the ones for @xmath
and some for @xmath were allowed and of low order, as shown in ( 315 ),
( 316 ). In the present vacuum, this statement is weakened. In terms of
the four @xmath families from ( 278 ) the couplings for the choice
@xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes an monomial of singlets of order @xmath . The
explicit expressions can be found in Table 19 .

The vacuum @xmath thus indeed is a two Higgs pairs vacuum, and for both
pairs a similar pattern occurs in the Yukawa couplings. However,
assuming that each of the singlets contributes a suppression factor in
the appropriate units, one observes a significant hierarchy in the
coupling to matter for the two Higgs pair choices.

We do not follow the phenomenology of this vacuum any further, since we
do not expect that gauge coupling unification is compatible with the two
Higgs scenario.

#### 4.6.3 Partial gauge-Higgs unification

The main reason for considering gauge-Higgs unification in the context
of this model is the large top-quark mass which follows from identifying
the up-type Yukawa coupling with the gauge interaction in the bulk.
However, this result does only rely on the choice @xmath and is
independent of the down-Higgs. We are thus free to study the assignment

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

as suggested by the Yukawa matrices ( 315 ) and ( 316 ) for the vacuum
@xmath . We call this scenario ‘partial gauge-Higgs unification’, since
only the @xmath arises from bulk gauge interactions, while @xmath is a
field from the second twisted sector.

The @xmath -term can then be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the choice @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Up to the projection ( 323 ), the conditions for the monomials @xmath
then read

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (341)
     @xmath   @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By subsequently adding singlets from the list ( 330 ), we find the
maximal vacuum

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This vacuum contains 14 singlets. Its charge kernel has dimension eight,
with basis monomials as given in Table 20 .

Again, the condition @xmath is obviously violated by all monomials in
@xmath . The vacuum is maximal, since the only possibility to enlarge it
without breaking matter parity is to add singlets @xmath ( @xmath )
whose @xmath superpartners @xmath ( @xmath ) already belong to @xmath .
One then obtains the @xmath -term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (344)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is of order 16 in the singlets. Similar to the case of @xmath ,
going beyond the maximal vacuum leads to a generation of the @xmath
-term with large suppression. Order 16 may even be enough for the
fulfillment of the phenomenological requirements.

The vacuum expectation value of the superpotential follows from
monomials @xmath with @xmath . Again, this condition cannot be fulfilled
by the monomials from Table 20 , since @xmath is always even. Also for
the case of partial gauge-Higgs unification one therefore has the
property

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -- -------

as it is the case for full gauge-Higgs unification.

We now consider the mass term of the exotic pair of Higgs field
candidates,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (346)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and choose @xmath . One then obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

in the vacuum @xmath . This looks as if the situation is the same as for
@xmath , where we found a two Higgs pair vacuum. However, there the full
@xmath mass matrix was zero, whereas here one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This shows that @xmath decouples together with a linear combination of
@xmath and @xmath . The orthogonal linear combination is the down-type
Higgs,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The vacuum @xmath thus leads to a down-type Higgs with a dominant
component from the second twisted sector, as it was already suggested by
the Yukawa matrices ( 316 ) of the vacuum @xmath . In contrast, the
up-type Higgs remains a pure gauge field in six dimensions, @xmath ,
giving an explanation of the large top-quark mass within our orbifold
GUT model.

#### Unbroken symmetries and interactions

The unbroken symmetry of the vacuum @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with generators as shown in Table 21 .

Again, one obtains the factor @xmath which was also present in the
vacuum @xmath . It has the generator @xmath , where @xmath is the
generates @xmath in the false vacuum. This implies the presence of the
matter parity from ( 300 ) in both studied vacua which extend @xmath .
Dimension-four proton decay operators are therefore absent in both
cases, however, dimension-five proton decay occurs also in the vacuum
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

So far, there is no known model with vanishing @xmath -term, interesting
Yukawa couplings, preserved supersymmetry, no exotic particles, and a
stable proton. In our setup, full proton stability seems to be linked to
the existence of two Higgs pairs, as in the vacuum @xmath . We interpret
the fact that we are not able to solve this problem as further need to
understand the structure of the model, and maybe relate the question of
decoupling to underlying smooth compactifications. We will comment more
on this in the following chapter.

The @xmath -term vanishes in the vacuum @xmath by construction, we
checked this explicitly by order-by-order scans up to order 500. The
up-type Yukawa couplings are at lowest order given by the result ( 315 )
for the vacuum @xmath . Hence we again benefit from partial gauge-Higgs
unification by the generation of a large top-quark mass through the
gauge interaction in the bulk. The down-type Yukawa couplings are given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with explicit lowest order monomials as in Table 22 . Note that all
zeros are protected by symmetries and thus present at arbitrary order in
the singlets. This can be approved by close inspection of Table 31 in
Appendix F .

From the above matrix and the up-type analogue ( 315 ) one deduces the
Yukawa couplings of the four-dimensional effective theory, as described
in ( 313 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This explicitly shows that the top-quark mass is proportional to the
gauge coupling @xmath in six dimensions. The lepton and down-quark mass
matrices do not look convincing. In fact, they predict @xmath , which
excludes the studied model. One can now either understand this as a
problem of the specific choice of gauge embedding that we chose and
study other possibilities, as claimed in [ 14 ] . An alternative
approach may be to further explore correlations between the decoupling
of exotics and the identification of matter and Higgs fields, and the
generated interactions. Possibly the details of the physical vacuum are
closely linked to the dynamics of the underlying geometry, once the
restriction to the orbifold point is relaxed.

### 4.7 The all-order superpotential

So far symmetry arguments were given for the vanishing of couplings to
all orders in the singlets. This was then used as a tool for the
construction of partly-realistic vacua. The non-vanishing couplings were
calculated by order-by-order scans over all monomials within a given
vacuum @xmath . Here we argue that the methods introduced in Section 4.6
can be extended to an algorithm which allows for the calculation of the
superpotential to all orders, without relying on the naive
order-by-order approach.

In ( 321 ) we separated the continuous and the discrete transformation
behavior of a superpotential term @xmath , where the monomial @xmath ,
@xmath , determines the coupling of the interaction @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (355)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In fact, the total superpotential is a sum of such terms, which we did
not write out explicitly. It will have an overall factor which is
completely invariant under all symmetries. The corresponding terms,
written as @xmath , are then universal contributions to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (356)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We denote the defining properties of @xmath as @xmath . The latter set
of monomials can now be calculated for a given vacuum configuration
@xmath . Since the @xmath are universal, this has to be done only once
for the full superpotential.

However, what remains to be found for each interaction @xmath are the
monomials @xmath and @xmath . If one can find a basis of @xmath , it is
sufficient to find only one solution. In the end, the projection ( 323 )
to physical monomials with positive exponents has to be evaluated. The
total superpotential to all orders can then be written as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (358)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where the omnipresent and unknown coefficients are not shown.

Recall from Section 3.1.2 that the discrete symmetries discussed so far
are not sufficient for the description of all interactions of the
effective theory. There we found that is was necessary to discuss the
terms which contain only fields from equivalent twisted sectors
separately. They can be collected into a part @xmath of the full
superpotential,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is then subject to additional @xmath symmetry constraints. If such
terms appear in the potential ( 358 ) the corresponding condition

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

has to be checked a posteriori.

#### Example: The vacuum @xmath

As an example for the algorithm suggested above by ( 358 ), we calculate
the superpotential for the vacuum @xmath from ( 284 ). The corresponding
basis monomials of the charge kernel were given in Table 16 . The basis
of @xmath can then be found by calculating

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (361)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the first four columns contain the quantum numbers @xmath of the
four basis monomials @xmath of @xmath , and the last five columns are
added in order to find solutions modulo the corresponding order, as
given in ( 357 ). This yields a basis @xmath for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (362)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

The monomials @xmath are then completely invariant under the continuous
and the discrete symmetries. Their explicit form is given in Table 23 .
Note the appearance of inverse exponents, which will eventually be
subject to the projection @xmath . Consider for example the down-type
Yukawa coupling

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (363)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

for which one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (364)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Table 23 shows that the smallest term with only positive exponents
arises for @xmath and the corresponding coupling is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (365)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

in agreement with ( 316 ). The next terms then follow from

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the last four choices all produce couplings of order 13.

The evaluation of the projection to physical monomials corresponds to
solving Diophantine equations. We find that for the ten-field vacuum
@xmath , the algorithm ( 358 ) can be solved to very high orders without
any restrictions due to limits of computing power (order 50 in less than
a minute). We expect that the efficiency changes if one studies much
larger vacua. Here, the method correctly reproduces the Yukawa matrices
( 315 ), ( 316 ) and higher order terms, which we do not explicitly
list.

#### 4.7.1 The calculation of @xmath-terms

The method ( 358 ) can also be used for the calculation of @xmath -terms
@xmath , by choosing @xmath . The expectation value of @xmath only gets
non-zero contributions from terms in which @xmath is the only field in
the monomial which is not contained in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Now consider @xmath from the second or the fourth twisted sector and the
case that the vacuum @xmath contains the charge conjugate field @xmath .
For the maximal vacuum @xmath , this is the case for all @xmath with
non-trivial @xmath -terms. Then one can choose

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with a universal monomial @xmath . For the vacua @xmath this is the
monomial which was used for the universal decoupling, @xmath . With (
358 ) the @xmath -terms take the form

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (369)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

up to coefficients. Due to @xmath the conditions @xmath , required for
unbroken supersymmetry, are not universal. The projection to physical
monomials depends on @xmath and has to be evaluated for each case
separately. We do not perform this calculation here, and simply assume
the existence of solutions in the studied vacua, which are needed for
consistency of the model.

## 5 Connection with smooth geometries

In the previous chapters, we have described in detail an effective local
orbifold GUT model in six dimensions, obtained from an anisotropic
compactification of the heterotic string. It was found by first
compactifying four internal dimensions on an orbifold @xmath , whose
volume was assumed to be small, the other two on a torus of GUT scale
size, and then dividing out another @xmath symmetry. This short chapter
is meant to be an outlook on work in progress, concerned with the
possibility that the four small internal dimensions are not compactified
on an orbifold, but on the smooth manifold @xmath . The orbifold @xmath
is a singular limit of the latter, and thus a comparison of the two
compactifications,

  -- -- -- -------
           (370)
  -- -- -- -------

may yield insights on the role of the fields that were obtained on the
orbifold side. Note that this idea is somehow diametrical to the
standard blow-up approach (cf. [ 51 , 40 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 ] ).
We hope that the above comparison may help to improve the understanding
of the decoupling procedure and the structure of physical vacua. Here we
present first results in this direction ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 We are grateful to
Taizan Watari for related discussions. .

### 5.1 Compactification on the @xmath surface

The @xmath surface is a standard example for string compactifications on
a manifold (see for example [ 76 , 83 ] ). It is the only non-trivial
Calabi--Yau in two complex dimensions. Its topology has Euler
characteristic @xmath , corresponding to the result

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (371)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This has to be understood together with the ‘tadpole cancelation
condition’,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is required for the absence of anomalies, cf. Section 3.3 . The
above formulas imply that consistent compactifications on @xmath are
tied to the existence of a non-vanishing gauge background. This
necessarily breaks the @xmath gauge group, and the possible effective
theories that can be obtained in six dimensions correspond to the
different choices for the embedding of the broken generators into the
full gauge group [ 76 , 84 , 53 ] . The non-vanishing gauge background
of the compactified theory is then often referred to as the ‘gauge
bundle’ in the literature.

The topological invariant on the gauge theory side is called the
‘instanton number’, and as a consequence of the tadpole cancelation
condition it also has to sum to 24. The breaking of the gauge group can
then be characterized by the distribution of the instantons among
subgroups of @xmath . If they all sit in a subgroup @xmath , its
commutant @xmath gives the unbroken gauge symmetry, defined such that
@xmath is a maximal subgroup of the original symmetry.

Both the geometry and the gauge symmetry background are associated with
moduli fields, which comprise the degrees of freedom that describe
fluctuations around that background. Including fluctuations of the
antisymmetric tensor field and the volume, the geometrical part has a
moduli space of dimension 80 and is essentially given by [ 83 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (373)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the gauge bundles, the moduli space depends on the model. We refer
the reader to table 3 of [ 84 ] for a classification of various
possibilities to break @xmath to a subgroup, and focus only on one
particular case of interest for the comparison with the orbifold model
discussed in this work. In Chapter 3 the gauge group and the matter
content of the six-dimensional bulk theory were found to be

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (374)
                          
              @xmath      (375)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the following we shall compare this model to a compactification on
@xmath which yields the following gauge symmetry:

  -- -- -- -------
           (376)
  -- -- -- -------

We thus assume that all @xmath factors as well as the hidden sector
@xmath gauge group are remnants of the singular orbifold limit in the
geometrical moduli space.

The corresponding instanton distribution is [ 84 , 85 ]

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath         (377)
        @xmath   @xmath         (378)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

From these numbers one can also infer the number of massless matter
multiplets in the effective theory in six dimensions. The result is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -- -------

and perfectly matches the spectrum of the orbifold result ( 375 ), as
far as the common gauge group @xmath is concerned. The discrepancies
will be discussed shortly.

The instanton numbers also specify the gauge bundle moduli space. The
corresponding degrees of freedom can be understood in terms of
hypermultiplets of the six-dimensional effective theory:

  -- -- -- -------- -- -- --------
                          
           @xmath         (380a)
           @xmath         (380b)
           @xmath         (380c)
  -- -- -- -------- -- -- --------

In summary, the @xmath compactification with the above gauge bundles, to
which we want to compare the orbifold results, has a smaller unbroken
gauge group and matter spectrum, but predicts 83 moduli hypermultiplets,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (381)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, the orbifold provides a larger gauge group and
additional matter transforming under the latter, as well as 40 singlets
and two geometrical moduli hypermultiplets, denoted as @xmath in ( 155
). However, additionally there are non-zero Fayet–Iliopoulos terms ( 272
), and parts of the gauge symmetry will be broken. As will be described
in the following, this breaking is the key for a successful matching of
the two approaches.

### 5.2 Identifying moduli

The 320 hypermultiplets ( 375 ) of the @xmath compactification arise
from different sectors of the orbifold,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (382a)
              @xmath      (382b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (382c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (382d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The singlets in ( 382b ) carry non-vanishing oscillator numbers @xmath ,
defined in ( 52 ). The singlets in ( 382c ) and ( 382d ) were called
@xmath and @xmath in the previous chapters, respectively. The two latter
hypermultiplets play the role of geometrical moduli of the orbifold
geometry.

We can only make contact with the assumed @xmath configuration, if we
also break the additional gauge group factors @xmath on the orbifold
side by a Higgs mechanism. This means that some of the degrees of
freedom in the above list are traded for masses of the corresponding
gauge bosons and gauginos,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (383a)
     @xmath               (383b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Let us now count the degrees of freedom that remain on the orbifold
side. We are left with @xmath gauge symmetry after the Higgs mechanism.
From the representations of the hidden sector @xmath one obtains @xmath
hypermultiplets. For the visible sector, one can show that for each
localization quantum number @xmath , the multiplets from ( 382a ) arise
from different embeddings of the group @xmath into @xmath . This fact
was observed in [ 13 ] and not stressed much in the previous chapters.
For each value of @xmath and @xmath one has the decomposition @xmath ,
and we can associate @xmath singlets with vanishing oscillator numbers
with the visible sector. Amending the latter by the four charged
untwisted singlets, one obtains after the Higgs mechanism

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (384)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (385)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The degrees of freedom from the twisted sectors of the orbifold match
the gauge bundle moduli in ( 381 ) of the @xmath compactification, after
breaking the additional gauge symmetry.

Furthermore, 18 twisted singlets from oscillator excitations in the
internal directions are present on the orbifold, as well as two from the
untwisted sector with the same property. Together, they may correspond
to the geometrical moduli of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (386)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We have thus found a correspondence between the gauge bundle moduli and
the geometrical moduli of a smooth @xmath compactification and the
hypermultiplets of the orbifold, after spontaneous breakdown of the
additional symmetries.

It is a remarkable fact that the hypermultiplets which play the role of
geometrical moduli are charged under the @xmath ’s of the orbifold. This
may be related to the fact that we chose a gauge background on @xmath
without Abelian factors and therefore they are specific to the orbifold
point. This issue and the interpretation of the above is still under
debate.

### 5.3 Outlook: A local GUT based on @xmath

The next step would be to complete the comparison ( 370 ) by defining
the action of @xmath on the manifold @xmath and work out the local
spectra at the fixed points of @xmath . The involutions on @xmath were
classified in [ 86 ] and their application to our model is work in
progress. We hope that the comparison with the results obtained for the
local orbifold GUT may lead to significant progress in understanding the
validity of the orbifold description and its interpretation in terms of
their smooth counterparts.

## 6 Conclusions

Field theoretical orbifold GUTs can be derived from heterotic string
theory by the consideration of anisotropic compactifications. We
explicitly constructed an effective @xmath model in six dimensions with
some interesting properties. For vanishing vacuum expectation values, it
has @xmath gauge symmetry in the bulk, which is broken to the GUT group
@xmath at two fixed points of the geometry. There, two complete standard
model families are localized and it was possible to uniquely determine a
@xmath gauge symmetry, which combines with the hypercharge to a unique
@xmath in the effective four-dimensional theory. This was then used as a
tool to interpret the bulk fields of the model, with the result that two
additional complete quark-lepton generations in the @xmath language
could be identified. They are split multiplets, yielding the missing
third standard model family in four dimensions as the sum of their zero
modes. This as such is an interesting setup for a higher dimensional GUT
model, since it resembles the well-known and successful orbifold
solution of the doublet-triplet splitting problem of the GUT Higgs
multiplets in the matter sector. Phenomenologically, this mechanism
avoids the problematic mass relations obtained in standard @xmath GUTs
in four dimensions. However, also the successful predictions are lost,
and the effective Yukawa matrices are to a high degree vacuum dependent.

In fact, this statement generalizes to all superpotential interactions.
A main point that we learn from the explicit calculation of the spectrum
is therefore that a better understanding of the vacuum structure of
orbifold models is required in order to reveal the mechanisms of string
theory behind phenomenological observations, if existent.

Closely linked to that issue is the problem of the presence of exotic
fields in the model, which are unavoidable in the false vacuum. Since
they are vector-like, it is possible to generate mass terms for them
which imply their decoupling from the effective low-energy theory.
However, this is inevitably linked to the simultaneous generation of
interactions, since the total superpotential originates from the sum of
all consistent higher-dimensional operators. The latter are restricted
by continuous gauge symmetries and a set of discrete symmetries. We
explicitly calculated these symmetries for example vacua and found that
they explain the absence or presence of interactions in the effective
superpotential. This provides a tool for reversing the order of the
construction of phenomenologically interesting vacua: Instead of
throwing dice and calculating the results, it is possible to construct
vacua such that they allow or forbid specific terms of phenomenological
interest. Furthermore, we found an algorithm which allows the
calculation of the superpotential to arbitrary order in the singlets
with better efficiency than the naive order-by-order approach.

All exotics at the @xmath GUT fixed points are bulk fields in the
studied model, almost all arise from the second or the fourth twisted
sectors of the @xmath orbifold. Due to the existence of inequivalent
superpositions of states from equivalent Hilbert spaces, the latter
hypermultiplets have an overall multiplicity of three in the bulk. The
intertwining of gauge and supersymmetry breaking at the orbifold fixed
points then allows for the universal decoupling of many exotics, since
uncharged pairs of fields with different superposition quantum numbers
can be formed. This mechanism is independent of the specific gauge
embedding of the model.

This universal decoupling required only four singlet fields with a
non-zero vacuum expectation value. We extended this set to two different
maximal vacua, which cannot be enlarged further without either violating
matter parity or generating a @xmath -term. This showed that in the
studied model, the unification of both the up- and the down-type Higgs
with gauge fields of the six-dimensional bulk is impossible. Instead, we
found that either a model with two Higgs pairs can be realized, which is
incompatible with gauge coupling unification, or partial gauge Higgs
unification. The latter corresponds to the situation that only the
up-type Higgs is contained in the gauge vector, with the desirable
prediction of a large top-quark mass. In fact, the case of full
gauge-Higgs unification is phenomenologically not preferred over the
partial gauge-Higgs unification scenario. One may even argue that the
symmetry between the fundamental and the anti-fundamental representation
of @xmath is already broken by the identification of matter with the
latter. However, both vacua predict massless electrons and down-quarks
and are thus excluded as physical vacua.

This observation is not surprising. The whole analysis was based on one
particular model, contained in a whole landscape of possibilities. The
motivation for the work was not to find the standard model vacuum by
pure luck, but to consider one model in detail and gain a better
understanding of the problems that form the typical obstacles on the way
towards fully realistic vacua.

The main part of this paper was concerned with the issue of vacuum
selection and the question of relating the latter to phenomenology.
Another source of problems may arise from the misinterpretation of
remnants of the orbifold construction. It is apparent from the
calculation of anomalies that the effective orbifold GUT model has
localized Fayet–Iliopoulos terms of GUT scale at the fixed points. Thus
even though we could show explicitly that all anomalies of the effective
orbifold field theory vanish or can be canceled, the trivial vacuum is
inconsistent, since it is not supersymmetric. This implies that singlet
fields acquire large vacuum expectation values during the transition to
the supersymmetric solution, thereby blowing up singularities. The
orbifold description can thus only be effective, and its validity as an
approximate description is not clear a priori. For the bulk theory of
the effective orbifold GUT in six dimensions it was possible to identify
the fields of the orbifold with the moduli of a compactification of four
dimensions of heterotic string theory on the @xmath manifold. This
assigns new interpretations to the singlets of the orbifold model. One
may hope that the analogue orbifold GUT can be constructed in terms of
an anisotropic compactification, where the small dimensions are
compactified on @xmath , modulo an involution. If the resulting model
can also be matched with the @xmath orbifold case, new insights on the
validity and interpretation of orbifolds may be gained, including new
guiding principles for the search for physical vacua.

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Wilfried Buchmüller, Rolf Kappl, Christoph
Lüdeling, Jan Möller, Saúl Ramos–Sánchez, Kai Schmidt–Hoberg and Hagen
Triendl for many valuable discussions and comments.

## Appendix A Orbifold details

### a.1 Solving the fixed point equation

For any element @xmath one can write down the fixed point condition

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (387)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus the corresponding fixed point or fixed plane coordinates form the
kernel of @xmath . They can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (388)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This equation has no solution if @xmath describes a pure translation in
the plane @xmath , which means @xmath . Otherwise the solutions are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the first line describes a localization in the plane @xmath , while
for non-trivial @xmath the latter corresponds to a fixed plane solution.

In summary, the space group @xmath splits into two regimes. One
generates winding modes in at least one of the planes ( @xmath ). All
other elements fulfill a fixed pointed equation. These regimes can now
be decomposed into disjoint conjugacy classes, yielding a non-redundant
description of the space group.

### a.2 Space group selection rules for @xmath

A coupling

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

of @xmath multiplets at fixed points with space group elements @xmath ,
@xmath , can be present if the space group selection rule ( 100 ) is
fulfilled,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (391)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The sub-lattices @xmath are given in Table 3 . We count the number of
multiplets @xmath with quantum numbers @xmath by @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath in the @xmath - and the @xmath -plane, respectively. With
Table 2 the left hand side of ( 391 ) then gives for the three planes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (392a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (392b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (392c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -plane was discussed in Section 3.1.2 of the main text.
Recall from table 3 that the sub-lattices relevant for the @xmath - and
the @xmath -plane are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- --------
                                      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (393a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (393b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- --------

The condition ( 391 ) can thus be evaluated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (394a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (394b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (394c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These conditions are equivalent to the rules

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- --------
                                      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (395a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (395b)
              @xmath   @xmath         (395c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- --------

as stated in ( 128 ).

### a.3 The gamma phases

#### a.3.1 The general case

Consider a sector @xmath , with representative space group element
@xmath . As explained in Section 2.3 , physical states are
superpositions of states which are localized at the various fixed points
@xmath , corresponding to the elements @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (396)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with coefficients @xmath . The gamma phases are then defined by the
eigenvalues of the action of other elements @xmath on @xmath .

Any element of the conjugacy class @xmath arises from the representative
@xmath by conjugation with a twist @xmath and a translation @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (397)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For the associated fixed point @xmath this means

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (398)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and a natural ansatz for the superposition ( 396 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (399)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first bracket @xmath sums over infinitely many terms which
correspond to infinitely many lattice translations within @xmath . The
second bracket @xmath represents @xmath rotations of the translational
part of @xmath , where @xmath is the order of the orbifold.

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath in ( 399 ) are not fully arbitrary.
First, we require compatibility with the group multiplication rule,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (400)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the latter relation follows from the explicit form of the inverse
element ( 20 ) and should hold for any @xmath . The rotation can be
expressed on the coefficients @xmath by use of the Coxeter element
@xmath of the geometry, which is the rotational matrix defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (401)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The requirements ( 400 ) are then fulfilled by the exponential ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (402)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are some coefficients, constrained by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (403)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Second, elements @xmath which do commute with the representative @xmath
do not affect the state @xmath , and hence should not appear with
different coefficients. The property @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (404)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For the coefficients @xmath this reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (405)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We now aim to associate the right-hand side of this equation with @xmath
in ( 402 ), and the left-hand side with @xmath , with a relative minus
sign. However, this requires a linear expression in @xmath , up to
integers. With a new set of constrained constants @xmath the
linearization can be realized:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (406)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to the improved, but still preliminary ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (407)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for which the constraints ( 403 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (408)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the two brackets combine to a diagonal matrix, whose entries
are given by @xmath , where @xmath is the twist in the corresponding
plane.

So far we have realized the group transformation laws on the
coefficients, and we have ensured that elements which commute with the
representative element have unit coefficients. They are thus equivalent
to the trivial element @xmath within the product of sums @xmath .
However, one can add an additional phase to the terms in @xmath which is
also trivial for commuting elements, without cancelation from the phase
in @xmath . Let @xmath be the smallest positive integer for which

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (409)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath is a divisor of @xmath . By comparison with ( 404 ) one
finds that for commuting elements @xmath , @xmath must be a multiple of
@xmath . This means that the phase

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (410)
  -- -------- -- -------

is one for commuting elements, and we have introduced a new constant
@xmath . Our final ansatz is then

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (411)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

and one can now study the transformation behavior of the superposition (
399 ), with the suggested coefficients.

As we will show, they fulfill an eigenvalue equation with respect to
arbitrary operators @xmath , of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (412)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath under
translations and rotations, respectively. This follows the spirit of the
separation of space group elements into a translational and a rotational
part, which is the crucial feature of the decomposition ( 399 ).

On @xmath , rotations @xmath act as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (413)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the rotational invariance of @xmath from ( 403 ) was used. Thus
@xmath commutes with rotations, as a direct consequence of ( 400 ).

Furthermore, @xmath fulfills an eigenvalue equation with respect to
translations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (414)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Finally we consider the action of rotations @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (415)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In summary, the eigenstates of @xmath in the sector @xmath , @xmath ,
are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (416)
     @xmath   @xmath      (417)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the constants in @xmath and @xmath fulfill the constraints

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (418a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (418b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (418c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (418d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the labels of the planes associated with the lattice
vectors @xmath , and @xmath was defined in ( 409 ). Note that the
condition

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (419)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

is automatically satisfied for solutions of the above constraints. This
immediately follows from ( 418b ) with the choice @xmath .

#### a.3.2 The @xmath example

For the @xmath geometry, the transpose @xmath of the Coxeter element
from ( 401 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (420)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where all entries which are not shown are zero. The conditions ( 418 )
for the space group eigenstates ( 416 ) for the @xmath geometry are then
solved by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (421)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of integers @xmath . Thus the order of the @xmath -th entry of
@xmath corresponds to the order of the lattice vector @xmath , and the
two entries for the @xmath -plane are identical since @xmath and @xmath
are connected by a twist.

## Appendix B Lie Group Basics

This section is a very brief review of selected well known facts about
Lie groups. Some of them are needed in the main text, especially for the
identification of the representations of states, which arise in the
effective theories derived from the heterotic string.

#### Weights

A Lie group @xmath has an associated Lie algebra @xmath . Its commuting
generators form the Cartan sub-algebra @xmath with dimension @xmath ,
dubbed the rank of @xmath .

For any representation of dimension @xmath , the action of the elements
of the Cartan sub-algebra @xmath can be simultaneously diagonalized. The
states then obey a relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (422)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the weight vector @xmath collects the weights @xmath of the
representation @xmath . In the main text, the weight vectors are given
by the shifted left-moving momenta @xmath of the generated states.

#### Roots

Roots @xmath are the weights of the adjoint representation. They obey

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (423)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the corresponding states @xmath act as raising and lowering
operators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (424)
  -- -------- -- -------

For each root eigenstate @xmath , there is a natural @xmath subgroup
generated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (425)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that the @xmath raise and lower the eigenvalue of @xmath of a
state, respectively. In general,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (426)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath in any representation is an integer or half integer. As
always for representations of @xmath there are a non-negative integers
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (427a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (427b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

In that case, the highest and lowest weights are @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (428a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (428b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin of the representation. One then finds the
formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (429)
  -- -------- -- -------

The right hand side gives a label to the state with weight @xmath ,
compare e.g. the @xmath representation, where @xmath . The left hand
side, when applied to the adjoint representation, gives the cosine of
the angle between roots. The integer nature of @xmath then restricts the
possible angles to 90,120,135 or 150 degrees. These are the angles
appearing in Dynkin- and root diagrams.

#### Simple Roots

A root is said to be positive, if the first non-zero entry in some fixed
basis is positive. It is negative, if the first non-zero entry is
negative. With this definition in the adjoint representation the
positive roots correspond to raising, the negative to lowering
operators. For roots @xmath we define

@xmath if @xmath is positive.

Simple roots are positive roots that cannot be written as a sum of other
positive roots. The number of simple roots equals the rank @xmath of the
group. All other roots and thus the whole algebra can be deduced from
linear combinations of simple roots.

#### Cartan Matrix

The Cartan matrix is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (430)
  -- -------- -- -------

For fixed @xmath , its entries give the @xmath values of the @xmath ’s
associated with the simple roots @xmath , when acting on a the state
@xmath . The Cartan matrix is characteristic for a group, it contains
the same information as the associated Dynkin diagram. Non-zero
off-diagonal entries, or equivalently non-zero angles between roots,
describe a non-trivial overlap of the contained @xmath subgroups,
generated by the simple roots @xmath .

#### Dynkin Labels and Fundamental Weights

In the spirit of ( 429 ) one can define the ‘Cartan–Weyl labels’ @xmath
for any state @xmath of a irreducible representation @xmath (here no
summation over @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (431)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The integers @xmath specify how often the simple root @xmath can be
applied before the state reaches zero, cf. ( 427 ). Now consider the
application of @xmath to the state @xmath . It results in @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (432)
  -- -------- -- -------

The difference of the vectors @xmath for two different states of a
representation is thus always given by one of the columns of the Cartan
matrix. This is the property which is used in the main text in order to
identify the weights @xmath that correspond to the same representation
@xmath .

For any irreducible representation @xmath there is a maximal weight
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (433)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus for this weight one has @xmath for all @xmath , and the set of
integers

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (434)
  -- -------- -- -------

fully determines the representation. These labels @xmath are called
Dynkin labels of the representation @xmath .

Furthermore, one defines fundamental weights @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (435)
  -- -------- -- -------

which imply the decomposition of general weights as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (436)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives another interpretation for the quantities @xmath from ( 431
). In ( 436 ) they play the role of coefficients of the weight vector
with respect to a basis in weight space, spanned by the fundamental
weights @xmath .

## Appendix C Anomalies with Abelian factors

### c.1 Bulk anomalies

The contributions to the bulk anomaly polynomial @xmath which involve
Abelian field strength two-forms @xmath , canonically normalized as in (
219 ), take the form ( 218 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (437a)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (437b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath labels the non-Abelian gauge groups in the bulk. The
different relative multiplicities arise from the various choices of
associating the non-Abelian groups with some of the field strength
two-forms, and the Abelian group factors with the others.

The coefficients @xmath follow from summations over all hyperinos @xmath
in the bulk. Each of them transforms in a representation of the gauge
group and has charges under the @xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (438)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the conversion of this information into quantities of relevance for
( 437 ) we use the identities from Table 13 and the definition ( 219 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (439)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The hyperino charge sums then read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (440a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (440b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (440c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (440d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now evaluate these sums for the bulk hypermultiplets listed in the
Tables 6 and 7 . With @xmath from Table 24

and the given charges follows immediately that

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (441)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Furthermore, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (442)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with a symmetric matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (443)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The coefficients @xmath are listed in Table 25 . Close inspection shows
that they can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (444)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a symmetry factor, which is only different from one if
two or more of its variables are equal. In that case it counts the
possibilities to associate these equal labels with equally many of the
four @xmath -factors. For example,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (445)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### c.2 Fixed point anomalies

The anomaly polynomial at the fixed points characterized by @xmath is a
six-form of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (446)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are coefficients, and @xmath and @xmath label the local
non-Abelian and Abelian gauge group factors, respectively, cf. ( 225 ).
The canonically normalized @xmath factors @xmath were defined in ( 219
).

The coefficients are calculated by summing over the chiral fermions
which are present at the fixed point. They can either arise from twisted
sectors, in which case we denote them as @xmath , or they are contained
in a bulk hypermultiplet, denoted as @xmath . As detailed calculations
show, see for example [ 79 ] , the contributions of the latter are
weighted with a relative factor of @xmath compared to the localized
fermions. This is interpreted as a democratic distribution of their
effect among the four fixed points of the geometry.

The coefficients in ( 446 ) are given by the sums

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (447a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (447b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (447c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (447d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath were defined in ( 439 ).

With Tables 8 , 10 , 12 , 11 and 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 24 we evaluate
these sums and find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (448)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (449)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath               (450)
     @xmath   @xmath                        
              @xmath                        (451)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We can bring this into a much simpler form by changing the basis of the
Abelian generators. With

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (452)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (453)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and orthogonal sets of generators which extend @xmath and @xmath to a
basis at @xmath or @xmath , respectively, the above results become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (454)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (455)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (456)
     @xmath   @xmath                        
              @xmath                        (457)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the appearing square roots are a consequence of

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (458)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Finally, we calculate the sums @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (459)
     @xmath   @xmath      (460)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For an orthogonal basis, the brackets sum to @xmath .

## Appendix D The hidden brane

The effective orbifold GUT in six dimensions which is described in
Chapter 3 has two pairs of inequivalent fixed points. They differ in the
localization label @xmath and their role in the compactification:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (461)
     @xmath   @xmath      (462)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The hidden brane fixed point is responsible for the breaking of the GUT
gauge group to the standard model gauge group in the effective theory in
four dimensions.

## Localized states at @xmath

We now calculate the matter spectrum at @xmath . This requires to solve
the mass equations ( 79 ), ( 80 ), and simultaneously the projection
conditions ( 134a ). Consider a sector @xmath which gives rise to
localized states at @xmath . The case @xmath will be completely
analogous. The elements @xmath are then further characterized by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (463)
     @xmath                                          (464)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (465)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

By the arguments of Section 3.2.3 we find projection conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (466a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (466b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (466c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations have 96 solutions which can be casted into multiplets of
the local gauge symmetry @xmath . The result is given in Table 26 . All
states are exotics and have to be decoupled from the low-energy
spectrum. An example for this is given in [ 13 ] .

The chiral projection of bulk hypermultiplets to the fixed points @xmath
is summarized in Tables 27 , 29 .

### Projection of bulk states

The local projection condition for bulk fields to fixed points @xmath
with @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (467)
     @xmath   @xmath      (468)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is understood for fields from the untwisted sector. The
results are listed in Tables 27 , 28 and 29 .

## Appendix E Zero modes in four dimensions

The spectrum of the low-energy effective field theory in four dimensions
follows from solutions of the mass equations ( 79 ), ( 80 ) and the
projection conditions ( 144 ), ( 147 ). Up to the geometrical @xmath
-phases, the result was already published in [ 13 ] . Here we present
the list of chiral gauge multiplets of @xmath with charges under nine
linearly independent @xmath factors, with generators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (469)
  -- -------- -- -------

as defined in Table 4 . We additionally list the @xmath charges and the
multiplet of the six-dimensional model which contains the zero mode. In
the case of bulk multiplets, we chose to represent the latter by
multiplets with respect to the local gauge group at @xmath , rather than
the bulk gauge group, since we are mainly interested in the effective
@xmath GUT at this fixed point in the main text. All left-handed chiral
multiplets which arise from sectors @xmath are listed in Table 30 ,
together with all left-handed chiral multiplets from @xmath at @xmath .
Note that the spectrum of the sectors @xmath at @xmath is an exact copy
of the latter, and not shown explicitly. The @xmath charges with respect
to the generators @xmath can be inferred from the Tables 8 , 10 , 12 and
26 .

## Appendix F Discrete symmetry transformations

In Chapter 4 three vacua were studied in detail,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (470a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (470b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (470c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with unbroken symmetries

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (471a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (471b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (471c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

under which a field @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (472)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath can be found in Tables 15 , 18 and 18 for the
vacua @xmath , respectively. The phases @xmath for all fields @xmath at
the GUT fixed point @xmath are listed in Tables 31 and 32 . These tables
confirm that the given symmetries are unbroken in the above vacua.

Furthermore, from the tables one can infer if a coupling of interest can
be present in the superpotential or not. This follows from comparison of
the total phase with the vacuum phase with respect to the unbroken
symmetries,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (473)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (474)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Couplings may be allowed if the sums of the phases add to the above
vacuum values, up to integers, and for all unbroken symmetries.
Otherwise, they are forbidden to arbitrary order in the singlets.

Note that the breaking of symmetries is insensitive to overall minus
signs. This implies that singlets @xmath and @xmath , in the sense of
Section 4.6 , yield the same unbroken symmetry. In consequence, it is
possible that a coupling is allowed from the viewpoint of the unbroken
symmetries, but always involves singlets with negative powers, and is
therefore forbidden for the description of physical interactions. As an
example, consider the dimension-five proton decay operator from
Equation ( 329 ) in the vacuum @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (475)
  -- -------- -- -------

This term is consistent with the unbroken symmetries of the vacuum.
However, an example for a corresponding coupling reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (476)
  -- -------- -- -------

and in fact it is impossible to find monomials with only positive
exponents. Since the symmetries do not know about the projection rule (
323 ) for physical couplings, they can only state necessary conditions
for their existence.