# Note

This version differs slightly from the original. Typographical errors
have been corrected without comment. More substantial changes are
indicated by footnotes. The numbering of definitions, propositions and
references is unchanged.

\phd \campus

New Brunswick \program Mathematics \director Wolmer V. Vasconcelos
\approvals 4 \copyrightpage \submissionmonth October \submissionyear
1998 \beforepreface

###### Acknowledgements. I am deeply indebted to my thesis advisor,
Wolmer Vasconcelos, a warm and decent person, generous with his time and
attention, tolerant of my faults, a Fountain of Algebra, and a wonderful
teacher in the broadest – and noblest – sense of the word. I am also
grateful to the balance of my patient thesis committee, Joseph Brennan,
Friedrich Knop and Charles Weibel. Friedrich Knop and Charles Weibel
offered excellent instruction in the courses basic to this dissertation:
Commutative Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Homological Algebra. Charles
Weibel devoted considerable energy to reading this thesis and suggesting
numerous improvements. Joseph Brennan was like a second advisor to me
during his visit in the Fall of 1996 and the Spring of 1997. It was Joe
who sparked my interest in Dilworth numbers. The ideas in Chapter 4 of
this thesis were worked out with his considerable help. My friend Luisa
Doering, with whom I shared an office and an advisor, and with whom I
learned Commutative Algebra, served as audience, critic and collaborator
for many of the ideas in this dissertation. This thesis would not have
been completed without the support of Carol Hamer. My Uncle Wayne and
Aunt Barbara Perkins and my late grandparents, Doris and Howard Gunston,
have given me generous financial support throughout my education. I can
not thank them enough. Finally, I thank my family for laying a firm
foundation. \dedication This is dedicated to my family: Mom, Dad, Hope,
Emily and Christian. \abbreviations {descriptionlist} box width the
natural numbers the real numbers the integers finitely generated @xmath
-modules, graded if @xmath is graded; Section 1.1 the @xmath graded
component of @xmath ; Section 1.1 the Hilbert function of @xmath ;
Section 1.1 the multiplicity or degree of @xmath ; Section 1.1 the
length of @xmath the Hilbert series of @xmath ; Section 1.1 the
associated graded module of @xmath ; Section 1.1 the Hilbert-Samuel
function of @xmath with respect to @xmath ; Section 1.1 the multiplicity
of @xmath with respect to @xmath ; Section 1.1 the multiplicity symbol;
Definition 1.2.2 the reduction number of @xmath with respect to @xmath ;
Definition 1.3.3 the reduction number of @xmath ; Definition 1.3.3 the
depth of @xmath the type of @xmath ; Definition 1.4.1 the socle of
@xmath ; Definition 1.4.3 the @xmath -adic completion of @xmath the
injective envelope of the @xmath -module @xmath ; Definition 1.5.1 the
Matlis dual of @xmath ; Section 1.5 the category of @xmath -modules of
finite length, graded if @xmath is graded; Section 1.5 the size of a
minimal generating set of @xmath the zeroth local cohomology module of
@xmath ; Definition 1.5.3 the @xmath local cohomology module of @xmath ;
Definition 1.5.5 @xmath , where @xmath is a Gorenstein ring of dimension
@xmath ; Section 1.5 the set of prime ideals in @xmath the set of primes
associated to @xmath the invariant of Stückrad and Vogel; Definition
1.6.4 the truncation @xmath of the graded module @xmath ; Definition
1.7.3 the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of @xmath ; Definition 1.7.5
the reverse lexicographic order; Section 1.9 the degree of the monomial
@xmath in the variable @xmath the initial term of @xmath with respect to
the reverse lexicographic order; Section 1.9 the initial ideal of @xmath
with respect to the reverse lexicographic order; Section 1.9 the group
of inveritible linear transformations of the vector space @xmath the
generic initial ideal of @xmath with respect to the reverse
lexicographic order; Definition 1.9.3 the saturation of the ideal @xmath
; Section 1.9 the restriction of the ring @xmath and ideal @xmath to the
hyperplane @xmath ; Section 1.9 the homological degree; Example 2.1.3
the extremal cohomological degree with respect to @xmath ; Example 2.1.6
the embedding dimension of @xmath ; Section 2.2 the embedding
codimension of @xmath ; Section 2.2 the extremal cohomological degree;
Definition 3.1.3 Definition 3.1.10 the Rees number of @xmath ;
Definition 3.1.11 see Section 3.4 the Dilworth number of @xmath ;
Definition 4.2.1 the unique maximal submodule @xmath of @xmath
satisfying @xmath ; Definition 4.2.8 the homological Dilworth number;
Definition 4.4.1 the end of a portion of a proof the end of a proof
\afterpreface

## Introduction

This dissertation is about measuring modules.

Let @xmath be a local, Noetherian ring, with residue field @xmath , or a
homogeneous @xmath -algebra, with @xmath a field. Write @xmath for the
category of finitely generated (and graded if @xmath is homogeneous)
@xmath -modules.

It is of interest to assign a number, @xmath , to every @xmath in @xmath
, which measures the complexity of the module @xmath . Some examples are
the rank of @xmath ; the size of a minimal generating set for @xmath ,
@xmath ; the multiplicity of @xmath ; the arithmetic and geometric
degrees, @xmath and @xmath , studied in Bayer-Mumford [ 1 ] and
Sturmfels-Trung-Vogel [ 35 ] ; the homological degree, @xmath ,
introduced in [ 38 ] , and other cohomological degrees. For a survey,
see the notes of Vasconcelos [ 39 ] . In the case where @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, the multiplicity (or degree) of @xmath , written @xmath
, serves this purpose admirably. It is defined as follows: If @xmath ,
then the length of @xmath , @xmath , is finite and we let @xmath . If
@xmath then @xmath has infinite length and we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is always a positive integer unless @xmath , in which case @xmath
.

The multiplicity function has served particularly well in bounding
numbers of generators of ideals and modules. For example, Sally [ 30 ] ,
[ 31 ] , has shown that if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath is a
Cohen-Macaulay ideal of height @xmath , then the number of generators of
@xmath , @xmath , is bounded as follows:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

Many similar bounds can be found in the literature ( [ 4 , 5 , 14 , 33 ,
36 , 37 ] ). In particular, an improvement to ( 1 ) can be found in [ 10
] . On the other hand if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then we have

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

and, as demonstrated by Brennan, Herzog and Ulrich in [ 6 ] , equality
holds if and only if @xmath has a linear resolution (viewed as a module
over a polynomial ring.) Unfortunately, all of these results are false
when the Cohen-Macaulay condition is removed. In the words of
Vasconcelos [ 39 , page 145] , “ @xmath leaks all over as a predictor of
properties of @xmath ” when @xmath fails to be Cohen-Macaulay.
Cohomological degree functions were introduced in [ 10 ] in an attempt
to remedy this situation.

###### Definition 1

Let @xmath be an infinite field. A cohomological degree is a function,
@xmath , from the isomorphism classes of modules in @xmath to @xmath ,
satisfying the following conditions.

1.   If @xmath and @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   If @xmath and @xmath is a generic hyperplane on @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

( @xmath denotes the zeroth local cohomology module. The condition that
@xmath be infinite is required, of course, to make sense of the term
’generic’.) The prototype for such a function is the homological degree,
@xmath , introduced in [ 38 ] . If @xmath is a Gorenstein ring of
dimension @xmath , then we define @xmath inductively as follows. If
@xmath then we let @xmath . If @xmath , then we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(This definition is well founded since @xmath for all @xmath .) In [ 38
] it is shown that @xmath is a cohomological degree.

In Chapter 2 of this dissertation, we lay out the basic properties of
cohomological degrees (many of which first appear in [ 10 ] ). Included
are several bounds on the number of generators of ideals in the spirit
of Sally, but extended to the non-Cohen-Macaulay case (Section 2.3 ).
Moreover, if @xmath is a cohomological degree and @xmath is a finitely
generated module, we may generalize ( 2 ) to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Yoshida [ 45 ] has partially extended the result of
Brennan-Herzog-Ulrich [ 6 ] for the cohomological degree @xmath :

###### Theorem 2

If @xmath then @xmath has a linear resolution.

In Section 2.4 we show (following Yoshida’s proof) that only the
properties of cohomological degrees are needed. Thus, we have:

###### Theorem 3

Suppose @xmath is a cohomological degree and @xmath is a finitely
generated module. If @xmath then @xmath has a linear resolution.

However, unlike in the Cohen-Macaulay case, the converse does not hold.

In Chapter 3, we introduce a new cohomological degree, @xmath , which
may be described axiomatically as follows.

###### Definition 4

@xmath is the unique function from the isomorphism classes of modules in
@xmath to @xmath satisfying the following properties.

1.  @xmath if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay.

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath and @xmath is a generic hyperplane on @xmath , then
    @xmath .

It is not obvious that such a function exists. Thus Section 3.1 is
devoted to establishing that there is such a function (Theorem 3.1.2 ).

@xmath is sharper than @xmath , so the bounds in Section 2.3 are
necessarily improved, but we also now have a converse to Theorem 3 .

###### Theorem 5

If @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath module then @xmath if and only
if @xmath has a linear resolution.

A key step will be to show that @xmath may only increase when we pass to
the associated graded module.

###### Theorem 6

@xmath .

In counterpoint to these degree-like functions, when @xmath is
homogeneous, is the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of @xmath . Since
@xmath is homogeneous, it is the homomorphic image of a polynomial ring,
@xmath , and so we may view @xmath as an @xmath -module. @xmath has a
graded minimal free resolution as an @xmath -module:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The regularity of @xmath is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Regularity has a distinctly different flavor from the degree functions:
it is oblivious to rank ( @xmath ) but sensitive to shifts ( @xmath ),
whereas a degree function, @xmath , tends to exhibit the opposite
behavior; it is sensitive to rank ( @xmath ) but oblivious to shifts (
@xmath ). This situation may be summarized by saying that degrees are
“ranky” and regularity is “shifty”. Nonetheless, for algebras these two
kinds of functions are not completely independent. There is a growing
literature ( [ 10 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 27 , 28 ] ) on the interplay between
@xmath and @xmath for various @xmath .

For cohomological degrees, the starting point is the following theorem,
taken from [ 10 ] .

###### Theorem 7

Suppose @xmath is a homogeneous @xmath -algebra and @xmath is a
cohomological degree on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We take up the question of how much @xmath may exceed @xmath . Our first
result is:

###### Theorem 8

There exists a function @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all homogeneous @xmath -algebras @xmath of dimension at most @xmath
.

Here, @xmath is the embedding dimension of @xmath . We conjecture that
the condition @xmath is unnecessary.

For @xmath our results are stronger. We give two bounds. The first one
is a consequence of Theorem 5 .

###### Theorem 9

If @xmath is a finitely generated graded module over a homogeneous
@xmath algebra and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Hilbert function of @xmath and @xmath .

Our second bound is less elegant but more concrete. It is based on the
fact that @xmath does not change when we pass to the generic initial
ideal.

###### Theorem 10

Let @xmath be a polynomial ring over @xmath and let @xmath be a
homogeneous ideal of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the generic initial ideal of @xmath .

We give a combinatorial description of @xmath and from this derive a
sharp, explicit bound on @xmath , where @xmath is a homogeneous @xmath
-algebra.

Recall that any positive integer @xmath can be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , called the @xmath Macaulay representation of @xmath . For
fixed positive integers @xmath and @xmath , the numbers @xmath are
uniquely determined. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 11

Let @xmath be a homogeneous algebra over a field of characteristic
@xmath . If @xmath , and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Chapter 4, we study another measurement on modules, which is also
useful in bounding numbers of generators, the Dilworth number.

###### Definition 12

If @xmath is in @xmath , then we define the Dilworth number, @xmath , as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Trivially, we have @xmath , but unfortunately @xmath is finite if and
only if @xmath has dimension at most @xmath . Further, it simply does
not hold that if @xmath then @xmath has a linear resolution, even in
dimension @xmath . Nevertheless, there is an analogy between the
Dilworth number and cohomological degrees – the homological degree in
particular. It is as follows. If @xmath is Gorenstein of dimension
@xmath and @xmath is an @xmath -module of dimension @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By a theorem of Ikeda [ 25 ] , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we are led to the definition of the homological Dilworth number,
@xmath .

###### Definition 13

If @xmath is a Gorenstein ring of dimension @xmath and @xmath , then the
homological Dilworth number is defined recursively as follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We show that, like the homological degree, the homological Dilworth
number may only decrease modulo a generic regular hyperplane section.

###### Theorem 14

Let @xmath in @xmath have positive depth and let @xmath be a generic
hyperplane on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This allows us to prove Sally bounds analogous to those proved for
cohomological degrees. Since @xmath , the bounds are sharper for the
homological Dilworth number than they are for the homological degree,
though perhaps not for @xmath . We also have another linear resolution
theorem.

###### Theorem 15

If @xmath is in @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath
has a linear resolution.

In the final section, we compare @xmath to @xmath . Our first result is:

###### Theorem 16

If @xmath in @xmath has dimension at most @xmath , then @xmath .

As a corollary, we have:

###### Theorem 17

If @xmath has dimension at most @xmath , then @xmath has a linear
resolution if and only if @xmath and @xmath .

We show by example that this theorem is false in dimension @xmath and
higher. We also give examples to show that either inequality

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is possible when @xmath .

## Chapter 1 Preliminaries

In this chapter we provide a brief summary of the definitions and
results in commutative algebra upon which we will rely in the subsequent
chapters. Our sources for most of this material are: for basic
commutative algebra, [ 12 ] and [ 26 ] ; for the theory of
Cohen-Macaulay rings and modules, [ 7 ] ; for Buchsbaum rings and
modules, [ 34 ] ; and for homological algebra, [ 43 ] . The reader is
advised to skim this chapter briefly, coming back to it only as needed.

### 1.1 Local and Homogeneous Rings; Hilbert Functions

In this dissertation we will be concerned primarily with commutative
rings @xmath (with identity, of course!) which are of either of the
following types

-   Noetherian local rings; or

-   homogeneous @xmath -algebras, @xmath a field.

A homogeneous @xmath -algebra (also called a standard graded algebra) is
a positively graded ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the @xmath graded component of @xmath , such that
@xmath , each @xmath is a finite dimensional vector space over @xmath ,
and @xmath is generated as a @xmath -algebra in degree @xmath : @xmath .
Equivalently, @xmath is of the form @xmath , where @xmath is a
polynomial ring over @xmath and @xmath is a homogeneous ideal.

If @xmath is local, then we let @xmath denote the maximal ideal and we
let @xmath denote the residue class field @xmath . @xmath will denote
the category of finitely generated @xmath -modules. If @xmath is
homogeneous, then @xmath will denote the irrelevant maximal ideal,
@xmath , and @xmath will denote the category of finitely generated
graded @xmath -modules. For the proofs of the assertions in the
following discussion, we refer the reader to [ 7 ] , [ 12 ] or [ 26 ] .

If @xmath is homogeneous and @xmath is in @xmath , then the Hilbert
function of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hilbert function agrees with a polynomial for large enough values of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath is an integer, called the multiplicity or degree
of @xmath , written @xmath . (If @xmath , then we set @xmath .)

If @xmath is local and @xmath is in @xmath , then the associated graded
module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a finitely generated graded module over the associated graded ring
@xmath , which is a homogeneous @xmath -algebra. Thus @xmath has a
Hilbert function, and we define the degree of @xmath to be the degree of
its associated graded module:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any @xmath -primary ideal @xmath , we may define the Hilbert-Samuel
function of @xmath with respect to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hilbert-Samuel function also agrees with a polynomial for @xmath
large enough:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is an integer, called the multiplicity of @xmath
with respect to @xmath , and written @xmath . Observe that @xmath . For
some interesting variations on this theme, we refer the reader to [ 9 ]
.

If @xmath is homogeneous and @xmath is in @xmath , then the generating
function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the Hilbert function is called the Hilbert series. The Hilbert series
is a rational function of @xmath , and can be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath satisfies @xmath .

### 1.2 The Multiplicity Symbol

Let @xmath denote a Noetherian local ring or a homogeneous @xmath
-algebra. For the proofs of the propositions in the section, see [ 7 ,
Section 4.6]

###### Definition 1.2.1

A sequence of elements @xmath in @xmath is called a multiplicity system
for a module @xmath if @xmath has finite length.

###### Definition 1.2.2

If @xmath is a multiplicity system for @xmath then we define the
multiplicity symbol , @xmath , by induction on @xmath , as follows. If
@xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 1.2.3

Let @xmath be a multiplicity system for @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath
. If @xmath , then the multiplicity symbol @xmath agrees with the
multiplicity of the ideal generated by @xmath with respect to @xmath :
@xmath

###### Proposition 1.2.4

Given an exact sequence of modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a sequence @xmath of elements in @xmath is a multiplicity system for
@xmath if and only if it is a multiplicity system for @xmath and for
@xmath , and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.3 Reductions

Again, @xmath is a Noetherian local ring or a homogeneous @xmath
-algebra. If @xmath is homogeneous, then whenever we refer to an ideal
of @xmath , it is assumed that the ideal is homogeneous.

###### Definition 1.3.1

If @xmath are ideals of @xmath and @xmath is in @xmath , then @xmath is
said to be a reduction of @xmath with respect to @xmath if @xmath for
@xmath . We say that @xmath is a reduction of @xmath if @xmath is a
reduction of @xmath with respect to @xmath . If @xmath is a reduction of
@xmath and no other reduction of @xmath is contained in @xmath , then
@xmath is said to be a minimal reduction of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.3.2

Every ideal has a minimal reduction.

For a proof, see [ 29 ] .

###### Definition 1.3.3

If @xmath is a reduction, then the reduction number of @xmath with
respect to @xmath , written @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The reduction number of @xmath , denoted @xmath , is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

For a proof of the following proposition, we refer the reader to [ 7 ,
Lemma 4.5.5.] or [ 26 , Theorem 14.13] .

###### Proposition 1.3.4

If @xmath is a reduction with respect to @xmath and @xmath is @xmath
-primary, then @xmath .

The following proposition says, roughly, that any sequence of
sufficiently generic linear combinations of the generators of an @xmath
-primary ideal form a minimal reduction of the ideal.

###### Proposition 1.3.5

Suppose @xmath is infinite and @xmath . Let @xmath be an @xmath -primary
ideal, and suppose that @xmath , where @xmath . Then there is a
Zariski-open subset @xmath of the affine space @xmath such that if
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath denotes the residue class of @xmath in
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a minimal reduction of @xmath with respect to @xmath . In
particular, @xmath is a system of parameters for @xmath .

A proof is contained in [ 26 , Theorem 14.14] .

###### Corollary 1.3.6

Suppose the field @xmath is infinite. If @xmath is in @xmath , there is
a multiplicity system @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Definition 1.3.7

If @xmath is a multiplicity system for @xmath such that @xmath , then
@xmath is called a degree system for @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.3.8

If @xmath is part of a multiplicity system for @xmath , then @xmath ,
for all @xmath .

Proof. This follows quickly from, for example, Lech’s formula [ 26 ,
Theorem 14.12] . @xmath

### 1.4 Gorenstein Rings

Let @xmath be a Noetherian local ring or a homogeneous @xmath -algebra,
and let @xmath be in @xmath . Then we have ( [ 7 , Theorem 1.2.8] )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The modules @xmath are all annihilated by @xmath , so it makes sense to
speak of the dimension of @xmath as a vector space over @xmath . This
leads to the definition of the type of a module.

###### Definition 1.4.1

If @xmath then the type of @xmath is the integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Type is preserved modulo a regular element.

###### Proposition 1.4.2

Let @xmath be regular on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath . We will show @xmath From the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath annihilates @xmath , this gives the desired isomorphism.
@xmath

###### Definition 1.4.3

The socle of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the socle is nonzero precisely when the depth is zero.

###### Definition 1.4.4

@xmath is called Gorenstein if it is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath .

Thus, by Proposition 1.4.2 , if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath is a
maximal regular sequence in @xmath , then @xmath is Gorenstein if and
only if @xmath . In particular, if @xmath or if @xmath is a regular
local ring, then @xmath is Gorenstein.

We will frequently be moved to require that @xmath be the homomorphic
image of a Gorenstein ring, in order to use the duality described in the
next section. If @xmath is homogeneous, this is automatically so, since
@xmath is the quotient of a polynomial ring by a homogeneous ideal,
@xmath . If @xmath is local, it is not necessarily the homomorphic image
of a Gorenstein ring, but by Cohen’s structure theorem ( [ 7 , Theorem
A.21] or [ 26 , Theorem 29.4] ), its @xmath -adic completion @xmath is.

### 1.5 Local Cohomology and Local Duality

In this section, we preserve the notation of the previous sections. We
refer the reader to [ 7 , Sections 3.2 and 3.5] for the proofs of the
assertions in this section.

###### Definition 1.5.1

If @xmath is in @xmath and @xmath is an embedding of @xmath into an
injective module @xmath such that for every embedding @xmath of @xmath
into an injective module @xmath , there is an embedding @xmath of @xmath
into @xmath such that the following diagram commutes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is said to be the injective envelope of @xmath .

Injective envelopes always exist, and are unique up to isomorphisms
which respect the embedding @xmath . We let @xmath denote the injective
envelope of @xmath . For @xmath in @xmath , we write @xmath . @xmath is
called the Matlis dual of @xmath . For the following proposition, which
is a summary of the facts about Matlis duality that we will require, we
let @xmath denote the category of @xmath -modules of finite length.

###### Proposition 1.5.2

(Matlis Duality) @xmath is an exact functor on @xmath satisfying, for
all @xmath in @xmath ,

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath , and

4.   The natural homomorphism @xmath is an isomorphism.

Here, @xmath denotes the length function and @xmath counts the number of
generators in a minimal generating set.

###### Definition 1.5.3

For @xmath in @xmath , we define the submodule @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 1.5.4

@xmath is an additive, left exact functor on @xmath .

###### Definition 1.5.5

The @xmath right derived functor of @xmath is written @xmath . @xmath is
called the @xmath local cohomology module of @xmath , for @xmath in
@xmath .

###### Proposition 1.5.6

Local cohomology detects depth and dimension:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Suppose @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring, @xmath .
For all @xmath in @xmath , we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . @xmath is an @xmath -module, and is independent of the
choice of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.5.7

(Local Duality) Suppose @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein
ring. Then for @xmath in @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . In particular, @xmath if @xmath .

We remark that the module @xmath need not be in @xmath , so Proposition
1.5.2 does not necessarily apply. Combining Propositions 1.5.6 and 1.5.7
, we obtain the following corollary.

###### Corollary 1.5.8

If @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring and @xmath is in
@xmath , then @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if and only if @xmath for @xmath
.

###### Proposition 1.5.9

If @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring and if @xmath is
in @xmath , then @xmath Furthermore, for all @xmath of dimension @xmath
, we have that @xmath if and only if @xmath .

### 1.6 Buchsbaum Modules

In this section, @xmath will denote a Noetherian local ring or a
homogeneous @xmath -algebra. The proof of the assertions can be found in
[ 34 ] .

###### Definition 1.6.1

A module @xmath in @xmath is Buchsbaum if @xmath , or if @xmath and
there exists an integer @xmath such that for every system of parameters
@xmath for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then we set @xmath .

@xmath is sometimes referred to as the invariant of Stückrad and Vogel.
Note that @xmath in @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if and only if it is
Buchsbaum with @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.6.2

If @xmath in @xmath is Buchsbaum, then @xmath for @xmath .

The converse to Proposition 1.6.2 is not true. If @xmath for @xmath ,
then we say that @xmath is quasi-Buchsbaum .

###### Proposition 1.6.3

If @xmath in @xmath is Buchsbaum of dimension @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.6.4

If @xmath for @xmath , then we say that @xmath has finite length
cohomology , and we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.7 Castelnuovo-Mumford Regularity

In this section, @xmath will denote a homogeneous @xmath -algebra of the
form @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial ring in @xmath variables over
the field @xmath and @xmath is a homogeneous ideal. For the proofs of
the results in this section, we refer the reader to [ 12 ] and [ 13 ] .

For @xmath in @xmath , we let @xmath denote the module @xmath shifted by
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every @xmath in @xmath can be viewed as a graded @xmath -module, and as
such has a minimal graded free resolution over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath are called the graded Betti numbers of @xmath . We let @xmath
and call @xmath the @xmath Betti number of @xmath . Clearly, @xmath and
@xmath depend on the choice of @xmath , but the definitions and
propositions which follow are independent of the choice of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.7.1

If @xmath in @xmath has graded Betti numbers @xmath , then the Hilbert
series of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a proof, see [ 7 , Lemma 4.1.13] .

###### Definition 1.7.2

We say that @xmath has a linear resolution if @xmath for @xmath ; that
is, if the minimal graded free resolution of @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.7.3

If @xmath is in @xmath , then for @xmath , we let @xmath denote the
graded submodule of @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 1.7.4

For any @xmath in @xmath , @xmath has a linear resolution for @xmath .
Furthermore, if @xmath has a linear resolution, then @xmath has a linear
resolution for all @xmath .

###### Definition 1.7.5

The Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of @xmath is the integer @xmath ,
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.7.6

Let @xmath be in @xmath and let @xmath be the graded Betti numbers of
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 1.7.7

Given a short exact sequence of modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have the following inequalities.

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

###### Proposition 1.7.8

If @xmath is in @xmath and @xmath is a linear form such that @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if @xmath is regular on @xmath , then @xmath .

### 1.8 Linear Cohen-Macaulay and Linear Buchsbaum Modules

In this section, @xmath will denote a Noetherian local ring or a
homogeneous @xmath -algebra.

###### Proposition 1.8.1

If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath .

###### Definition 1.8.2

If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath , then we say that @xmath is a
linear Cohen-Macaulay module .

###### Proposition 1.8.3

Suppose the field @xmath is infinite. If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then
@xmath is a linear Cohen-Macaulay module if and only if @xmath has a
linear resolution.

The proofs of Propositions 1.8.1 and 1.8.3 can be found in [ 6 ] .

###### Proposition 1.8.4

If @xmath has finite length cohomology, then @xmath

###### Definition 1.8.5

If @xmath has finite length cohomology and @xmath , then we say that
@xmath is a linear Buchsbaum module .

###### Proposition 1.8.6

Suppose the field @xmath is infinite. If @xmath has finite length
cohomology, then @xmath is a linear Buchsbaum module if and only if
@xmath is Buchsbaum and has a linear resolution. Furthermore, if these
equivalent conditions hold, then @xmath is Buchsbaum.

The proofs of Propositions 1.8.4 and 1.8.6 can be found in [ 44 ] .

### 1.9 Generic Initial Ideals

In this section, @xmath will denote a polynomial ring in @xmath
variables over the field @xmath and @xmath will denote a homogeneous
ideal. We begin by describing the reverse lexicographic order .

Let @xmath be a monomial in @xmath . Then we let @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath
are monomials in @xmath , then we write @xmath if @xmath or if @xmath
and there is some @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath may be written uniquely as a sum of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The first monomial, @xmath , is called the leading term
of @xmath , and is written @xmath . If @xmath is a homogeneous ideal,
then the initial ideal of @xmath , @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a proof of the following proposition, see [ 7 , Theorem 4.2.3 and
Corollary 4.2.4] .

###### Proposition 1.9.1

If @xmath is a homogeneous ideal, then @xmath and @xmath have the same
Hilbert function. Thus @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be the vector space of linear forms. The group of invertible
linear transformations of @xmath , @xmath , acts on @xmath , and hence
on all of @xmath : If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath is an
ideal of @xmath , let @xmath . This is again a homogeneous ideal. Thus,
fixing an a homogeneous ideal @xmath , we have a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 1.9.2

Suppose the field @xmath is infinite and fix a homogeneous ideal @xmath
of @xmath . Then there is a nonempty Zariski-open subset @xmath of
@xmath such that the map described above is constant on @xmath ; that
is, for @xmath we have @xmath .

A proof can be found in [ 12 , Theorem 15.18] .

###### Definition 1.9.3

Let @xmath be a homogeneous ideal and suppose the field @xmath is
infinite. The unique monomial ideal described in Proposition 1.9.2 is
called the generic initial ideal , and is denoted @xmath .

For the remainder of this section, we require that the field @xmath have
characteristic @xmath .

###### Definition 1.9.4

A monomial ideal @xmath is said to be Borel-fixed if for all monomials
@xmath , if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath as well.

The following proposition is [ 12 , Theorem 15.20] .

###### Proposition 1.9.5

Let @xmath be a homogeneous ideal. Then @xmath is Borel-fixed.

The saturation of an ideal @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus @xmath . For proofs of the remaining propositions in the section,
we refer the reader to the notes of Green [ 17 ] .

###### Proposition 1.9.6

Let @xmath be a Borel-fixed ideal and let @xmath .

1.  @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is a generic hyperplane section, @xmath by a linear
    change of variables.

3.  @xmath .

If @xmath , then we let @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath is a polynomial
ring in @xmath variables and @xmath is a homogeneous ideal. Observe that
the generic initial ideal of @xmath is well defined (that is, it does
not depend on which linear forms in @xmath we decide to distinguish as
the variables of @xmath ) since @xmath is computed after making a
generic linear change of variables.

###### Proposition 1.9.7

There is a nonempty Zariski-open subset @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.9.8

Let @xmath be a homogeneous ideal.

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

### 1.10 Superficial Elements

###### Definition 1.10.1

An element @xmath is called superficial on @xmath if the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the initial form of @xmath in @xmath , has kernel of
finite length.

In other words, @xmath is superficial on @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . As an application of the Artin-Rees theorem we obtain the
following result.

###### Proposition 1.10.2

If @xmath is superficial on @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

Proof. Since @xmath is superficial, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , and, by the Artin-Rees theorem,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Choose @xmath large enough to satisfy both equations. Write
@xmath . Then, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by repeatedly applying equation ( 1.1 ). @xmath

We say that @xmath is a superficial sequence for @xmath if each @xmath
is a superficial sequence on @xmath and @xmath is superficial on @xmath
.

###### Proposition 1.10.3

Suppose @xmath is infinite and @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , where
@xmath . Then there is a Zariski-open subset @xmath of the affine space
@xmath such that if @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath denotes the residue
class of @xmath in @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a superficial sequence with respect to @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Cohomological Degrees

### 2.1 Definitions and Examples

Let @xmath be either a local, Noetherian ring, with residue field @xmath
, or else a homogeneous @xmath -algebra. In either case, we assume that
the field @xmath is infinite.

###### Definition 2.1.1

If @xmath is local, a notion of genericity on @xmath is a function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

subject to the following conditions for each @xmath .

1.   If @xmath then @xmath if and only if @xmath .

2.   The set @xmath contains a nonempty Zariski-open subset.

3.   If @xmath , and @xmath , then @xmath is regular on @xmath .

If @xmath is homogeneous, then a notion of genericity is a function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

subject to the following conditions for each @xmath .

1.   The set @xmath contains a nonempty Zariski-open subset.

2.   If @xmath , and @xmath , then @xmath is regular on @xmath .

The set @xmath should be thought of as the set of all “generic
hyperplanes” on @xmath . For the following definition, we fix a notion
of genericity @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.2

A cohomological degree on @xmath is a numerical function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfies the following conditions for all @xmath in @xmath .

1.   If @xmath and @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   If @xmath and @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   (The calibration rule) If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Implicit in every cohomological degree, @xmath , is a choice of a notion
of genericity, @xmath . When a cohomological degree has been specified,
we will usually suppress the use of the symbol @xmath ; instead, we will
write “ @xmath is generic on @xmath ” for “ @xmath ”. Similarly, a
generic system of parameters, @xmath for @xmath is a system of
parameters for @xmath such that @xmath and, for @xmath . When we wish to
emphasize the relationship between @xmath and @xmath , we say that
@xmath is a cohomological degree with respect to @xmath .

###### Example 2.1.3

The Homological Degree

The homological degree is the prototype for a cohomological degree.
Indeed, its definition [ 38 ] predates the definition of cohomological
degree [ 10 ] .

Suppose @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring @xmath of
dimension @xmath . If @xmath is homogeneous, then we take @xmath to be a
polynomial ring, so there is no conflict of notation. Write @xmath . If
@xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -module of dimension @xmath , then
we define the homological degree, @xmath , as follows,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

if @xmath , and @xmath if @xmath .

If @xmath is not the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring, then let
@xmath be the @xmath -adic completion of @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation ( 2.1 ) may at first appear strange, but in fact it is quite
natural: Suppose that @xmath has finite length cohomology. Then Equation
( 2.1 ) becomes, by local duality (Proposition 1.5.7 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the well-known invariant of Stückrad and Vogel.

###### Proposition 2.1.4

If @xmath , let @xmath . For modules @xmath of dimension @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a notion of genericity, and for @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. See [ 38 ] or the proof of Proposition 4.4.3 . @xmath

###### Corollary 2.1.5

@xmath is a cohomological degree with respect to the notion of
genericity described in Proposition 2.1.4 .

Proof. Properties (1) and (3) of Definition 2.1.2 follow easily from
Proposition 1.5.7 and Corollary 1.5.8 . Condition (2) is just
Proposition 2.1.4 with @xmath . @xmath

We remark that if @xmath is homogeneous, we may actually compute @xmath
on a computer algebra system with the capabilities of Macaulay [ 3 ] ,
and further that the definition of @xmath does not require that the
field be infinite.

###### Example 2.1.6

The Extremal Cohomological Degree

Fix a notion of genericity @xmath . Define @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to verify, assuming there are any cohomological degree
functions with respect to @xmath , that @xmath is a cohomological
degree. Note that, if @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This description is not very explicit – it is not clear how to compute
@xmath from ( 2.2 ), since there are infinitely many hyperplanes to
consider. In Chapter 3, we will see how to obtain an explicit
description of @xmath – one that is more or less amenable to explicit
computations – when the notion of genericity is selected appropriately.

### 2.2 Elementary Properties of Cohomological Degrees

Throughout this section, @xmath is a Noetherian local ring with infinite
residue field @xmath , or a homogeneous algebra over an infinite field
@xmath , with irrelevant maximal ideal @xmath , and @xmath is a
cohomological degree on @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.2.1

For each @xmath in @xmath the following hold.

1.  @xmath , with equality if and only if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay.

2.   If @xmath is any submodule of finite length, then @xmath .

Proof. Trivial. @xmath

###### Proposition 2.2.2

Let @xmath be in @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath is a generic
hyperplane on @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, @xmath .

Proof. See [ 10 , Proposition 2.3] . @xmath

###### Proposition 2.2.3

Suppose @xmath is homogeneous. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. See [ 10 , Proposition 2.4] . @xmath

###### Proposition 2.2.4

For every cohomological degree @xmath , the following inequalities hold.

1.  @xmath for all @xmath in @xmath .

2.  @xmath for all @xmath in @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

Here, @xmath denotes the embedding codimension of @xmath , and is given
by @xmath .

Proof.

(1) is proved in [ 10 , Proposition 2.1] . @xmath

(2): We induct on @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , let @xmath be a generic hyperplane on @xmath . By
Propositions 1.4.2 and 2.2.2 and by induction, we have @xmath . @xmath

(3): Let @xmath be a generic system of parameters of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

In light of Proposition 2.2.4 , one may ask: What happens if equality
holds in (1), (2) or (3)? The equality @xmath is dealt with in Section
3.4 , and the equality @xmath is the subject of Section 2.4 . The
equality @xmath is more elementary and can be dealt with immediately.

###### Proposition 2.2.5

If @xmath , then @xmath is a linear Cohen-Macaulay module.

Proof. Recall from Section 1.8 that a linear Cohen-Macaulay module is a
module which is Cohen-Macaulay and satisfies @xmath . To show that
@xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, we induct on @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but @xmath unless @xmath , in which case @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay. If
@xmath , let @xmath be a generic hyperplane on @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence @xmath . By induction, @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, and hence so is
@xmath .

To show that @xmath is linear, let @xmath be a generic system of
parameters of @xmath . Then @xmath implies that @xmath . But this says
that @xmath , from which it follows that @xmath . @xmath

### 2.3 Bounding Numbers of Generators and Hilbert Functions

Here we reproduce, without proof, some results from [ 10 ] which serve
to motivate the study of cohomological degrees, and in particular the
extremal cohomological degree which is studied in detail in Section 3 .
We preserve the assumptions about @xmath and @xmath from Section 2.2 .

###### Proposition 2.3.1

( [ 10 , Theorem 3.1] ) Let @xmath be Cohen-Macaulay of dimension @xmath
, and let @xmath be an ideal of codimension @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 2.3.2

( [ 10 , Theorem 4.6] ) Let @xmath be an @xmath -primary ideal of @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is the index of nilpotency of @xmath .

Observe that substituting @xmath into Proposition 2.3.2 yields a bound
for the Hilbert function of @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.3.3

( [ 10 , Corollary 4.7] ) The reduction number of @xmath is bounded as
follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

### 2.4 Linear Resolution

In this section we preserve the assumptions about @xmath and @xmath of
Section 2.2 . Our goal is to examine the consequences of the equality
@xmath . Namely, we have:

###### Theorem 2.4.1

If @xmath , then @xmath has a linear resolution.

This theorem was first proved by Yoshida in [ 45 ] for the homological
degree. Here we will show that the conclusion follows from only the
properties of cohomological degrees. Our proof follows the original
proof of Yoshida, and proceeds by observing that modules which satisfy
the equality @xmath have much in common with Buchsbaum modules. Indeed,
Yoshida defines a weakly linear Buchsbaum module ¹ ¹ 1 This should be
parsed “(weakly) (linear Buchsbaum) module” and not “(weakly linear)
(Buchsbaum) module”, since such modules are not necessarily Buchsbaum.
as one which satisfies the equality @xmath . However, we will use the
less unwieldy term Yoshida module . Note that Theorem 2.4.1 is a
generalization of (half of) Proposition 1.8.3 .

###### Proposition 2.4.2

Let @xmath be a cohomological degree function and suppose that @xmath .

1.  @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is a generic hyperplane then @xmath .

Proof.

(1): Let @xmath and @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath , which is equivalent to @xmath , and @xmath . Thus it only
remains to show that the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

splits. Tensoring with @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , and, by counting dimensions, we have that the map @xmath is
an inclusion. The composition of maps @xmath gives the desired
splitting. @xmath

(2): Squeeze:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 2.4.3

Suppose @xmath , and let @xmath , where @xmath is a generic system of
parameters for @xmath . Then @xmath .

Proof. The result is clear in dimension @xmath . Let @xmath . By
Proposition 2.4.2 (2), we have @xmath , and so we are done. @xmath

The following lemma, and its proof, is the analogue of [ 34 , Lemma
1.14] .

###### Lemma 2.4.4

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath such that @xmath and let @xmath , where
@xmath is a generic partial system of parameters for @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Assume the lemma is false and that @xmath is maximal possible
such that, for some @xmath , where @xmath is a partial system of
parameters for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this @xmath , let @xmath be minimal with respect to this property.
Let @xmath .

Claim: @xmath for generic @xmath .

Proof of Claim. Since @xmath , we have, by Proposition 2.4.2 (1),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Say @xmath . So @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath
be the image of @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath , and hence @xmath .
Since @xmath is generic, this implies @xmath , so @xmath , i.e. @xmath .
@xmath

Note that the claim implies that @xmath for generic @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath then @xmath and the lemma is trivial. So @xmath . Let @xmath
Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, @xmath , for all @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Since @xmath , by the maximality of @xmath we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and if @xmath , then by the minimality of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In either case we have a contradiction, and so we are done. @xmath

###### Lemma 2.4.5

Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a generic hyperplane section
on @xmath and let @xmath . Then we have an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the initial form of @xmath in @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath , where @xmath is a generic system of parameters for
@xmath . By Lemma 2.4.4 with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Lemma 2.4.3 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath , so @xmath is regular on @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof. @xmath

Proof of Theorem 2.4.1 . We proceed by induction on the dimension of
@xmath . If @xmath , the result is trivial, since then @xmath is a
vector space, @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 2.4.2 , @xmath ,
@xmath has a linear resolution and @xmath satisfies the condition @xmath
, so we may assume @xmath

Let @xmath be a generic, regular hyperplane on @xmath . Then @xmath is a
regular hyperplane on @xmath . Since @xmath has a linear resolution by
induction, it follows that @xmath does as well, by Proposition 1.7.8
@xmath

Unfortunately, the converse to Theorem 2.4.1 fails for some
cohomological degrees. We illustrate this with the homological degree.
Recall that a Yoshida module is a module which satisfies @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.4.6

If @xmath is a finitely generated module of dimension @xmath and @xmath
has no associated primes of dimension @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. We may assume @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein
ring. Since @xmath has no associated primes of dimension @xmath , we
have that @xmath and that @xmath is a module of finite length, by
Proposition 1.5.9 . Let @xmath . The exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Proposition 2.4.7

If @xmath is a Yoshida module of dimension @xmath , then @xmath is not
Yoshida for some @xmath .

Proof. Clearly, we may assume that @xmath . Since @xmath is Yoshida, we
have by [ 45 , Proposition 2.2] that @xmath has no associated primes of
dimension @xmath . Now, by the above lemma we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, if @xmath is Yoshida for all @xmath , we have @xmath , which
contradicts a famous theorem [ 15 ] . @xmath

### 2.5 The Homological Degree and Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity

Throughout this section, @xmath will denote a homogeneous @xmath
-algebra, where @xmath is infinite. We choose a presentation, @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath is a homogeneous ideal. We let @xmath .

If @xmath is infinite and @xmath is a cohomological degree on @xmath ,
then by Proposition 2.2.3 we have @xmath . In this section, we are
interested in finding a complement to Proposition 2.2.3 : an inequality
of the form @xmath , where @xmath is some function of @xmath . In
addition to depending on the cohomological degree @xmath will
necessarily incorporate the embedding dimension, @xmath , since if
@xmath we have @xmath but @xmath .

Observe that both @xmath and @xmath may be bounded in terms of @xmath
and @xmath : Clearly @xmath . By Propositions 1.9.1 and 1.9.8 , we have
that @xmath and @xmath , and for a given @xmath and @xmath there are
only finitely many possible generic initial ideals. Therefore, we may
harmlessly incorporate @xmath and @xmath into any bound for @xmath .
Hence our problem is as follows.

###### Problem 2.5.1

Given a cohomological degree @xmath on @xmath , find a function @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

With this in mind, we turn our attention to what is, at this point, our
only explicitly defined (but see Chapter 3) cohomological degree, @xmath
.

###### Conjecture 2.5.2

There is a function @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conjecture 2.5.2 would follow immediately from the following.

###### Conjecture 2.5.3

@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.5.4

Conjecture 2.5.2 is true for @xmath .

Before proving Theorem 2.5.4 , we need to establish some tools. The
first is a proposition taken from [ 38 , Theorem 2.13] .

###### Proposition 2.5.5

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be an exact sequence of finitely generated modules with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following proposition is based upon the idea of a theorem of
Herzog-Kühl [ 19 ] and of Huneke-Miller [ 23 ] ; see also [ 7 , Theorem
4.1.15] . In Appendix A , we will develop some further applications of
Proposition 2.5.6 .

###### Proposition 2.5.6

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded module over @xmath such that
@xmath has a linear resolution for some @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath Betti number of @xmath , @xmath is the
minimal number of generators of @xmath , and @xmath is the degree of
@xmath .

Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that @xmath is
generated in degree 0. The Hilbert series of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Thus we have the system of equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

On the other hand, from Proposition 1.7.1 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the system of equations becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

One easily calculates that this system of equations is equivalent to:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

The claim follows from the final two rows. @xmath

###### Proposition 2.5.7

Let @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is given by a matrix of linear
forms in @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. We may assume that @xmath is infinite. We let @xmath denote the
irrelevant maximal ideal of @xmath .

Let @xmath be the ideal generated by the maximal minors of @xmath . Then
@xmath is equivalent to @xmath is @xmath -primary. Thus, by [ 11 ,
Theorem 1] we must have @xmath .

If @xmath , then by [ 8 ] we have @xmath . On the other hand, by [ 11 ,
Theorem 1] the Eagon-Northcott complex is a minimal free resolution of
@xmath ; in particular, the @xmath maximal minors of @xmath minimally
generate @xmath . Therefore, @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath , it suffices to show that @xmath can, after a change of basis
of @xmath , be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are linear forms in @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath matrix of
linear forms in @xmath such that @xmath is again @xmath -primary.
Indeed, if this is the case, then @xmath is a homomorphic image of
@xmath which, by induction on @xmath , satisfies @xmath , which
completes the proof.

For any @xmath , write @xmath for the @xmath matrix of scalars obtained
by evaluating the entries of @xmath at the point @xmath . Let @xmath be
the ring of polynomials @xmath , and @xmath the @xmath matrix of linear
forms in @xmath whose @xmath column is given by @xmath , where @xmath is
the standard basis for @xmath . For any generalized column

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath , we write @xmath for the ideal in @xmath generated by the
entries of @xmath ; in particular, we write @xmath for the degree 1
component of this ideal. We have the following equivalences:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, recasting the problem in terms of @xmath , we must show that there
is a hyperplane @xmath such that for every generalized column @xmath in
@xmath , we have @xmath ; in other words, that there is a linear form
@xmath such that @xmath for every generalized column @xmath of @xmath .
Each @xmath is a vector space of dimension @xmath in @xmath which has
dimension @xmath . Since the vector spaces @xmath are parameterized by
@xmath , their union is a variety of dimension @xmath in @xmath . Since
@xmath , we can find such an @xmath . @xmath

Proof of Theorem 2.5.4 . Let @xmath . Then @xmath . Thus, since @xmath
is a subquotient of @xmath , we may bound @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath . Now, if we let @xmath , then we have @xmath and @xmath . Since
@xmath , we may replace @xmath by @xmath and assume that @xmath .

If @xmath , we are done, so we assume @xmath . Now we show that the
claim is true if @xmath is unmixed; that is, if every associated prime
of @xmath has dimension @xmath .

Let @xmath and let @xmath . We have @xmath by Proposition 2.5.5 , and,
since @xmath is a subquotient of @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath , we
can bound @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Thus is suffices to
bound @xmath .

Now, @xmath , so @xmath is also unmixed. Hence @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to bound @xmath .

@xmath has a linear resolution,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is a matrix of linear forms. Hence @xmath has a
presentation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , by Proposition 2.5.7 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath can also be bounded in terms of @xmath and @xmath , so we are
done in the case where @xmath is unmixed.

Now suppose @xmath is not unmixed. Say @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are the intersections of the primary components of @xmath of
dimensions @xmath and @xmath , respectively. We have an exact sequence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , it has dimension @xmath , and, since it is embedded in
@xmath , it must be Cohen-Macaulay. From ( 2.3 ), we obtain the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath and @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since every module in ( 2.3 ) has positive depth, we may choose a linear
form @xmath , which is regular on all three modules. Thus we have an
inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath can be bounded in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Now it only
remains to bound @xmath . It is unmixed, so it is bounded in terms of
@xmath and @xmath , but @xmath . Indeed, by Proposition 1.7.7 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath is a Cohen-Macaulay submodule of @xmath , so @xmath , and we
are done. @xmath

By following the above proof carefully, one may extract an explicit
bound for @xmath . The present author has in fact done so, but to record
it here would violate standards of mathematical aesthetics. (The
sensitive reader may feel that such standards have already been
violated.) In light of the proof of Theorem 2.5.4 , it seems that
Conjecture 2.5.2 may be rather difficult, unless one can prove
Conjecture 2.5.3 .

By now, we have compiled a list of grievances against what is at this
point our only friend, the only cohomological degree which we know how
to compute, @xmath . The converse to Theorem 2.4.1 does not hold for
@xmath , and it is difficult to relate @xmath to Castelnuovo-Mumford
regularity. The homological degree tends to give numbers which are too
large, due to the deadly combination of the recursive nature of the
definition with the binomial coefficients contained therein. This is
reflected in the fact that the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for generic @xmath is frequently strict, even when @xmath is regular on
@xmath .

It turns out that the extremal cohomological degree, @xmath , about
which we have so far said little, is free of these difficulties. This is
the subject of the next chapter.

## Chapter 3 The Extremal Cohomological Degree,

### 3.1 Axiomatic Characterization of

In this section, @xmath will be a local Noetherian ring with infinite
residue field @xmath , or a homogeneous algebra over an infinite field,
@xmath , with irrelevant maximal ideal @xmath . We recall the definition
in the previous chapter of the extremal cohomological degree.

###### Definition 3.1.1

Let @xmath be a notion of genericity for @xmath . Then for all @xmath in
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The main theorem of this section is the following.

###### Theorem 3.1.2

There exists a notion of genericity @xmath such that for all @xmath in
@xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

An easy induction argument shows that if @xmath and @xmath are two
notions of genericity for which the conclusion to Theorem 3.1.2 holds,
then we have @xmath . Therefore, once we have proved Theorem 3.1.2 , we
will have established the existence of a cohomological degree – written
simply @xmath , without any reference to a notion of genericity – which
satisfies the following axiomatic description.

###### Definition 3.1.3

@xmath is the unique numerical function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfying the following conditions.

1.  @xmath if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay.

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath and @xmath is a generic hyperplane on @xmath , then
    @xmath .

We remark that the above definition is redundant. In place of condition
1. , one only need require

1’. @xmath

Then, if @xmath , from the second condition we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying the third condition, we recover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay.

In order to prove Theorem 3.1.2 , we first establish a series of lemmas.
The first shows that, by passing to the completion if necessary, we may
assume that @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring.

###### Lemma 3.1.4

Let @xmath denote a Noetherian local ring and let @xmath denote the
@xmath -adic completion of @xmath . If @xmath is an @xmath -module,
write @xmath for @xmath . Suppose @xmath is a notion of genericity on
@xmath with respect to which there exists at least one cohomological
degree. Let @xmath denote the image of @xmath in @xmath . For @xmath in
@xmath , we define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a notion of genericity on @xmath , and, for all @xmath in
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. That @xmath is a notion of genericity on @xmath is clear. To
prove that @xmath , we observe that @xmath and @xmath and apply
induction on the dimenstion of @xmath to the characterization of @xmath
given in Equation ( 2.2 ). @xmath

For the remainder of this section, we assume that @xmath is the
homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring. The next lemma is adapted from
the appendix of Watanabe [ 40 ] .

###### Lemma 3.1.5

Let @xmath be an @xmath -module of finite length. Then the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

achieves its minimum generically among hyperplanes.

###### Corollary 3.1.6

Let @xmath be a one dimensional finitely generated @xmath -module. Then
the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

achieves its minimum generically among hyperplanes @xmath such that
@xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath and let @xmath be a regular hyperplane on @xmath .
Then the short exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath . We have @xmath , with equality generically (when @xmath
is a degree system for @xmath ). Since @xmath achieves its minimum
generically, @xmath must also achieve its minimum generically. @xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.7

Suppose @xmath . Then for @xmath , regular on @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring, @xmath .
Let @xmath , where @xmath . We will show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which will suffice, since the roles of @xmath and @xmath may be
inverted. First, note that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , we are done. @xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.8

Let @xmath be a notion of genericity, @xmath and let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equality holds if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Proof.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.9

Given an exact sequence of modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and a sequence @xmath of elements in @xmath , then
@xmath is a degree system for @xmath if and only if it is a degree
system for @xmath .

Proof. This is trivial if @xmath , so assume that @xmath and @xmath have
positive dimension. Thus if @xmath is a multiplicity system on @xmath or
on @xmath then it is a multiplicity system on both @xmath and @xmath ,
and we have @xmath . Since the property of being a degree system is a
generic condition, there exists a sequence which is a degree system for
both @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath , so @xmath is a degree system for
@xmath if and only if it is a degree system for @xmath . @xmath

###### Definition 3.1.10

If @xmath , we let @xmath , and if @xmath , we define @xmath inductively
as follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 3.1.11

If @xmath is a module of dimension at most @xmath , then we define the
Rees number of @xmath to be the integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 3.1.5 and Corollary 3.1.6 , the Rees number is attained by a
generic element.

###### Definition 3.1.12

We say that a sequence @xmath in @xmath is a @xmath -Rees sequence for
@xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and, for all such sequences @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.1.13

If @xmath and @xmath are regular on @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. We have an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Tensoring with @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But there is an isomorphism @xmath , and the kernel of the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath . @xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.14

If @xmath is a @xmath -Rees sequence for @xmath , then any permutation
of @xmath is a @xmath -Rees sequence for @xmath .

Proof. This follows from Lemma 3.1.13 .

###### Lemma 3.1.15

Suppose @xmath . Let @xmath be such that @xmath and @xmath each have
finite length. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. We may assume that @xmath has positive depth, in which case
@xmath and @xmath are regular on @xmath . The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

may be decomposed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

From ( 3.1 ), we derive exact sequences

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The sequence ( 3.2 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From ( 3.3 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Splicing ( 3.4 ) and ( 3.5 ) into ( 3.6 ), and bearing in mind ( 3.1 ),
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath by Lemma 3.1.13 , we may reverse the roles of @xmath and
@xmath , whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.16

Given a finitely generated module @xmath , any @xmath sufficiently
generic linear combinations of the generators of @xmath form a @xmath
-Rees sequence for @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be a @xmath -Rees sequence for @xmath . For a generic
@xmath , we have that @xmath and @xmath have finite length and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, by Lemma 3.1.15 , we have that @xmath is a @xmath -Rees sequence.
Continuing in the fashion, we may replace @xmath by a generic @xmath ,
and so on. @xmath

###### Definition 3.1.17

An element @xmath of @xmath is called a Rees element for @xmath if
@xmath is part of a @xmath -Rees sequence for all @xmath .

###### Definition 3.1.18

Let @xmath be a finitely generated module. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath and @xmath are notions of genericity.

###### Lemma 3.1.19

If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. We begin by showing that if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath . We
proceed by induction on @xmath . Observe that we may assume that @xmath
.

Let @xmath . We wish to show that @xmath has finite length and that
@xmath is part of a degree system on @xmath .

-   Case 1: @xmath . Since @xmath , we have that @xmath has finite
    length and that @xmath is part of a degree system for @xmath . It
    follows that @xmath has finite length and that @xmath is part of a
    degree system for @xmath .

-   Case 2: @xmath , where @xmath . The exact sequence

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    yields the exact sequence

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Since @xmath , we have, by induction, that @xmath . Since @xmath and
    @xmath have finite length, @xmath has finite length as well.
    Furthermore, since @xmath is part of a degree system for @xmath , it
    follows that @xmath is part of a degree system for @xmath , by Lemma
    3.1.9 .

-   Case 3: @xmath , where @xmath . From ( 3.7 ), we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    if @xmath . Therefore, either @xmath or @xmath is isomorphic to a
    module in @xmath . Since @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we have @xmath , so we are done in the former case.

    If @xmath , then we have, from ( 3.7 ),

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath by Lemma 3.1.9 .

Now suppose @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath . By the above reasoning,
we have that @xmath . It remains to show that @xmath is a Rees element
for @xmath and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , we have that @xmath is a Rees element for
@xmath and that @xmath is a Rees element for @xmath . Thus @xmath can be
extended to a @xmath -Rees sequence for @xmath , for every @xmath .
Since any permutation of @xmath -Rees sequence is again a @xmath -Rees
sequence, @xmath is a Rees element for @xmath .

Finally, since @xmath and @xmath are Rees elements for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, by Lemma 3.1.15 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this forces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Proof of Theorem 3.1.2 . Observe that @xmath is the notion of genericity
with respect to which @xmath is a cohomological degree (Proposition
2.1.4 ). Since @xmath is a refinement of @xmath , @xmath is well
defined. We will show that if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . We proceed by induction on @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath lie in @xmath . It suffices to show that @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 3.1.19 , we have @xmath . Thus, by induction and Lemma 3.1.8 ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath and, similarly, @xmath . Thus, by Lemma 3.1.7 ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Similarly, @xmath , so we are done. @xmath

We remark that the above proof is not constructive, in the sense that it
is not clear how one could determine, using a program such as Macaulay ,
if a given hyperplane section is generic for a given module.
Nonetheless, a “random” hyperplane will, with probability one, be
generic. Therefore, with the help of a random number generator, one has
an algorithm for the computation of @xmath . Though the theoretical
status of this algorithm may be dubious, from a practical standpoint it
is quite satisfactory: the script that the present author has written
for Macaulay works, and works quickly (much more quickly than the script
for @xmath , for example).

### 3.2 Basic Properties

We preserve the assumptions on @xmath of the previous section.

Lemma 3.1.8 can be recast in terms of @xmath . We record the
reformulation for reference.

###### Proposition 3.2.1

Let @xmath be in @xmath and let @xmath . Then for a generic hyperplane
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.2.2

Given an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, we have @xmath , and, if @xmath , @xmath .

Proof. We induct on the dimension of @xmath . If @xmath , the statement
is trivial, so assume @xmath . First, we treat the case in which @xmath
. Choose @xmath to be generic on @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is
regular on @xmath , we obtain the exact sequence

[]

where @xmath is the kernel of the map @xmath . Now, @xmath is generic on
@xmath , so @xmath , and, by induction, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last inequality is from the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is induced by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof in the case where @xmath . If @xmath , let
@xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath we have @xmath , from which the
proposition follows. @xmath

###### Proposition 3.2.3

Let @xmath in @xmath have dimension @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equality holds if @xmath is Buchsbaum ¹ ¹ 1 Originally, this read, ”…if
@xmath for @xmath ; that is, if @xmath is ’quasi-Buchsbaum.’” The proof
incorrectly assumed that the property of being quasi-Buchsbaum was
preserved under generic hyperplane sections. This error was pointed out
in U. Nagel and T. Römer , Extended degree functions and monomial
modules, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 358 (2006), 3571-3589. .

Proof. Clearly, we may assume @xmath . Let @xmath be generic on @xmath .
We have the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The long exact sequence in cohomology breaks up into short exact
sequences

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

Thus @xmath so the claim follows from Pascal’s triangle and induction on
the dimension of @xmath .

If @xmath is Buchsbaum, then so is @xmath . Since @xmath for @xmath , (
3.8 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we finish as before. @xmath

###### Exercise 3.2.4

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded @xmath -algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and @xmath is generated in degree @xmath as an @xmath
-algebra. Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded @xmath -module,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Show that the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

agrees with a polynomial for @xmath .

Hint. This may be proven as in [ 9 , Proposition 3.3.4] .

### 3.3 Linear Resolution

In this section, we preserve the assumptions and notation of Section 3.1
. Recall that in Section 2.4 we showed that if @xmath is any
cohomological degree on @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, we saw, using the example of @xmath , that the converse
does not hold. In this section, we prove that the converse does hold for
@xmath ; that is, we have:

###### Theorem 3.3.1

The following are equivalent.

-   @xmath has linear resolution.

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

We begin by establishing some tools for dealing with associated graded
modules.

###### Lemma 3.3.2

Suppose @xmath is superficial on @xmath . Then we have an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Proof.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , there is a natural surjection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The kernel is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since by Lemma 1.10.2 , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

###### Corollary 3.3.3

If @xmath is superficial on @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any cohomological degree @xmath .

Proof. This follows from Proposition 2.2.1 (2). @xmath

###### Theorem 3.3.4

@xmath .

Proof. We argue by induction on @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Choose @xmath
generic on @xmath such that @xmath is generic on @xmath . In particular,
we choose @xmath to be superficial on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So assume @xmath . Let @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath and that @xmath . So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

Proof of Theorem 3.3.1 . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by Theorems 2.4.1 and 3.3.4 . Hence, replacing @xmath by @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath , we may assume @xmath and need only show

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We argue by induction on @xmath . The case @xmath is trivial, since such
a module has linear resolution if and only if it is a vector space
concentrated in degree @xmath . So suppose @xmath . Since @xmath has
linear resolution, @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is a module with
linear resolution and positive depth. Let @xmath be generic on @xmath .
Then @xmath has linear resolution also, so, by induction

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.3.5

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded module over @xmath . If @xmath
has positive depth and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath . By Lemma 3.2.2 , @xmath . But @xmath has a linear
resolution, so @xmath . @xmath

This corollary gives an indication of the connection between @xmath and
Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity. We shall have more to say about this in
the next section.

### 3.4 Castelnuovo-Mumford Regularity

In this section, we assume that @xmath is a homogeneous @xmath -algebra
with presentation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is a homogeneous
ideal. We further assume that the characteristic of the field @xmath is
zero. Under these assumptions, we will solve Problem 2.5.1 in its
entirety for @xmath .

Recall the @xmath Macaulay representation of an integer @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Then we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Our main theorem is the following.

###### Theorem 3.4.1

If @xmath , and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The method of proof is, briefly, as follows. First, we show that @xmath
is unchanged when we pass to the generic initial ideal. Generic initial
ideals are Borel-fixed, so our next step is to give a combinatorial
description of @xmath when @xmath is Borel-fixed. Finally, we exhibit
the Borel-fixed ideal which maximizes @xmath and calculate. We remark
that Theorem 3.4.1 is sharp, since we will give an ideal for which the
bound is obtained.

###### Theorem 3.4.2

@xmath .

Proof. We induct on the dimension of @xmath , the 0-dimensional case
being trivial. First, suppose @xmath and let @xmath be a generic
hyperplane. Recall from Section 1.9 that @xmath denotes @xmath and
@xmath denotes @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by induction and Propositions 1.9.6 (2) and 1.9.7 .

Now, if @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Definition 3.4.3

Let @xmath be a Borel-fixed monomial ideal. For a monomial @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A monomial @xmath is standard with respect to @xmath if @xmath but
@xmath , where @xmath ; that is, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.4.4

If @xmath is Borel-fixed, @xmath is equal to the number of monomials
standard with respect to @xmath .

Proof. We proceed by induction on the dimension of @xmath . If @xmath ,
then @xmath is equal to the number of monomials not in @xmath . It is
easy to see that, in this case, every such monomial is standard. So
assume @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, by induction,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Clearly, these two sets are disjoint, and their union is the set of all
monomials standard with respect to @xmath . @xmath

Note that if @xmath is standard and @xmath , then @xmath agrees with
what Sturmfels, Trung and Vogel [ 35 ] call a standard pair . It follows
that if @xmath is Borel-fixed, @xmath , where @xmath is the arithmetic
degree function. See [ 35 , Lemma 3.3] .

In what follows, we write @xmath for the set of all monomials in the
variables @xmath and @xmath for the set of all monomials in @xmath of
degree @xmath . Let @xmath denote the lexicographic order on monomials
in @xmath : @xmath if @xmath for @xmath but @xmath for some @xmath .
Note that we do not sort by total degree here, as we did for the reverse
lexicographic order. A set of the form @xmath , where @xmath , is called
a lex-segment in @xmath . We say that @xmath satisfies the shift axiom
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.4.5

Out of all subsets @xmath of @xmath of size @xmath which satisfy the
shift axiom, the one which is a lex-segment minimizes the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath . Then all monomials @xmath of degree @xmath with
support in @xmath lie in @xmath . Thus, to minimize @xmath , it suffices
to minimize @xmath . A lex-segment accomplishes this. @xmath

###### Definition 3.4.6

Say @xmath is @xmath -compact if

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

3.   If @xmath and @xmath divides @xmath , then @xmath , and

4.   (The shift axiom) If @xmath divides @xmath , and @xmath , then
    @xmath .

Let @xmath consist of the @xmath lexicographically least monomials of
degree @xmath . Observe that @xmath is @xmath -compact.

###### Lemma 3.4.7

Let @xmath be such that if @xmath , then @xmath . For all @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is @xmath -compact, then @xmath .

Proof. For @xmath , write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath , let

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that if @xmath satisfies the shift axiom, @xmath can be expressed
as the disjoint union @xmath .

Now, it follows from Lemma 3.4.5 that if @xmath , both satisfying the
shift axiom and both of size @xmath , and @xmath is a lex-segment, then
@xmath , since for all @xmath satisfying the shift axiom we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, say @xmath is @xmath -compact. Let @xmath , and let @xmath be the
lex-segment of size @xmath .

Claim. @xmath is @xmath -compact.

Proof of Claim. It is clear that @xmath and that @xmath satisfies the
shift axiom. To show that if @xmath and @xmath divides @xmath then
@xmath , it suffices to show that @xmath . But @xmath . @xmath

Since @xmath , we may assume that @xmath is a lex-segment for each
@xmath . Let @xmath be the lexicographically least monomial @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath be the lexicographically
greatest monomial @xmath such that @xmath . Then we have @xmath because
each @xmath is a lex-segment. If @xmath maximizes @xmath , then @xmath ,
since otherwise @xmath is still compact, but with @xmath . Hence @xmath
. @xmath

Suppose @xmath is Borel-fixed. Then @xmath , where @xmath . Thus, if
@xmath has height @xmath , then it can be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is @xmath -primary.

###### Lemma 3.4.8

Suppose @xmath is Borel-fixed of height @xmath and regularity @xmath .
Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath . Then @xmath is generated in degree @xmath and @xmath
. Thus @xmath by Proposition 2.2.1 and so we may assume that @xmath is
generated in degree @xmath .

Claim. A monomial @xmath is standard with respect to @xmath if and only
if @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath .

Proof of Claim. Observe that we need only show that @xmath is standard
implies that @xmath , since @xmath is generated in degree @xmath .
Suppose @xmath is standard. Then there exists @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath but @xmath . Since @xmath is Borel-fixed, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is standard, it does not lie in @xmath , and so @xmath ,
whence @xmath . @xmath

Now suppose that @xmath is standard with respect to @xmath . Then @xmath
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is standard with respect to @xmath . By Proposition 3.4.4
, we are done. @xmath

Note that the ideal @xmath has the same height, degree and regularity as
@xmath and is also Borel-fixed.

Proof of Theorem 3.4.1 . First, by factoring out a maximal regular
sequence of hyperplanes, we may assume that @xmath . By passing to the
generic initial ideal, we may assume that @xmath is a Borel-fixed
monomial ideal. Furthermore, by Lemma 3.4.8 , we may assume that @xmath
is of the form @xmath , where @xmath is @xmath -primary, where @xmath .

Let us establish some notation. As above, let @xmath . For any @xmath ,
write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath . Observe that
@xmath is @xmath -compact.

Now, @xmath , but @xmath , so

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By Lemma 3.4.7 , this is maximized when @xmath .

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , then @xmath consists of

  The @xmath monomials @xmath of degree @xmath ; and
  The @xmath monomials of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath ;
  and
  @xmath
  The @xmath monomials of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

Therefore, @xmath consists of

  The @xmath monomials @xmath of degree @xmath ; and
  The @xmath monomials of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath ;
  and
  @xmath
  The @xmath monomials of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

This completes the proof. @xmath

Of course, combining Theorem 3.4.1 with the propositions in Section 2.3
yields bounds on numbers of generators of ideals, etc., in which the
cohomological degrees have been banished, leaving the multiplicity,
Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity, and more elementary invariants.

As further application of Theorem 3.4.1 , we will make some remarks on
minimal multiplicity, as promised in Section 2.2 . Let @xmath be a
homogeneous @xmath -algebra with minimal presentation @xmath , so that
@xmath . @xmath is said to have @xmath -linear resolution if @xmath is
concentrated in degree @xmath and @xmath has a linear @xmath -resolution
(after a shift of degree @xmath , of course). Said another way, @xmath
is generated in degree @xmath and @xmath . The following theorem (which
is valid even if @xmath has nonzero characteristic) is from [ 13 ,
Theorems 2.1 and 3.1] .

###### Proposition 3.4.9

Let @xmath be a homogeneous ring of dimension @xmath , multiplicity
@xmath and embedding codimension @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, if equality holds, then @xmath has @xmath -linear
resolution.

###### Corollary 3.4.10

Suppose @xmath is a homogeneous ring with embedding codimension @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The converse is true if @xmath is Buchsbaum ² ² 2 Originally, if @xmath
is quasi-Buchsbaum. See the note to Proposition 3.2.3 . .

Proof. By Proposition 2.2.4 , we have @xmath . If @xmath has @xmath
-linear resolution, then @xmath and by Theorem 3.4.1 , @xmath ; hence
equality holds. If, on the other hand, @xmath and @xmath is Buchsbaum,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Proposition 3.2.3 . By Proposition 3.4.9 , @xmath has a @xmath
-linear resolution. @xmath

## Chapter 4 The Homological Dilworth Number,

### 4.1 Motivation

Once again, we let @xmath be a local Noetherian ring with residue field
@xmath , or a homogeneous @xmath algebra with irrelevant maximal ideal
@xmath . Given an exact sequence of @xmath -modules of finite length

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the length function satisfies the following equality:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Usefully, the length function is also an estimator of the number of
generators of a module of finite length,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

though this estimate can be quite crude. Equation ( 4.1 ) and inequality
( 4.2 ) are at the heart of the proofs of the statements (Propositions
2.2.4 , 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 ) which bound the number of generators of a
module in terms of @xmath (and other cohomological degrees). More
precisely: the homological degree

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a general hyperplane @xmath , a fact whose proof relies crucially on
( 4.1 ); inequality ( 4.4 ) allows us to reduce to dimension @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath coincide; and finally, inequality ( 4.2 )
provides the desired bound.

Unfortunately, the homological degree inherits the inefficiency of the
inequality ( 4.2 ), and therefore bounds using @xmath can be
significantly wasteful. In order to sharpen @xmath , one may be tempted
to replace @xmath with @xmath in ( 4.3 ). But @xmath does not interact
well with exact sequences; instead of ( 4.1 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is not strong enough to pass through the proof of ( 4.4 ). Our
solution is to use another function, the Dilworth number, @xmath
(Definition 4.2.1 ) which is intermediate to @xmath and @xmath , and
satisfies (Lemma 4.2.5 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Though this is still weaker than ( 4.1 ), it turns out that it is just
enough to prove an inequality similar to ( 4.4 ).

### 4.2 Dilworth Numbers, Elementary Properties

Let @xmath be a local Noetherian ring with residue field @xmath , or a
homogeneous @xmath -algebra with irrelevant maximal ideal @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.1

Let @xmath be a finitely generated module over @xmath . Then we define
the Dilworth number of @xmath , @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Dilworth number was first studied systematically by Watanabe [ 41 ]
, though it had already been considered in passing by Sally [ 31 ] . The
terminology is due to Watanabe. Note that @xmath if and only if @xmath .
See, for example, [ 31 , Chapter 3, Theorem 1.2] . Clearly, we have
@xmath . If equality holds, we say that @xmath is Dilworth .

Recall (Definition 1.4.1 ) that if @xmath then the type of @xmath is the
dimension of @xmath as a vector space over @xmath . Therefore, if @xmath
has finite length, @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.2

If @xmath then we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . @xmath

Recall that if @xmath is a module of finite length, then we write @xmath
for the Matlis dual of @xmath ; see Section 1.5 . As a corollary of
Lemma 4.2.2 , we obtain the following result of Ikeda [ 25 ] .

###### Corollary 4.2.3

If @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. This is Matlis duality; see Proposition 1.5.2 . @xmath

On the other hand, from [ 25 ] we have the following proposition.

###### Proposition 4.2.4

(Ikeda) If @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, @xmath , by Local Duality (Proposition 1.5.7 ). Thus, combining
Corollary 4.2.3 and Proposition 4.2.4 , we have that if @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a suggestive formula! In Section 4.4 , we will pursue this
analogy with the homological degree, but in the meantime, we need to
develop some more tools.

###### Lemma 4.2.5

If @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Trivial. @xmath

We remark that @xmath is the unique minimal function satisfying the
conclusion to Lemma 4.2.5 which also satisfies the inequality @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.6

Let @xmath be a finitely generated module over @xmath such that @xmath .
Let @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are submodules of @xmath such that
@xmath , then @xmath as well.

Proof. We have the exact sequence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Tensoring with @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector space in the middle has dimension @xmath . Since each of the
other two vector spaces has dimension less than or equal to @xmath , we
must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Thus, the collection of submodules @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath
forms a lattice under @xmath and @xmath . As a consequence, we have the
following.

###### Corollary 4.2.7

Let @xmath be a finitely generated module over @xmath such that @xmath .
Let @xmath . There exists a unique maximal submodule @xmath such that
@xmath . If @xmath , then there is also a unique minimal submodule with
this property.

###### Definition 4.2.8

For @xmath , let @xmath be the unique maximal submodule of @xmath
satisfying @xmath .

Though we will not require this fact in the sequel, it turns out that
@xmath is a functor, as we shall see in the following sequence of
propositions.

###### Lemma 4.2.9

If @xmath is Dilworth, then all homomorphic images of @xmath are
Dilworth.

Proof. Let @xmath . We wish to show that @xmath is Dilworth. From the
exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , so @xmath . Thus @xmath is Dilworth. @xmath

###### Proposition 4.2.10

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are modules of dimension at most @xmath , and
let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. By replacing @xmath by @xmath , we may assume that @xmath is
Dilworth. By Lemma 4.2.9 , @xmath is also Dilworth, so we may replace
@xmath by @xmath and assume @xmath . Thus we need only show that if
@xmath and @xmath is Dilworth then @xmath .

We have an exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is Dilworth, and so @xmath . But @xmath , so @xmath . Hence
@xmath , which finishes the proof. @xmath

###### Corollary 4.2.11

@xmath is a covariant functor on @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
category of finitely generated @xmath -modules of dimension at most
@xmath .

Before leaving this topic, we conclude with some remarks whose proofs
are left as an exercise for the reader.

###### Exercise 4.2.12

@xmath is neither right exact nor left exact on @xmath , though it
obviously preserves inclusions. On the other hand, on exact sequences of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is left exact. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a functor on @xmath , with @xmath if @xmath or if @xmath
is Cohen-Macaulay of dimension @xmath . @xmath is neither left exact nor
right exact.

Hint. Use Proposition 4.2.4 . @xmath

### 4.3 Behavior Under Generic Hyperplane Sections

In this section, we explore the behavior of the Dilworth number under
generic hyperplanes sections. We preserve the notation and assumptions
of the previous section, and in addition assume that the field @xmath is
infinite.

###### Lemma 4.3.1

Suppose @xmath . If @xmath for a generic hyperplane @xmath , then @xmath
is Dilworth, i.e. , @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be the unique maximal submodule such that @xmath . Let
@xmath be generic. Let @xmath be the preimage of @xmath in @xmath .
Since @xmath . Since @xmath , we must have @xmath . On the other hand,
since @xmath , we have @xmath . Since this is true for generic @xmath ,
it follows that @xmath . Since @xmath , this forces @xmath . @xmath

###### Corollary 4.3.2

Suppose @xmath . If @xmath for a generic hyperplane @xmath then @xmath

Proof. Matlis duality; see Proposition 1.5.2 . @xmath

The following ugly orphan of a lemma will be the crucial step in the
proof of Proposition 4.6.5

###### Lemma 4.3.3

If @xmath is a module over @xmath such that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a generic hyperplane @xmath , then @xmath for such @xmath .

Proof. We proceed by induction on @xmath . For a hyperplane @xmath ,
write @xmath . If @xmath for generic @xmath , then @xmath and the
assertion is trivial. So we may assume @xmath for generic @xmath . Let
@xmath and @xmath be generic. Since @xmath , we have @xmath . But since
@xmath , we have that the module @xmath satisfies the hypotheses of the
lemma, and @xmath . So, by induction, we have @xmath for generic @xmath
.

Choose hyperplanes @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for infinitely
many units @xmath . For the remainder of this argument, we will call
such @xmath “good”. We shall also employ the following language: if
@xmath is a finitely generated module and @xmath , then we say that
@xmath is a generator of @xmath if @xmath is part of a minimal
generating set for @xmath ; that is, if @xmath .

Claim. For good @xmath , if @xmath then there exists a module @xmath
such that

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath , and

-   @xmath .

We will prove the claim presently. For the moment, assume it is true.
For brevity, write @xmath for @xmath and write @xmath , where @xmath has
no generators in @xmath . (The choice of @xmath is not unique, but no
matter.) We wish to show, by induction on @xmath , that @xmath for
distinct, good @xmath . This is a contradiction, and so will complete
the proof.

The case @xmath is trivial. By induction, we may assume @xmath . For
good @xmath , so @xmath . Since @xmath , this forces @xmath . Now, we
also have @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So @xmath . In particular, @xmath does not annihilate any generator of
@xmath . Therefore, if for each @xmath is a generator for @xmath , then
@xmath is a linearly independent set in the vector space @xmath .

Now, to show @xmath , it suffices to show that if @xmath is a generator
for @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then each @xmath .

Multiplying by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the @xmath are linearly independent, @xmath , and the @xmath are
distinct, this implies that @xmath for @xmath . Similarly, one shows
that @xmath . Thus, we are done.

Proof of claim. It suffices to show that if @xmath , with @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath as well. Indeed, if this is true, then we can find
our @xmath among the modules @xmath

Thus, let @xmath , where no generator of @xmath lies in @xmath . Then
@xmath . Now, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and since no generator of @xmath lies in @xmath , we have
@xmath . Since, clearly, @xmath , this yields @xmath . Since @xmath and
we are done. @xmath

We shall also require the dual formulation of this lemma, and so we
record it here.

###### Lemma 4.3.4

If @xmath is a module over @xmath such that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a generic hyperplane @xmath , then @xmath for such @xmath .

### 4.4 The Definition and Basic Properties of the Homological Dilworth
Number

As previously remarked, Equation ( 4.5 ) suggests an analogy between the
Dilworth number and the homological degree. To extend the Dilworth
number to modules of dimension greater than or equal to @xmath , we are
therefore led to the following definition.

###### Definition 4.4.1

If @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring and @xmath ,
then the homological Dilworth number is defined recursively as follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is not the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring, then we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -adic completion of @xmath .

By Equation ( 4.5 ) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whenever @xmath ; that is, whenever @xmath .

The homological Dilworth number is not a cohomological degree, as it
violates the condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whenever @xmath . However, if @xmath and @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, then
@xmath . Suspecting that the difficulty is confined to dimension @xmath
, one may bravely speculate that there exists some cohomological degree,
@xmath , which agrees with the homological Dilworth number, at least for
modules of positive depth; but this too is false, as we shall see.
Nonetheless, many of the statements which hold for @xmath may also be
proven for @xmath , a task to which we now dedicate ourselves. Generally
speaking, a statement about @xmath and the corresponding statement about
@xmath have similar proofs, except on the level of details (the home of
the Devil; see, for example, Lemma 4.3.3 ), where the proofs of
statements about @xmath tend to be more complicated.

###### Lemma 4.4.2

If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact, then

1.   If @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. By taking completions if necessary, we may assume that @xmath is
the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring. Suppose @xmath . It suffices
to show that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . But @xmath for @xmath and we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since, by Proposition 1.5.9 , @xmath , we have that @xmath for these
modules, and since @xmath , we have that @xmath .

Meanwhile, if we let @xmath , then we have, by Lemma 4.2.5 , @xmath and
@xmath . Hence we are done in this case.

Now suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath for @xmath and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence we are
done in all cases. @xmath

The following proposition was proved for the homological degree by
Vasconcelos [ 38 ] . The proof given here follows the argument of
Vasconcelos closely; we merely observe that the properties of the
Dilworth number are just enough to carry through.

###### Proposition 4.4.3

If @xmath is a generic hyperplane on @xmath , then, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. We may assume that @xmath is the homomorphic image of a
Gorenstein ring. We proceed by induction on @xmath .

First, observe that we may assume that @xmath . Indeed, assume the
result has been proven for modules of positive depth and suppose @xmath
.

If not, then the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, by Proposition 4.4.2 ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So we assume that @xmath is regular on @xmath . We have the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we obtain the long exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is generic, we may take it to be part of a degree system
for @xmath , and so, by Proposition 1.3.8 , @xmath . Thus it suffices to
show the inequality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

With this in mind, we break the long exact sequence above into short
exact sequences as follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is generic, we have that @xmath . If @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this immediately implies ( 4.6 ).

If @xmath , we begin by applying the functor @xmath to ( 4.7 ), from
which we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath . Then applying the snake lemma to ( 4.9 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, @xmath , and the composite map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is induced by multiplication by @xmath . Hence we may rewrite ( 4.10 )
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , by Proposition 1.5.9 , we may apply induction. Hence, by
Proposition 4.4.2 , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now, from ( 4.8 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have @xmath @xmath

###### Corollary 4.4.4

@xmath

###### Definition 4.4.5

If @xmath then we say that @xmath is Dilworth.

Since, clearly, @xmath , a Yoshida module (that is, a module which
satisfies @xmath ) is necessarily Dilworth. The converse is not true,
even if @xmath , as the following example shows.

###### Example 4.4.6

A module which is Dilworth but not Yoshida.

Let @xmath or @xmath , and let @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath is
Dilworth but not Yoshida, with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(We leave the calculation as an exercise for the reader.) Observe that
@xmath has a linear resolution (which foreshadows the results in section
4.6 ) and hence, in this case, @xmath .

###### Exercise 4.4.7

Given an exact sequence of finitely generated modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also exact, and @xmath .

### 4.5 Bounding Numbers of Generators and Hilbert Functions

The following three propositions are the analogues of Propositions 2.3.1
, 2.3.2 and 2.3.3 . The proofs of Propositions 4.5.1 and 4.5.3 are
almost identical to the proofs of Propositions 2.3.1 and 2.3.3 , and so
we omit them. The proof of 4.5.2 is slightly different from that of
2.3.2 (in fact, Proposition 4.5.2 is marginally simpler to prove than
Proposition 2.3.2 , an exception to the rule stated in the remarks
following Definition 4.4.1 ) so we will include the proof in this case.

###### Proposition 4.5.1

Suppose @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay of dimension @xmath and let @xmath be
an ideal of codimension @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Similar to [ 10 , Theorem 3.1] , cited as Proposition 2.3.1 .
@xmath

###### Proposition 4.5.2

Let @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath -primary ideal. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the index of nilpotency of @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be a generic system of parameters for @xmath and let
@xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Clearly, @xmath . Since @xmath
is an ideal of @xmath , a one dimensional ring, it suffices to show that
@xmath .

We use induction on @xmath . If @xmath , the claim follows from
Proposition 4.4.3 . Suppose @xmath . The exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath , whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, by the induction hypothesis we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting this all together, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Proposition 4.5.3

The reduction number @xmath of @xmath is bounded as follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Similar to [ 10 , Corollary 4.7] , cited as Proposition 2.3.3 .
@xmath

### 4.6 Dilworth Modules and Linear Resolution

In this section, we study Dilworth modules: modules which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The analogous statement for a cohomological degree @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, as we saw in Chapter 2, this equality forces @xmath to have a
linear resolution. Therefore, one is moved to ask:

  If @xmath is Dilworth, does @xmath necessarily have a linear
  resolution?

The answer is no, for in dimension @xmath , the question becomes

  Does @xmath imply @xmath ?

(The reader may satisfy herself that counterexamples are myriad.) What
is perhaps surprising is that misbehavior in dimension @xmath is the
only obstruction to linear resolution. Thus, we will prove:

###### Theorem 4.6.1

Let @xmath be a Dilworth module such that @xmath . Then @xmath has a
linear resolution.

Before we give a proof, we need to establish some preliminary results.

###### Proposition 4.6.2

If @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath is a generic hyperplane on @xmath ,
then @xmath is Dilworth also.

Proof. Squeeze: @xmath . @xmath

###### Proposition 4.6.3

Assume @xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring. Let @xmath
be a module such that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is Dilworth, then
@xmath is Dilworth and, for @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be generic on @xmath . We write @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . The exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Since @xmath is generic, the module @xmath has finite
length, and so, by Lemma 4.4.2 , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for each @xmath . On the other hand, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence we must have equality all the way through, and so

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath . This forces @xmath (since @xmath ) and, by Lemma 4.3.1 and
Corollary 4.3.2 , @xmath , for @xmath To show the final claim, that
@xmath , we proceed by induction on @xmath .

If @xmath , in which case @xmath , we have @xmath for generic @xmath ,
and since @xmath , we are done by Lemma 4.3.1 .

If @xmath , then we have, by induction,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence we have equality all the way through, whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which finishes the proof. @xmath

###### Lemma 4.6.4

Let @xmath be a Dilworth module with @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and
@xmath are both Dilworth modules with @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath ,
then @xmath .

Proof. It is harmless to assume that @xmath is the homomorphic image of
a Gorenstein ring. From the exact sequence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are again Dilworth. On the other
hand, if @xmath , tensoring ( 4.11 ) with @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 4.12 ), the map @xmath must be an injection, so ( 4.13 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This induces a splitting of ( 4.11 ); i.e. @xmath . @xmath

###### Proposition 4.6.5

Let @xmath be Dilworth of dimension @xmath and of positive depth. Let
@xmath be a generic, regular hyperplane on @xmath , and write @xmath .
Then @xmath for @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. We may assume that @xmath is the homomorphic image of a
Gorenstein ring. As in the proof of Proposition 4.6.3 , we have, for
@xmath , short exact sequences of modules of finite length

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

subject to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath for @xmath , equations ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.16 ), along with
Lemmas 4.3.3 and 4.3.4 , force @xmath for @xmath . By virtue of ( 4.14
), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence @xmath , for @xmath .

To show the second claim, first note that @xmath . If @xmath , then we
may proceed as above, so we assume @xmath . @xmath is Dilworth, so
@xmath , by Lemma 4.6.4 . Since @xmath , we have @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath . Note that since @xmath is Dilworth, @xmath is
Dilworth and @xmath is a one dimensional linear Cohen-Macaulay module.
The exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is linear Cohen-Macaulay, @xmath Further,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so @xmath . Consequently, by Lemma 4.3.4 , @xmath . Meanwhile, the above
calculation also forces @xmath ; hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which finishes the proof. @xmath

By replacing the condition that @xmath by the conditions @xmath and
@xmath , we may prove the following three Lemmas exactly as Lemmas 2.4.3
, 2.4.4 and 2.4.5 .

###### Lemma 4.6.6

Let @xmath be Dilworth with @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is a
generic system of parameters for @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.6.7

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath and @xmath a finitely generated @xmath
-module such that @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath . Let @xmath , where
@xmath is a generic partial system of parameters for @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.6.8

Let @xmath be Dilworth with @xmath and let @xmath be a regular, generic
hyperplane on @xmath . Set @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact, where @xmath is an initial form of @xmath in @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 4.6.1 . We have shown (Propositions 4.6.2 and 4.6.5 )
that if @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath and @xmath is generic on @xmath ,
then @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath ; that is, that the hypotheses of
Theorem 4.6.1 are preserved under a generic hyperplane section. Thus we
may prove Theorem 4.6.1 exactly as we proved Theorem 2.4.1 . @xmath

The converse to Theorem 4.6.1 is not true, as the following example
shows.

###### Example 4.6.9

A module which has a linear resolution but is not Dilworth.

Let @xmath be a regular local ring of dimension @xmath . Let @xmath .
Then @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath is Dilworth and if @xmath , the difference
@xmath is a polynomial in @xmath of degree @xmath . In either case,
@xmath has a linear resolution, by Proposition 1.7.4 .

### 4.7 Comparison Between @xmath and @xmath

In this section we compare the homological Dilworth number with the
extremal cohomological degree. We preserve the notation and assumptions
of the previous sections, including the assumption that @xmath is
infinite. Our first result is:

###### Proposition 4.7.1

Let @xmath be in @xmath and suppose @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall require the following result of Ikeda [ 25 , Theorem 1.1] .

###### Proposition 4.7.2

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

Proof of Proposition 4.7.1 . By taking completions, we may assume that
@xmath is the homomorphic image of a Gorenstein ring. The proposition is
almost trivial is @xmath , so we assume that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then,
by Lemma 4.4.2 (2) and by Definition 3.1.3 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we may assume @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be generic on @xmath and let @xmath . Then, since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 4.7.2 , @xmath , and so we are done. @xmath

###### Corollary 4.7.3

Suppose @xmath in @xmath has dimension at most @xmath . Then @xmath has
a linear resolution if and only if @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath .

Proof. This follows from Theorems 3.3.1 and 4.6.1 and Proposition 4.7.1
. @xmath

For another proof (in a special case) of the above theorem which does
not make reference to @xmath , see Appendix A .

We now turn our attention to the modules of dimension @xmath or greater.
It turns out that in this case, either inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is possible (though, obviously, not at the same time). First, observe
that if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , and since the difference can be made as large as desired,
it is in some sense cheating to admit modules with non-trivial @xmath .
Therefore, for the remainder of this section, the module @xmath is
assumed to have dimension at least @xmath and positive depth.

Under these assumptions, the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is typical. Any module with a linear resolution which is not Dilworth,
as in Example 4.6.9 , must satisfy this inequality. In fact, as the
reader may verify for himself, randomly ¹ ¹ 1 In the sense of human
activity, not in the mathematical sense. constructing non-Cohen-Macaulay
modules on, for example, Macaulay , will almost invariably produce
modules satisfying this inequality.

Thus, to produce a module satisfying @xmath a systematic approach is
required. Suppose @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and let @xmath be a module of
finite length with @xmath . Let @xmath be the module of syzygies of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath and @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, as the reader may verify,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a generic partial system of parameters. Thus, we wish to
find a module of finite length satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for generic @xmath .

We begin with some remarks concerning modules @xmath satisfying @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath . Assume that no generator of @xmath is killed by
@xmath ; that is, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Then we have a homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath denote their residue classes in
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. By fixing bases of @xmath and @xmath
corresponds to an @xmath matrix of linear forms, as follows. Let @xmath
be a minimal generating set of @xmath . Then for each @xmath corresponds
to a matrix, and if @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an @xmath matrix of linear forms in the variables @xmath .

Conversely, any matrix of linear forms @xmath determines a module @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath , subject to relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us use this correspondence to construct a module @xmath which
satisfies @xmath and @xmath for generic @xmath . For convenience, let us
assume that @xmath ; that is, that @xmath corresponds to a square
matrix. We have the following proposition.

###### Proposition 4.7.4

With notation as above,

1.  @xmath for generic @xmath if and only if @xmath ; and

2.  @xmath if and only if there is no choice of bases of @xmath and
    @xmath such that, with respect to these bases, the matrix of linear
    forms corresponding to @xmath has a rectangular block of zeroes in
    the lower left hand corner which is large enough to intersect the
    main diagonal; that is, of size @xmath where @xmath .

We leave the proof as an exercise to the reader. Now, if @xmath , then
the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies @xmath , and it is clear that no sequence of row and column
operations can get @xmath into either of the following forms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath and @xmath for generic @xmath . (In fact, @xmath , so @xmath
for generic @xmath .)

## Appendix A Almost Cohen-Macaulay Modules with Linear Resolution

In this appendix, we derive some consequences of Proposition 2.5.6 ,
reproduced here for convenience.

###### Proposition A.1

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded module over @xmath such that
@xmath has a linear resolution, @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath Betti number of @xmath , @xmath is the
minimal number of generators of @xmath , and @xmath is the degree of
@xmath .

In Chapter 4 we established (Corollary 4.7.3 ) the following theorem.

###### Theorem A.2

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded @xmath -module of dimension at
most @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial ring over
the infinite field @xmath . Then @xmath has linear resolution if and
only if @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath .

The condition @xmath is equivalent to the condition that @xmath be
generated in degree @xmath . One direction of Theorem A.2

  If @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath then @xmath has a linear resolution

is just a special case of Theorem 4.6.1 , and is valid without the
assumption that @xmath . To prove the converse

  If @xmath has a linear resolution then @xmath is Dilworth and @xmath

we appealed to Theorem 3.3.1 . Here, we shall give a second proof based
on Proposition A.1 .

###### Lemma A.3

Suppose @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . Then @xmath is Dilworth.

Proof. Let @xmath and @xmath . We induct on @xmath , the case @xmath
being straightforward; thus suppose @xmath . Let @xmath . We may assume
@xmath . Indeed, if not, then let @xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath
and @xmath . Since @xmath , by induction we have @xmath It follows that
@xmath .

Thus we assume @xmath . Let @xmath . We claim that @xmath . It is clear
that @xmath . To show the opposite inclusion, let @xmath . Then @xmath ,
so @xmath for some @xmath . So @xmath , which proves the claim.

Now @xmath , hence @xmath , a contradiction. @xmath

Proof of Theorem A.2 . By Theorem 4.6.1 , we have that if @xmath is
Dilworth and @xmath , then @xmath has linear resolution. We need only
show the converse.

Suppose @xmath has linear resolution. Then @xmath and @xmath , so we may
assume @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, so the result
follows from Proposition 1.8.3 . Thus, we may assume that @xmath has
dimension @xmath . Let @xmath be generic on @xmath and let @xmath .
Then, from the long exact sequence derived from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have @xmath . @xmath has linear resolution and is of dimension @xmath
, so it is a Yoshida module. In particular, @xmath . Hence @xmath ,
whence @xmath is Dilworth, by Lemma A.3 . Now @xmath is presented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath Betti number of @xmath . Thus, by Proposition
A.1 , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath is Dilworth. @xmath

###### Exercise A.4

Let @xmath be a polynomial ring in two variables. Yoshino [ 46 ] has
classified @xmath -modules with linear resolution. Using Yoshino’s
classification, verify that all such modules are Dilworth, thus giving a
third proof of (this special case of) Theorem A.2 .

###### Proposition A.5

Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded @xmath -module of dimension at
most @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial ring over
the infinite field @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is Yoshida and unmixed.
Let @xmath . then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and each of these values may be obtained.

Proof. @xmath and we must have @xmath . @xmath is presented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a matrix of linear forms. We have @xmath and @xmath .
Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence @xmath .

To see that each of these value may be obtained, let @xmath and @xmath
be integers such that @xmath and @xmath ; let @xmath ; let @xmath ; and
let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is unmixed with @xmath and @xmath @xmath

Similarly, we may derive:

###### Proposition A.6

If @xmath and @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is linear Buchsbaum, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --