##### Acknowledgements.

The author wishes to stress his most sincere gratitude to his thesis
advisor, Ursula Hamenstädt.

## 2. Families of Algebraic Curves

In this chapter we discuss some generalities about moduli spaces of
curves, curves in moduli spaces of curves and families of curves.
Working over the complex numbers, we make excessive use of the
equivalence between algebraic curves over the complex numbers and finite
type Riemann surfaces.

There does not exist a fine moduli space of curves. Since we do not to
want to work with stacks or orbifolds, we consider the moduli space
@xmath as a coarse moduli space. The price we have to pay is that
whenever we want to use some correspondence between maps to moduli space
and families of curves, we have to pass to a cover of @xmath . There are
basically two possibilities, both of which are important: moduli spaces
with level structures @xmath for @xmath , and Teichmüller spaces @xmath
.

We are interested in one-dimensional families of curves which are in
some sense maximally apart from being isotrivial. This can be made
precise using metric terms. We shall find that all one-dimensional
families of curves which are not isotrivial must have a hyperbolic base.
Hence we have the hyperbolic metric on the base, and luckily this
behaves nicely when compared to the Teichmüller metric on moduli (or
Teichmüller) space. These metrics can be conceptually subsumed as
Kobayashi metrics. An analysis of the properties of Kobayashi metrics
then hints that one should regard precisely those families as maximally
non-isotrivial whose classifying map is a local isometry.

### 2.1. Conventions and Setup

We begin by recalling some basic ideas and constructions in moduli
theory of algebraic curves. The primary purpose of this section is to
fix notation and precise definitions, hence it is not self-contained.

###### Riemann Surfaces.

A Riemann surface is a one-dimensional complex manifold. We always
assume Riemann surfaces to be connected, unless explicitly stated
otherwise. The universal covering space of a Riemann surface @xmath is,
up to isomorphism, exactly one of the following three Riemann surfaces:
the Riemann sphere @xmath , the complex plane @xmath and the unit disk
@xmath . In the first case @xmath is called elliptic , in the second
case parabolic and in the third case hyperbolic . These namings
correspond to natural geometries on such surfaces which are only of
relevance for us in the hyperbolic case: the Poincaré metric on the unit
disk is the metric tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives a well-defined Hermitian metric on @xmath ; this metric is
invariant under the holomorphic automorphism group of @xmath and hence
descends to every hyperbolic Riemann surface. It has constant curvature
@xmath . For every pair of points @xmath there exists a holomorphic
automorphism of @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to some
@xmath ; the distance with respect to @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A Riemann surface is called of finite type if it is either elliptic,
parabolic or hyperbolic with finite hyperbolic volume. Every Riemann
surface @xmath of finite type can be written as @xmath where @xmath is a
compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath and @xmath is a finite set;
conversely every such Riemann surface is of finite type. The cardinality
of @xmath , which we often denote by @xmath , and the genus @xmath of
@xmath are uniquely determined by @xmath ; we call @xmath the type of
the Riemann surface @xmath .

###### Algebraic Curves.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field. An algebraic curve over
@xmath is a scheme @xmath of finite type over @xmath which is integral,
reduced and one-dimensional. It is called smooth if the structure
morphism @xmath is smooth; usually we will only consider smooth curves.
For @xmath there is an “analytification functor” from smooth algebraic
curves over @xmath with @xmath -morphisms to Riemann surfaces with
holomorphic maps; its essential image consists precisely of the finite
type Riemann surfaces. Two complex algebraic curves are isomorphic
precisely if the associated finite type Riemann surfaces are
biholomorphic.

An algebraic curve @xmath over @xmath is called complete if the
structure morphism @xmath is proper or, equivalently, projective. Every
smooth algebraic curve @xmath can be written as @xmath , where @xmath is
a smooth complete algebraic curve and @xmath is a finite set of closed
points in @xmath . For @xmath the analytification functor from smooth
complete algebraic curves over @xmath with @xmath -scheme morphisms to
compact Riemann surfaces with holomorphic maps is an equivalence of
categories. For this reason we will often not distinguish between
compact (or even finite type) Riemann surfaces and complex algebraic
curves.

###### Mapping Class Groups.

Let @xmath be a compact orientable (topological) surface of genus @xmath
. The mapping class group @xmath is the quotient of the group of
orientation-preserving self-homeomorphisms of @xmath modulo the subgroup
of those homeomorphisms which are isotopic to the identity. In case
@xmath comes equipped with a @xmath structure, we may as well only take
diffeomorphisms, the resulting group is the same. Once and for all we
fix a “model surface” @xmath and then write @xmath instead of @xmath .

The mapping class group can also be defined group-theoretically ¹ ¹ 1
The following only holds for @xmath , but the case @xmath is trivial
anyway . Namely the fundamental group @xmath of @xmath is a priori only
well-defined up to inner automorphisms, but so its outer automorphism
group @xmath only depends on @xmath and not on the choice of a base
point. There is an obvious group homomorphism @xmath ; this is
injective, and the image is the index two subgroup @xmath of those outer
automorphisms that act trivially on @xmath . The fundamental group
@xmath has the following presentation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Teichmüller Markings.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath . A
(Teichmüller) marking of @xmath is an isotopy class of diffeomorphisms
@xmath . Equivalently it can be described as an orientation-preserving ²
² 2 In the sense that it preserves the canonical orientations on group
cohomology @xmath outer isomorphism @xmath .

###### Level Structures.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath and let @xmath
be an integer. Then a level- @xmath -structure on @xmath is a symplectic
basis @xmath of @xmath as @xmath -module. Equivalently we can define a
level- @xmath -structure as a symplectic isomorphism @xmath ; here the
standard basis of the former is written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with symplectic form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the cohomology being endowed with the Poincaré duality form.

###### Families of Riemann Surfaces and Algebraic Curves.

Let @xmath be a complex space. A family of Riemann surfaces over @xmath
is a proper morphism of complex spaces @xmath of relative dimension one
with connected fibres. In other words, all fibres are compact Riemann
surfaces of some genus; if @xmath is connected, this genus is the same
for every fibre and called the genus of the family.

Every family of Riemann surfaces is topologically a fibre bundle, hence
the fundamental, homology and cohomology groups of the fibres can be
organized into local systems. A Teichmüller marking of a family of
Riemann surfaces @xmath can be described in two equivalent ways. First
it can be defined by giving a Teichmüller marking on every fibre @xmath
in a “locally constant” way; second, it can be defined as an outer
isomorphism from the constant local system of groups @xmath on @xmath to
the local system of the @xmath , defining a Teichmüller marking on each
fibre. For a rigorous definition see [ 13 , Définition 2.2] .

The local system of first cohomology groups with @xmath coefficients can
be described more easily: this is the local system @xmath on @xmath . A
level- @xmath -structure on the family @xmath is then a symplectic
isomorphism from the constant local system @xmath to @xmath .

Let @xmath be a noetherian scheme. Then a family of algebraic curves
over @xmath is a proper smooth morphism of schemes @xmath such that for
every geometric point @xmath the fibre @xmath is a smooth complete
algebraic curve over @xmath . If @xmath is connected, again the genus of
@xmath is constant and called the genus of the family. Teichmüller
markings do not have a direct analogue, but level structures do, using
either Jacobians (as abelian varieties) or étale cohomology.

###### Teichmüller Spaces.

Consider the following moduli functor @xmath on the category of complex
spaces: @xmath is the set of isomorphism classes of families of Riemann
surfaces of genus @xmath with Teichmüller marking over @xmath , with the
action on morphisms being given by pullbacks. This functor is
representable by a complex space @xmath called Teichmüller space of
genus @xmath . By the universal property of @xmath there exists a
universal Teichmüller marked family @xmath , briefly called the
universal family over Teichmüller space . This is topologically (but of
course not complex-analytically) a trivial fibre bundle @xmath .
Assigning to every point @xmath the class of the fibre @xmath sets up a
bijection between points of @xmath and isomorphism classes of
Teichmüller marked Riemann surfaces of genus @xmath . We will often
identify these two sets by this bijection.

The complex space @xmath is indeed a complex manifold, biholomorphic to
a bounded domain in @xmath and homeomorphic to a @xmath -dimensional
ball.

The mapping class group @xmath acts from the left on @xmath : for @xmath
represented by a Riemann surface @xmath with a Teichmüller marking
@xmath and for @xmath represented by @xmath , define the element @xmath
as represented by the same Riemann surface @xmath but now with the
marking

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This defines a faithful holomorphic and properly discontinuous action of
@xmath on @xmath .

###### Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces.

Now consider the following moduli functor @xmath , also on complex
spaces: @xmath is the set of isomorphism classes of families of Riemann
surfaces over @xmath . This functor is not representable but admits a
coarse moduli space @xmath . Hence the points of @xmath are in bijection
with isomorphism classes of compact Riemann surfaces of genus @xmath .
There is also a tautological family ³ ³ 3 Not a family of Riemann
surfaces as we defined it! @xmath ; its fibre over a point of @xmath
represented by a Riemann surface @xmath is the surface @xmath .

The coarse moduli space @xmath can be constructed as the quotient @xmath
; since the action of the mapping class group on Teichmüller space is
properly discontinuous, this quotient is a normal complex space. If one
is willing to work with orbifolds (we shall avoid this in this paper)
one can also view the orbifold quotient @xmath as a fine moduli stack.
There is a natural lift of the action of @xmath on @xmath to an action
on @xmath ; then the tautological family over @xmath can be constructed
as @xmath .

We rather work with rigidifications by level structures: they are close
enough to moduli spaces for our purposes but have the advantage that
they represent some functor and carry a universal family. So let @xmath
be an integer. The moduli functor @xmath on complex spaces sends a
complex space @xmath to the set of all families of Riemann surfaces of
genus @xmath with level- @xmath -structure over @xmath , up to
isomorphism. For every @xmath this admits a coarse moduli space @xmath
(of course @xmath ), and for @xmath this is even a fine moduli space and
a complex manifold. In particular for these @xmath there is a universal
family @xmath . The forgetful map @xmath is finite.

These moduli spaces with level structures can be constructed as follows:
denote by @xmath the subgroup of @xmath consisting of those mapping
classes which operate trivially on the cohomology group @xmath . The
quotient @xmath is then @xmath ; for @xmath the group @xmath is
torsion-free, hence operates without fixed points, and so the quotient
turns out to be a complex manifold.

###### Moduli Spaces of Algebraic Curves.

In contrast to Teichmüller spaces, moduli spaces with or without level
structures can also be constructed in the algebraic category. Since we
only work in characteristic zero, we restrict ourselves to defining them
over the rationals. So let @xmath be the functor on noetherian @xmath
-schemes which to such a scheme @xmath associates the set of all
families of algebraic curves over @xmath , up to isomorphism. This
functor is not representable but admits a coarse moduli space @xmath ;
this is a quasi-projective variety over @xmath . Its analytification is
canonically isomorphic to @xmath .

For any positive integer @xmath , define in analogy to the above a
functor @xmath on noetherian @xmath -schemes. This admits a coarse
moduli space which for @xmath is even a fine moduli space. In particular
it then admits a universal family @xmath . The analytification of all
these objects yield the corresponding analytic ones.

###### Quasiconformal Mappings.

Let @xmath be open and let @xmath . Then @xmath is called @xmath
-quasiconformal if the following holds:

1.  @xmath is open,

2.  @xmath is a homeomorphism onto its image,

3.  @xmath has partial distributional derivatives locally in @xmath and

4.  almost everywhere one has

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

The smallest @xmath for which this holds is called the constant of
quasiconformality of @xmath . Note that some authors also call @xmath
the quasiconformal constant; we prefer to call @xmath the quasiconformal
dilatation .

A map is @xmath -quasiconformal (or, equivalently, quasiconformal with
dilatation @xmath ) if and only if it is biholomorphic.

The composition of a quasiconformal map with a biholomorphic map (from
the left or the right) gives again a quasiconformal map with the same
constant of quasiconformality. In particular @xmath -quasiconformal maps
between Riemann surfaces are well-defined. A map between Riemann
surfaces is @xmath -quasiconformal (or, equivalently, quasiconformal
with dilatation @xmath ) if and only if it is biholomorphic.

###### Beltrami Forms.

Let @xmath be a Riemann surface. A Beltrami form on @xmath is an @xmath
complex antilinear endomorphism of the tangent bundle @xmath . Denote
the space of Beltrami forms on @xmath by @xmath ; this is a complex
vector space. It can be endowed with a norm as follows: let @xmath ,
this defines for every point @xmath a complex antilinear map @xmath .
Since @xmath is a one-dimensional complex vector space, the operator
norm @xmath is well-defined, i.e. does not depend on a choice of norm on
@xmath . Take then @xmath to be the essential supremum of all @xmath ,
where @xmath ranges over all points of @xmath . With this norm @xmath
becomes a Banach space.

Denote by @xmath the open unit ball in @xmath , i.e. the set of all
Beltrami forms of norm less than one. Every element @xmath defines a new
complex structure on @xmath , as follows: consider a holomorphic atlas
@xmath of @xmath . For every @xmath then @xmath corresponds to a
Beltrami form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath . Then let @xmath be some quasi-conformal homeomorphism with
Beltrami coefficient @xmath , i.e. such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the collection @xmath is a holomorphic atlas on the smooth surface
underlying @xmath ; this is not necessarily compatible with the old
atlas, so we get a possibly new Riemann surface structure on @xmath . We
call this new Riemann surface @xmath . Since its underlying smooth
surface is identified with that of @xmath , it automatically inherits a
marking. Thus we have defined a map

  ----- -- -------- --
  (1)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

This is a holomorphic submersion of complex Banach manifolds, in
particular surjective.

### 2.2. Curves in Moduli Space and Families of Curves

The moduli space of curves (or Riemann surfaces) only being a coarse
moduli space, there is a subtle difference between curves in the moduli
space of curves and families of curves over a curve.

First let us explain how to pass from a family to a curve. So let @xmath
be an algebraic curve over the complex numbers with at most ordinary
double-points as singularities, and let @xmath be a family of curves of
genus @xmath . This yields, by definition of @xmath , a regular map
@xmath . It does not, however, always suffice to know this map in order
to reconstruct the family. Hence it is useful to choose a
rigidification, either a level structure or a Teichmüller marking. But
this forces us to pass to a cover of the original family. Let @xmath be
the normalization of @xmath ; then @xmath is a smooth algebraic curve,
or a finite type Riemann surface. By pullback

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

we obtain a family of curves @xmath . Now let @xmath be the universal
cover of @xmath ; again by pullback we get a family of curves @xmath .
Now @xmath being simply connected we may choose a Teichmüller marking of
this family; this in turn defines a map @xmath , by definition of
Teichmüller space. Clearly the following diagram commutes:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the family @xmath can be reconstructed from the classifying map
@xmath .

Now let us consider the case of level structures. So choose some @xmath
and consider the monodromy representation of the local system @xmath on
@xmath ; this is a homomorphism @xmath . Since the latter group is
finite, the kernel of this map is a finite index normal subgroup @xmath
of @xmath . This corresponds to a finite cover @xmath , and the pullback
of the family @xmath along this covering map yields a family @xmath
whose monodromy representation on @xmath is trivial. Hence there exists
a level- @xmath -structure of the family @xmath , and this defines a
regular map @xmath . Now again this map allows to reconstruct the
original family, but it has two advantages over the Teichmüller marked
family constructed above. First, it keeps much more of the topological
information of the original family; second, it remains entirely within
the realm of algebraic geometry. Our construction of course only works
for complex algebraic geometry, but using étale fundamental groups and
étale local systems instead of the “classical” ones, the construction
can be carried out over an arbitrary base field (after possibly passing
to a finite extension of the base field).

There is — for the moment — less to say about the other direction.
Namely let @xmath be an algebraic curve with at most double point
singularities and let @xmath be a regular map. This does not directly
yield a family of algebraic curves over @xmath , only over a finite
(possibly ramified) cover of it: consider the forgetful map @xmath , for
@xmath . Pulling back @xmath along this map gives a cartesian diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since the pullback of finite morphisms is finite, the map @xmath is also
finite. In particular @xmath is again an algebraic curve. Now by the
universal property of @xmath we get from @xmath a family @xmath which
comes equipped with a level- @xmath -structure. This family, even
forgetting the level structure, does not necessarily descend to a family
on @xmath .

### 2.3. The Kobayashi Metric

It turns out that interesting families of algebraic curves can only
occur over algebraic curves which are themselves hyperbolic.
“Interesting” here means “not isotrivial”:

###### Definition 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a complex space (or an algebraic variety). A family @xmath
of curves is called

-   isotrivial if all its fibres are abstractly isomorphic;

-   trivial if it is isomorphic, as a family, to @xmath for some curve
    @xmath .

Every trivial family is isotrivial, but the converse does not hold. A
family @xmath is isotrivial if and only if the corresponding classifying
map @xmath is constant. We shall henceforth only consider non-isotrivial
families.

In order to determine over which curves non-isotrivial families are
possible at all, we have to take a closer look at the differential
geometry of the involved spaces.

###### The Kobayashi Semimetric.

On any complex space @xmath there is canonical semimetric, the Kobayashi
semimetric. In many cases, in particular most of the cases interesting
to us, it is in fact a metric. The naturality of its definition implies
that it is invariant under biholomorphic maps and has some other nice
properties. It is obtained by considering all holomorphic mappings from
the unit disk to @xmath and using the Poincaré metric on the former.

To begin with, let @xmath be a complex space and let @xmath and @xmath
be points of @xmath . By a holomorphic chain from @xmath to @xmath (on
@xmath ) we mean a finite sequence of holomorphic maps @xmath together
with points @xmath , where @xmath varies from @xmath to @xmath , subject
to the following conditions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that if @xmath is a path-connected complex manifold
and @xmath , there is always a holomorphic chain from @xmath to @xmath .
Namely cover @xmath by open subsets which are biholomorphic to the
polydisk @xmath and choose a path from @xmath to @xmath . The image of
the path is compact, so it can be covered by finitely many of the given
subsets, which reduces the problem to the case @xmath where it is clear.

###### Definition 2.3.2.

The Kobayashi semimetric on a complex space @xmath is the function
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the Poincaré distance on @xmath and the infimum is taken
over all holomorphic chains from @xmath to @xmath as above.

It is readily checked that @xmath is a semimetric, i.e. it satisfies all
the usual axioms for a metric with the exception that @xmath is allowed
to be zero also for @xmath , and also to be infinity. Note that taking
holomorphic chains instead of just holomorphic maps @xmath enforces the
triangle inequality. On complex manifolds there is also an infinitesimal
form of the Kobayashi semimetric, the Kobayashi seminorm. This is a norm
on the tangential space @xmath , smoothly varying with @xmath . Such
allows to transfer rudiments of Riemannian geometry.

###### Definition 2.3.3.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold. The Kobayashi seminorm on @xmath is
the function @xmath whose value at a tangent vector @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the infimum ranges over all @xmath such that there exists a
holomorphic map @xmath (here @xmath is the disk of radius @xmath around
zero) with @xmath and @xmath . For a nonzero tangent vector @xmath we
can also describe this as the infimum of all @xmath where @xmath is a
holomorphic function with @xmath and @xmath .

We will not dwell here on the smoothness properties of @xmath and other
subtleties. The important point is that Royden has shown that from this
infinitesimal metric one can retrieve the global metric. Namely for a
piecewise smooth path @xmath we can define the Kobayashi length as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this is unchanged under reparametrization of @xmath . Then @xmath is the
infimum of @xmath where @xmath ranges over all piecewise smooth paths
from @xmath to @xmath . This is Theorem 3 in [ 40 ] .

The following is now easy:

###### Proposition 2.3.4.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic map between complex manifolds, and let
@xmath . Then @xmath . If @xmath is a covering map, equality holds, so
that @xmath is a local Kobayashi isometry. @xmath

This means the following for the global Kobayashi semimetric:

###### Corollary 2.3.5.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic map between complex manifolds, and let
@xmath . Then one has @xmath . If @xmath is a covering map one gets more
precisely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the infimum ranging over all preimages @xmath of @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath . @xmath

For later reference we also note how to compute the Kobayashi semimetric
of a product:

###### Proposition 2.3.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be complex spaces. Then the Kobayashi semimetric
on @xmath is given by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is [ 23 , Theorem (3.1.9)] . ∎

###### Kobayashi Hyperbolic Spaces.

A complex space @xmath is called Kobayashi hyperbolic if its Kobayashi
semimetric is actually a metric, i.e. if @xmath whenever @xmath . In
this case we call @xmath the Kobayashi metric. First note that
Proposition 2.3.4 implies:

###### Proposition 2.3.7.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold and let @xmath be a universal covering
space of @xmath . Then @xmath is Kobayashi hyperbolic if and only if
@xmath is. @xmath

The notion of Kobayashi hyperbolicity can now be justified by the
following simple observation.

###### Proposition 2.3.8.

Let @xmath be a Riemann surface. If the universal covering space of
@xmath is @xmath or @xmath , then the Kobayashi semimetric on @xmath is
identically zero. If the universal covering space of @xmath is @xmath ,
then the Kobayashi semimetric on @xmath equals the Poincaré metric
descending from @xmath .

In particular a Riemann surface is Kobayashi hyperbolic if and only if
it is hyperbolic in the usual sense. @xmath

We will now collect some easy properties of Kobayashi hyperbolic
manifolds. To begin with, if @xmath is an complex subspace of @xmath ,
then the inclusion @xmath is holomorphic, hence distance non-increasing
for the Kobayashi semimetrics. So any complex subspace of a Kobayashi
hyperbolic space is again Kobayashi hyperbolic.

From Proposition 2.3.6 we also see that products of Kobayashi hyperbolic
spaces are again Kobayashi hyperbolic. Hence for instance all polydisks
@xmath are Kobayashi hyperbolic, and we see:

###### Proposition 2.3.9.

Every bounded domain in @xmath is Kobayashi hyperbolic. @xmath

###### The Teichmüller Metric.

Each Teichmüller space @xmath is biholomorphic to a bounded symmetric
domain in @xmath , e.g. by Bers’ embedding. Hence @xmath is Kobayashi
hyperbolic. This allows us to partially answer the question raised at
the beginning of this section:

###### Corollary 2.3.10.

Let @xmath be Riemann surface such that there exists a non-isotrivial
family @xmath of curves of genus @xmath . Then @xmath is hyperbolic.

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath is not hyperbolic. Then its universal covering space
@xmath is isomorphic to either @xmath or @xmath . In particular the
Kobayashi semimetric on @xmath is identically zero.

Let @xmath be any family of curves of genus @xmath ; this lifts to a
family over @xmath which admits a Teichmüller marking. Hence a
holomorphic map @xmath . This is distance-non-increasing for the
Kobayashi metric, and so for any @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath . This means that the map @xmath is constant, hence the
family is isotrivial. ∎

If @xmath is a non-isotrivial family of curves, then the universal
covering space of @xmath is isomorphic to the unit disk. After fixing an
isomorphism we may thus interpret the associated classifying map as a
nonconstant holomorphic map @xmath . By Corollary 2.3.5 this is
distance-non-increasing for the Kobayashi metric. So one might say that
the family is maximally apart from being isotrivial when the classifying
map is an isometry, and study isometric embeddings @xmath .

###### Definition 2.3.11.

A Teichmüller disk is a holomorphic Kobayashi isometry @xmath .
Sometimes we also call images of such maps Teichmüller disks.

It turns out that Teichmüller disks exhaust Teichmüller space in the
following precise sense: for every two distinct points in @xmath there
exists a unique ⁴ ⁴ 4 meaning that it is unique as a subspace of
Teichmüller space Teichmüller disk containing both of them. ⁵ ⁵ 5 This
follows from Teichmüller’s Theorem, see [ 17 ] The picture becomes very
different when one requires the map @xmath to be the classifying map of
a family as above, with @xmath of finite type. This is equivalent to
requiring that the image of the Teichmüller disk in @xmath (or in @xmath
) is closed, or is an algebraic curve. Such curves are called
Teichmüller curves and provide a spectacularly rich geometry and
arithmetic, of which this work discusses just some aspects.

On Teichmüller spaces the Kobayashi metric also has a more concrete
description, which helps us in understanding Teichmüller disks and
curves.

###### Definition 2.3.12.

Let @xmath . Then the Teichmüller metric @xmath on @xmath is defined as
follows: let @xmath be represented by marked Riemann surfaces @xmath and
@xmath . Then we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath ranges over all quasi-conformal maps @xmath such that the
diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

commutes up to isotopy, and @xmath is the quasiconformal dilatation of
@xmath .

One can show that this defines a complete metric on @xmath , see [ 17 ]
. Now:

###### Theorem 2.3.13 (Royden).

Let @xmath . Then the Kobayashi metric on Teichmüller space @xmath
equals the Teichmüller metric.

###### Proof.

This is [ 41 , Theorem 3] . ∎

Now the mapping class group @xmath acts on @xmath by holomorphic
automorphisms, hence by Kobayashi isometries. In particular the
Teichmüller metric descends to any quotient @xmath for a subgroup @xmath
of @xmath . If @xmath is torsion free, this map is an unramified
covering, hence a local Kobayashi isometry. Note that there are finite
index torsion-free subgroups of the mapping class group, e.g. @xmath for
@xmath ; this is [ 21 , Corollary 1.5] . On @xmath we also get a
well-defined quotient metric, but this is not necessarily equal to the
Kobayashi metric of @xmath itself! For example for @xmath we have @xmath
which is clearly not Kobayashi hyperbolic.

By the virtue of Theorem 2.3.13 we can easily describe the quotient
metric on @xmath : the distance between two points in @xmath ,
represented by Riemann surfaces @xmath and @xmath , is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath now runs over all quasiconformal maps @xmath .

## 3. Abelian Differentials: Local Theory

In the third chapter we will describe a method, geometrically very
explicit, to construct families of curves which are maximally
non-isotrivial in the sense of the previous chapter, i.e. which
correspond to holomorphic isometric embeddings of the hyperbolic plane
into Teichmüller space. The idea is simple: a complex structure on a
topological surface can be thought of as a conformal equivalence class
of metrics. Take then some particularly nice metric in that conformal
class, and deform it in the simplest possible way. One usually takes a
metric with constant curvature, in our case hence the hyperbolic metric.
But hyperbolic geometry is more difficult to deform than euclidean
geometry. Now for topological reasons ⁶ ⁶ 6 i.e. because of the
Gauss-Bonnet Theorem we cannot find a flat metric on a surface of genus
greater than one — unless we allow singularities. So we take a flat
metric which has finitely many possibly mild singularities.

There are several possible formalizations of this intuition; the one
most suitable for our purposes is that of translation structures with
cone points . Such a structure on a surface @xmath consists of an atlas
defined outside a finite set of “cone points” @xmath (thought of as the
set of singularities), where all transition maps are affine translations
@xmath , together with certain conditions on what happens at points in
@xmath . Clearly transitions are biholomorphic, so we can also view the
atlas as a holomorphic atlas. The extra conditions ensure that this
holomorphic atlas extends to a holomorphic atlas on all of @xmath . On
the other hand it also induces a flat euclidean metric on @xmath in the
conformal class of this holomorphic atlas.

The plan is then to deform such a translation structure by postcomposing
the atlas with a fixed element of @xmath . Here we let @xmath act on
@xmath via the usual identification @xmath (with @xmath corresponding to
@xmath ). This will then give a map @xmath which is the technical heart
of the desired construction of families of curves.

But before we can do this, we have to analyze the geometry of one single
translation structure. Namely the details in the definition of a
translation structure with cone points are made in a way that such
structures correspond bijectively to abelian differentials, i.e. nonzero
holomorphic one-forms. It is easy to explain how this looks like outside
the singularities: the holomorphic one-form corresponding to a
translation structure is the unique form which in all charts @xmath of
the translation atlas becomes @xmath . To phrase it the other way, the
translation charts of a holomorphic one-form are obtained by locally
integrating the holomorphic one-form. The cone points of the translation
structure are then precisely the zeros of the abelian differential.

We also discuss in detail our most important examples: the Wiman curves
of type I . These are curves which have an exceptionally large
automorphism group, in the following sense: by a classical theorem of
Wiman, an automorphism of a compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath has
order at most @xmath . Moreover in each genus @xmath there is a unique
compact Riemann surface which admits an automorphism of order equal to
@xmath . This can most easily be described as an algebraic curve @xmath
: it is the hyperelliptic curve of genus @xmath which is branched over
all @xmath -th roots of unity and @xmath (here @xmath ). In other words,
it is the projective algebraic curve which is birationally equivalent to
the affine curve with equation ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that this is not its
projective closure @xmath , but rather the normalization of that curve

  ----- -- -------- --
  (2)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

For proofs and further information about these curves, see [ 24 ] .

A basis of @xmath is given by the abelian differentials @xmath which can
in affine coordinates be represented as

  ----- -- -------- --
  (3)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

Now each pair @xmath can, as indicated above, be interpreted as a
surface with a translation structure. We explicitly compute that @xmath
can be viewed as two copies of a regular @xmath -gon with corresponding
sides glued, and that @xmath can be viewed as a regular @xmath -gon with
opposite sides glued. Also the “intermediate” surfaces @xmath with
@xmath admit an interpretation in terms of Euclidean geometry: they are
obtained by glueing rotated copies of an isosceles triangle with apex
angle @xmath .

### 3.1. The Geometry of Abelian Differentials

###### Translation Surfaces.

We now give the technical details for a correspondence between abelian
differentials and translation structures. We begin with the easiest
special case: no singularities, no zeros.

###### Definition 3.1.1.

Let @xmath be a (topological) surface. A translation structure on @xmath
is an atlas

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

1.   all chart transitions are of the form @xmath for some @xmath , i.e.
    just affine translations;

2.   the atlas @xmath is maximal amongst atlases satisfying (i).

A surface together with a translation structure is also called a
translation surface.

We claim that a translation structure on a surface is “the same” as a
complex structure together with a nowhere vanishing holomorphic (with
respect to that complex structure) one-form. To start with let @xmath be
a surface with a translation structure @xmath . Since all chart
transition maps are biholomorphic, clearly @xmath is a holomorphic atlas
and hence determines a complex structure on @xmath . Since the canonical
holomorphic one-form @xmath on @xmath has no zeros and is invariant
under affine translations, its pullbacks along all charts in @xmath glue
together to a holomorphic one-form without zeros on @xmath .

For the other direction let @xmath be a Riemann surface and let @xmath
be a holomorphic one-form on @xmath which is nowhere zero. We consider
all holomorphic charts @xmath of @xmath in which @xmath obtains the form
@xmath ; we claim that they form a translation structure @xmath .
Clearly all chart transition maps are affine translations; the only
thing which has to be checked is that these charts cover @xmath . But
locally around @xmath one can define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a neighborhood of @xmath , small enough so that the
integral is well-defined; this is a chart in @xmath .

We summarize:

###### Proposition 3.1.2.

Let @xmath be a topological surface. The following two sets are in
bijection via the construction described above:

1.   The set of all translation structures on @xmath ;

2.   The set of all pairs @xmath , where @xmath is a complex structure
    on @xmath , and @xmath is a holomorphic one-form without zeros on
    the Riemann surface @xmath . @xmath

###### Cone Points.

Translation structures in this sense cannot exist on compact surfaces of
genus greater than one. This can be seen using either the Gauss-Bonnet
formula (which implies that the Euler characteristic of a closed surface
with a flat metric must be zero) or the fact that the degree of the
canonical bundle on a Riemann surface of genus @xmath has degree @xmath
, hence if @xmath , every abelian differential has to have some zero.
Hence we need to allow certain exceptional points in the interior. Let
us first explain this with a local model: let @xmath be a positive
integer and let @xmath . Set @xmath , and consider the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When removing @xmath both in the domain and the target, this defines a
cyclic cover of degree @xmath . Define a translation structure (in the
old sense) on @xmath by pulling back that on @xmath by @xmath ; i.e. let
@xmath be the set of all @xmath , where @xmath is an open subset of
@xmath such that the restriction @xmath is injective. One can also
imagine @xmath as @xmath copies of a “slit disk” @xmath , indexed by
@xmath , where “upper bank” of the slit in the @xmath -th copy is glued
to the “lower bank” of the slit in the @xmath -st copy.

###### Definition 3.1.3.

Let @xmath be a topological surface with boundary. A translation
structure with cone points on @xmath consists of the following data:

-    a discrete subset @xmath , the set of “cone points”, and

-    an atlas

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    on @xmath with @xmath open,

such that the following conditions are satisfied:

1.   The atlas @xmath on @xmath defines a translation structure on the
    surface @xmath ;

2.   for every cone point @xmath there exist a positive integer @xmath ,
    some @xmath , a neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath and a
    homeomorphism @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath and such that the
    restriction of the atlas @xmath to @xmath corresponds via this
    homeomorphism to the atlas @xmath on @xmath .

A surface together with a translation structure with cone points is
called a translation surface with cone points .

For every cone point @xmath , the integer @xmath as in (ii) is uniquely
determined and called the multiplicity of the cone point. It can be
described more intuitively as follows: when walking once around @xmath
(in the topological sense, i.e. along a little circle embedded around
@xmath ) one travels by an angle of @xmath , instead of @xmath as would
be the case around a non-singular point.

Note that a cone point of multiplicity one has a particularly simple
description; in fact the atlas of a translation structure can be
uniquely extended into such a cone point, turning it into a regular
point. For this reason we shall usually assume that all cone points have
multiplicity at least two.

This definition of cone points is somewhat ad hoc, but serves our
purpose. In the literature on this subject one can find quite diverse
definitions.

###### Dictionary.

Now comes the promised relation with Riemann surface theory. We claim
that on a given topological surface there is a natural one-to-one
correspondence between complex structures together with an abelian
differential on the one hand and translation structures with cone points
on the other hand. In order to describe this correspondence first start
with a translation surface @xmath with cone points, with notation as in
the definition. We define a holomorphic atlas on @xmath as containing
all charts of the following form:

-   the charts in the translation structure @xmath on @xmath ;

-   for every cone point @xmath of multiplicity @xmath , choose some
    homeomorphism @xmath as in Definition 3.1.3 and note that @xmath was
    defined as @xmath , where @xmath , hence as an open subset of @xmath
    ; so we define the composed map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    as a chart of our atlas.

It is easily seen that all chart transition maps of this atlas are
biholomorphic, so it can be uniquely extended to a maximal holomorphic
atlas, defining a Riemann surface structure on @xmath . On @xmath this
is of course just the Riemann surface structure defined above. Also by
the above construction we get a nowhere vanishing holomorphic one-form
@xmath on @xmath (recall this was defined by pasting together the @xmath
, where @xmath is a chart in @xmath ), and we claim that it can be
uniquely extended to a holomorphic one-form on all of @xmath . Of course
it suffices to show this locally at a cone point, in other words, in the
“model surface” @xmath . Now the translation structure on @xmath is the
pullback along @xmath of the canonical one on @xmath , hence the
corresponding one-form is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This of course can be uniquely extended to a holomorphic one-form on
@xmath , by the very same formula. Note that this has a zero of order
@xmath at @xmath .

Vice versa let @xmath be a Riemann surface and let @xmath be a
holomorphic one-form on @xmath which is not identically zero. Let @xmath
be the set of zeros of @xmath ; this is a discrete subset. Then the
restriction of @xmath to @xmath is a nowhere vanishing holomorphic
one-form, defining a translation structure on @xmath . It remains to be
shown that this translation structure has the desired behaviour around
the zeros of @xmath .

To see this, let @xmath be a zero of @xmath of order @xmath and choose
some simply connected neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath which contains no
other zeros of @xmath . Then the function @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(the integral running over any path from @xmath to @xmath entirely
within @xmath ) is holomorphic and has an isolated zero of order @xmath
at @xmath . Hence there exists some local coordinate @xmath with @xmath
. By shrinking @xmath we may assume that the image of @xmath is a disk
@xmath for some @xmath ; then setting @xmath we get the following
commutative diagram:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

But here @xmath is a holomorphic map which outside @xmath is a finite
cover and such that the pullback of the canonical one-form @xmath along
@xmath is @xmath ; so this diagram means that indeed the whole setup is
locally isomorphic to the standard one, and hence that @xmath is a
translation surface with cone points. We sum up:

###### Proposition 3.1.4.

Let @xmath be a topological surface (without boundary). The above
constructions define mutually inverse bijections between the following
two sets:

1.   the set of all translation structures with cone points on @xmath ;

2.   the set of all pairs @xmath , where @xmath is a complex structure
    and @xmath is an abelian differential on @xmath (with respect to
    this complex structure).

The cone points (of multiplicity greater than one) of a translation
structure are precisely the zeros of the associated abelian
differential, a cone point of multiplicity @xmath corresponding to a
zero of order @xmath . @xmath

### 3.2. Some Examples

A large class of examples of translation surfaces with cone points can
be produced as follows: take some (compact, simply connected) polygon in
the plane, and partition its set of edges into pairs, such that each two
edges in a pair are parallel and have the same length, but with reverse
orientation. Then for each pair there exists exactly one translation
taking one edge to the other; glue the edges along these translations.
This gives a compact surface with a translation atlas on an open dense
subset; this atlas extends to a translation structure with cone points
on the whole surface.

###### Origamis.

We begin with origamis. These are in principle purely combinatorial
objects. The idea is that one only glues copies of one and the same
polygon (not even rotated), which is as simple as it may be: the unit
square.

###### Definition 3.2.1.

An origami consists of the following data:

1.   a finite ⁸ ⁸ 8 One may also drop this condition and study infinite
    origamis. This would lead out of the realm of algebraic geometry, so
    we omit this set @xmath of copies of the unit square in @xmath , and

2.   a partition of the set of edges of squares in @xmath into pairs,
    such that every left side is paired with a right side (possibly of
    the same square!) and every upper side with a lower side.

Gluing the paired sides defines a closed translation surface with cone
points, called the translation surface associated with the origami.

###### Billiards.

A large class of examples of closed translation surfaces with cone
points is obtained from a classical toy model in dynamical systems
theory: billiards in a rational polygon.

To explain this, start with an arbitrary ⁹ ⁹ 9 We always assume polygons
to be compact euclidean polygon @xmath and imagine a point-shaped
massless billiard ball moving inside the polygon without any
acceleration, except that it is reflected in the sides of the polygon.
¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Since our interest in this work is primarily in differential
and algebraic geometry rather than dynamical systems, we refrain from
formalizing this Now if one wishes to study the behaviour of such
billiard balls, the non-differentiability at the boundary of the polygon
poses some problems, and so one might instead do the following: reflect
the whole polygon in each of its sides, glue the thus obtained copies to
the ‘‘old’’ polygon along the corresponding sides, and repeat
indefinitely. One then obtains a huge translation surface with some
singularities (coming from the vertices of the polygon), and instead of
reflecting the ball in the sides of the polygon we can let it move along
a straight line in the big translation surface. But we have to bear in
mind that there are infinitely many copies of the original polygon in
this surface, in other words we have to divide by the action of some
infinite group ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 To be precise, this the group with generators
@xmath parameterized by the edges @xmath of @xmath , modulo the relation
@xmath for every @xmath to get back the polygon. Hence important
dynamical properties of the polygon and the big translation surface may
be totally different, and we have to look for a less generous way of
“unfolding” the billiard table.

Indeed we can identify those copies of @xmath obtained by consecutive
reflection which are translation equivalent, i.e. which can be
transformed into each other by a translation of @xmath . If we are lucky
there is only a finite number of equivalence classes, and we can glue
finitely many polygons (each congruent to @xmath , but pairwise
non-translation-equivalent) and obtain a closed translation surface with
cone points; in other words, we end up in the realm of algebraic
geometry!

Let us now formalize this intuition. For every side @xmath of @xmath ,
consider the reflection in @xmath ; this is a real affine map, whose
linear part we denote by @xmath . Since we are working with translation
structures, so everything should be invariant under translations in
@xmath , it is only this linear part which is of interest for us. Now
let @xmath be the subgroup generated by the @xmath . We now wish to
construct a translation surface as follows: for every @xmath take the
polygon @xmath , so that you obtain a family of translation surfaces
with corners, indexed by @xmath ; glue the side @xmath of @xmath to the
side @xmath of @xmath . For this to be possible of course we have to
check the following:

###### Lemma 3.2.2.

If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

This comes down to the formula @xmath . ∎

But there are more serious problems: it is not clear what happens at the
vertices of the polygon, and it is not ensured that there be only
finitely many copies of @xmath involved. So we have to restrict
ourselves to a certain class of polygons:

###### Definition 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be a compact polygon. Then @xmath is rational if the group
@xmath is finite.

So only for rational polygons we have a chance of getting a compact
translation surface (possibly with cones). The naming is justified:

###### Proposition 3.2.4.

Let @xmath be a compact polygon all of whose angles are rational
multiples of @xmath . Then @xmath is rational.

###### Proof.

Fix some @xmath such that all angles of @xmath are integral multiples of
@xmath . Write @xmath . Then there is a short exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(note that reflections have determinant @xmath , so the third map is
indeed surjective), so it suffices to show that @xmath is finite. We
claim that @xmath is contained in the cyclic subgroup of @xmath
generated by the rotation with angle @xmath . Namely @xmath is generated
by the elements @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are sides of @xmath . The
angle between @xmath and @xmath (or rather the euclidean lines they
define) is of the form @xmath for some integer @xmath , and hence @xmath
is the rotation with angle @xmath . ∎

From this proof we also see that @xmath has at most order @xmath .

We now construct the closed translation surface with cones associated
with a rational polygon. For simplicity we shall assume that @xmath
satisfies the condition of the preceding proposition. So let @xmath be a
compact polygon all of whose angles are rational multiples of @xmath .
For every @xmath let @xmath be the polygon @xmath , considered as a
translation surface with corners (this notation is just for emphasizing
that we wish to consider the @xmath as disjoint, distinct abstract
surfaces, even though they may overlap as subsets of the complex plane).
The desired translation surface @xmath is then the quotient of the
non-connected translation surface with corners

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo the following equivalence relation: for every @xmath and every
side @xmath of @xmath , identify @xmath via the identity (!) with the
edge @xmath of @xmath . Here we use Lemma 3.2.2 . This defines indeed a
closed translation surface with cone points; we denote the underlying
Riemann surface also by @xmath and the holomorphic one-form
corresponding to the translation structure with cones by @xmath .

###### Rational Isosceles Triangles.

Let @xmath be odd, and let @xmath . We shall construct a translation
surface @xmath . Denote once and for all @xmath , for any positive
integer @xmath . Take a triangle @xmath in the complex plane with
vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is an isosceles triangle with angles

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it can be subdivided into two right triangles @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath has vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath has vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We show this for @xmath and @xmath (from left to right):

[]

Now we want to glue a family of isometric copies of @xmath . For @xmath
and @xmath , let @xmath be (a copy of)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then let @xmath be the surface

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo the following equivalence relation: for each @xmath and @xmath ,
we identify:

1.  The segment from @xmath to @xmath is a side of both @xmath and
    @xmath ; glue these two triangles along these sides.

2.  The segment from @xmath to @xmath is a side of @xmath , and the
    segment from @xmath to @xmath is a side of @xmath . These sides are
    parallel and have the same length, hence there is a unique
    translation that takes the former to the latter. Identify these two
    sides by this translation.

The result is a closed Riemann surface @xmath ; the translation
structures on the interiors of the @xmath , induced by the inclusion
@xmath , glue to a translation structure with cone-points on @xmath ,
whose associated one-form we denote by @xmath .

The following is an elementary observation, but very important for what
follows:

###### Proposition 3.2.5.

Assume that @xmath and @xmath are coprime. Then @xmath is the billiard
surface associated with the triangular “billiard table” @xmath with
angles

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is also the billiard surface associated with the triangle @xmath
having angles

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath are not coprime, @xmath can still be interpreted as
a finite cover of such a billiard table, see section 5.2.

### 3.3. Translation Surfaces as Algebraic Curves

We have shown that closed translation surfaces with cone points are “the
same” as compact Riemann surfaces together with abelian differentials,
hence “the same” as algebraic curves over @xmath with nonzero algebraic
one-forms. In this section we will thus describe our examples of
translation surfaces in these terms.

###### The Schwarz-Christoffel Formula.

Let @xmath be a simply connected compact Euclidean polygon in the
complex domain, and let @xmath be its boundary points in
counter-clockwise order. Then by the Riemann mapping theorem there is a
conformal map @xmath which extends to a homeomorphism @xmath . The
preimages of the @xmath are then certain @xmath about which one cannot
say very much in general, except for that one can move them around by
precomposition with a Möbius transformation. In particular we can assume
that @xmath is amongst them or not, as we please. But once we know the
@xmath we can give a formula for @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.3.1.

With the notation as above, let @xmath be the interior angle of @xmath
at @xmath and assume that @xmath . If none of the @xmath is equal to
@xmath , then the map @xmath is given by the Schwarz-Christoffel formula

  ----- -- -------- --
  (4)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

for suitable constants @xmath . In case that say @xmath , the formula
gets modified to

  ----- -- -------- --
  (5)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

The map @xmath is then also called a Schwarz-Christoffel map , and the
@xmath are called its accessory parameters.

###### Proof.

See [ 20 , p. 431 et seqq.] . ∎

[]

In general there is still the task to determine the accessory parameters
if one wishes a fully explicit formula; in important special cases one
can get around that.

For example if @xmath is a triangle, then it is — up to similarity —
uniquely determined by the two angles @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore we
can map the accessory parameters by a Möbius transformation to @xmath .
Hence:

###### Corollary 3.3.2.

Let @xmath be the interior of a triangle in the complex domain, with
vertices @xmath (in counter-clockwise order) and with internal angle
@xmath at @xmath . Then there is a unique conformal map @xmath extending
to a homeomorphism @xmath (which we also denote by @xmath ) with @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . It is given by the formula

  ----- -- -------- --
  (6)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

Furthermore @xmath can be computed by using that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the classical formula for Euler’s beta function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[]

These formulæ help us to explicitly describe geometrically constructed
translation surfaces as algebraic curves.

We now show that the curves @xmath defined above are hyperelliptic, with
ramification locus precisely @xmath . For this, we first construct a
holomorphic @xmath map @xmath .

Let @xmath be the unique Schwarz-Christoffel map with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the open sector defined by @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this is a biholomorphic map which extends to a homeomorphism of the
closures (in @xmath !).

[]

###### Proposition 3.3.3.

The map @xmath extends, by continued Schwarz reflection, to a finite
holomorphic map @xmath of degree @xmath ; its ramification locus is
precisely @xmath . Hence @xmath identifies @xmath with the Wiman curve
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The main point to show is that @xmath is well-defined. So we investigate
what it must do on each @xmath and then check that these maps glue to a
global holomorphic map.

To begin with, @xmath maps the interior of @xmath conformally to the
sector @xmath , and hence it maps the interior of @xmath
biholomorphically to the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is illustrated in the following picture:

[]

Here the little distance between @xmath and @xmath is only drawn for
sake of clarity, actually they are glued together. Now @xmath maps the
upper dashed line to the half-line @xmath and the upper full line to the
positive real axis. The lower full line is also sent to the positive
real axis, with the branch point being sent to @xmath . Finally the
lower dashed line is sent to the half-line @xmath .

We have a very similar pattern for @xmath ; in fact we can use the same
picture (up to a rotation which we ignore, in order to use words like
“above”), but now @xmath is replaced by @xmath , and @xmath is replaced
by @xmath . Here the upper dashed line goes to @xmath , and the lower
dashed line goes to @xmath . Both full lines are sent to @xmath , with
the branch point being sent to @xmath . So @xmath sends the interior of
@xmath conformally to the sector @xmath , minus the straight segment
from @xmath to @xmath .

What happens on @xmath ? Again we have the same picture up to an ignored
rotation. In particular it is the same as that for @xmath , up to a
rotation by @xmath , and up to this rotation @xmath does exactly the
same on both triangles.

We can now check that these maps do glue to a continuous map @xmath .
This is clearly holomorphic on the interiors of the triangles @xmath .
Since for each identification of two sides involved in the construction
of @xmath , the map on one bank is the Schwarz mirror image of the map
on the other bank, @xmath is also holomorphic everywhere except possibly
for the cone points. But these form a finite set, and @xmath is
continuous, so by Riemann’s theorem on removable singularities, @xmath
has to be holomorphic everywhere.

Since both @xmath and @xmath are compact and @xmath is nonconstant, it
has to be a finite holomorphic map. Its degree is easily seen to be two.
The branch points are then precisely those points in @xmath whose
preimage has cardinality one, so by construction the branch locus is
@xmath . ∎

Next we compute the abelian differential @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.3.4.

Under the identification @xmath induced by @xmath , the differential
@xmath on @xmath corresponds to a nonzero multiple of @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall that @xmath is in affine coordinates @xmath with @xmath given as
@xmath . By the identity theorem, we only need to check that these two
one-forms agree on some nonempty open subset, say the interior of @xmath
. Here we can describe @xmath as the inverse of @xmath . Letting @xmath
be the standard coordinate on @xmath , we compute @xmath . For this,
recall that @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a suitable @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Locally choosing a square-root means locally choosing a leaf of @xmath .
Hence for a suitable constant @xmath we have @xmath . ∎

###### Wiman Curves and Regular Polygons.

The special cases @xmath and @xmath have also simpler descriptions.
Start with @xmath ; up to a scaling factor, this is isomorphic to @xmath
. Using the notation from above, we see that the triangles @xmath glue
together to a regular @xmath -gon (as always, @xmath ) with the @xmath
-th roots of unity in @xmath as vertices. Similarly, @xmath glue
together to a regular @xmath -gon with the @xmath as vertices, where
@xmath runs through all @xmath -th roots of unity in @xmath . In other
words, we can describe @xmath as two regular @xmath -gons, one being the
pointwise mirror of the other, glued along parallel sides. Here we show
a picture for @xmath :

[]

Now consider the translation surface @xmath . We claim that this is a
regular @xmath -gon with opposite sides identified. Namely, recall from
Proposition 3.2.5 that @xmath is the billiard surface obtained from
@xmath , where @xmath is a triangle with angles

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now take a regular @xmath -gon and join its center with all vertices and
with all midpoints of its sides. This gives a tesselation of the @xmath
-gon by triangles similar to @xmath , and turns this @xmath -gon with
opposite sides identified into the billiard surface of @xmath . Again a
picture for @xmath :

[]

We record for future reference:

###### Proposition 3.3.5.

The translation surface @xmath can be obtained by taking a regular
@xmath -gon and its point mirror image, and gluing the two along their
parallel sides. The translation surface @xmath can be obtained by gluing
a regular @xmath -gon along opposite sides. Here @xmath . @xmath

### 3.4. Some More Geometry of Abelian Differentials

Because of the very restricted form of the chart transition maps, we can
transfer many features of Euclidean geometry to translation surfaces.
This observation is more or less trivial, but is important to be spelled
out because it has very nontrivial consequences. To keep the language
simpler, we will now identify translation surfaces with cone points and
Riemann surfaces with holomorphic one-forms.

###### Euclidean Metric.

To begin with, translations in @xmath are isometries. Hence if @xmath is
a translation surface with cone points, pulling back the Euclidean
metric on @xmath gives a well-defined Euclidean (even Hermitian) metric
on @xmath minus the zeros of @xmath . Since the Euclidean metric on
@xmath can be described as @xmath , the metric on @xmath is @xmath .
Note that this extends, by the same formula, to a tensor on the whole of
@xmath , degenerate at the zeros of @xmath . The volume form of the
Euclidean metric in @xmath is @xmath , hence the volume form on @xmath
is @xmath . This is a two-form which is degenerate precisely at the
zeros of @xmath .

###### Trivialization of Tangent Spaces.

Also we can canonically identify every tangent space @xmath with @xmath
, and every translation in @xmath has (with this identification)
derivative equal to the identity of @xmath . This means that we can
identify every tangent space @xmath , where @xmath is not a zero of
@xmath , with @xmath . Note that this can in general not be extended to
the zeros of @xmath , since this would yield a trivialization of the
tangent bundle of @xmath , which is not possible for closed surfaces of
genus at least two.

###### Directions and Foliations.

Translations also preserve rays and their directions. Hence for every
@xmath it makes sense to study the ray emanating from a given point
@xmath , with direction @xmath . Sometimes this can be indefinitely
continued, sometimes it comes back to @xmath and sometimes it hits a
cone point (in which case we adopt the convention that it just stops
there). Going both forward and backward we obtain a line through @xmath
in direction @xmath (with the restriction that it may be cut off at one
or two ends and that it may in fact be a circle). To make this more
formal, define a foliation @xmath on @xmath as follows: recall that
every tangent space is canonically identified with @xmath , and let
@xmath be the real one-dimensional subspace spanned by @xmath . Note
that this foliation might not be extendable to a foliation on @xmath .
We can also describe this foliation in a way closer to abelian
differentials: first note that @xmath , so it suffices to describe
@xmath . But @xmath , as a real subbundle of the tangential bundle, is
the kernel of the real-valued one-form @xmath . Similarly @xmath is the
kernel of @xmath .

###### Leaves.

Assume now @xmath closed. The leaves of @xmath are what we have
inadequately described as the “lines in direction @xmath through a point
in @xmath ” above. Since these leaves are smooth one-dimensional
manifolds, there are not too many possibilities of what they can look
like. Let @xmath be a leaf of @xmath , then there exists an interval
@xmath and a local isometry @xmath , maximal with respect to inclusion
of intervals. Exactly one of the following statements then holds:

1.  @xmath , and @xmath is diffeomorphic to a circle, in which case we
    call it periodic. Intuitively this means that if we start from some
    @xmath and begin to walk in direction @xmath , we arrive again at
    @xmath after some time.

2.  @xmath and the map @xmath is injective, but not a diffeomorphism
    onto its image. The leaf @xmath is not closed in @xmath . This case
    can be quite complicated.

3.  @xmath for some @xmath . This means that if we start from some
    @xmath and walk in direction @xmath , we can walk backwards
    indefinitely without ever arriving at the same point again, but upon
    walking forwards we run into a cone point after finite time.

4.  @xmath . The “time mirror” of case (iii).

5.  @xmath for @xmath . This means that both forward and backward we run
    into a cone point. Such leaves are parametrized by saddle
    connections, see below.

###### Saddle Connections and Holonomy Vectors.

A saddle connection on @xmath is a smooth injective path @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath are cone points, @xmath is not a cone point for
@xmath , and the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is a geodesic. The
holonomy vector of @xmath is the complex number @xmath . For @xmath
compact, the set of all saddle connections of @xmath is always a
discrete subset of @xmath , see [ 19 , section 1.3.2] .

###### Jenkins-Strebel Directions and Cylinder Decompositions.

Since the foliation “breaks down” at the cone points, directions in
which they do not cause to much trouble are of special interest:

###### Definition 3.4.1.

Let @xmath be a closed translation surface. A direction @xmath is called
a Jenkins-Strebel direction if in the foliation @xmath there are only
leaves of type (i) and (v).

Jenkins-Strebel directions are very helpful in understanding translation
surfaces since they lead to complete cylinder decompositions. To explain
this, let @xmath and let @xmath . We then define a translation surface
with boundary ¹² ¹² 12 By this we mean a topological surface with
boundary, together with a translation structure on its interior @xmath
as follows: take a rectangle in @xmath with two edges in direction
@xmath and two edges in direction @xmath , such that the edges in
direction @xmath have length @xmath and the other two edges have length
@xmath . This is uniquely determined up to a translation. Identify the
two edges in direction @xmath , and the obtained translation surface
with boundary, which is homeomorphic to @xmath , is called a cylinder in
direction @xmath of circumference @xmath and width @xmath and denoted by
@xmath .

[]

A perhaps better definition of @xmath is the following: take an infinite
closed strip @xmath of width @xmath in direction @xmath ; i.e. take two
lines @xmath , @xmath in @xmath in direction @xmath whose distance is
@xmath , then @xmath is the convex closure of @xmath . Then the additive
cyclic subgroup @xmath of @xmath generated by @xmath , operating on
@xmath by translations, takes @xmath into itself; set @xmath .

[]

Now assume that @xmath is a closed translation surface, and let @xmath .
The critical graph in direction @xmath is the union of the zeros of
@xmath and the saddle connections of @xmath . If @xmath is a
Jenkins-Strebel direction for @xmath , the critical graph is a compact
graph embedded into @xmath . Cut @xmath along this graph; this yields a
finite union of compact translation surfaces with boundary (but no
corners!). Its entire boundary goes in direction @xmath , and all leaves
in the foliation in direction @xmath in its interior are periodic. Hence
every component is isomorphic (as translation surface) to a cylinder in
direction @xmath . In other words we can write @xmath as a finite union
of cylinders @xmath (where the @xmath and @xmath might be different for
different @xmath ), glued along their boundaries in some way. Conversely
for every translation surface which is glued from cylinders in the same
direction, this direction is Jenkins-Strebel.

We now discuss these concepts for some examples.

###### Origamis.

Let us start with one of the simplest translation surfaces: a unit
square with opposite sides identified, in other words, @xmath with
@xmath . Here the foliation @xmath behaves differently according to
whether the slope @xmath is rational or not. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Here we are a bit
sloppy. We actually view @xmath as an element of @xmath , and the
question is whether @xmath lies in @xmath or not If it is rational, then
all leaves of @xmath are periodic, in particular @xmath is a
Jenkins-Strebel direction. If @xmath is irrational, however, every leaf
is of type (ii), dense in the torus, and the space of leaves bears the
indiscrete topology. Thus the Jenkins-Strebel directions are precisely
the directions with rational slope.

This observation extends to origamis: on an origami surface the
Jenkins-Strebel directions are also precisely those with rational slope.
Of course the complete cylinder decompositions in the vertical and
horizontal directions can be directly read off the origami itself.

###### Regular Polygons I.

Next consider the surface @xmath ; in other words, consider a regular
@xmath -gon, @xmath , with opposite sides identified. Without loss of
generality we may assume that there is a side in the horizontal
direction. Then the horizontal direction ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 as well as any other
direction perpendicular or parallel to a side is a Jenkins-Strebel
direction. In the picture we show a complete cylinder decomposition in
the case @xmath :

[]

Here the trapezia of the same shade glue together to cylinders. For
general odd @xmath we will have one rectangle in the middle which glues
to a cylinder @xmath , and @xmath pairs of trapezia with vertices among
the vertices of the @xmath -gon, where the leftmost glues with the
rightmost to a cylinder @xmath , the second one from the left with the
second one from the right to @xmath , and so on till @xmath . Let us
compute the circumferences and widths of these cylinders.

For this, assume that the vertices of the @xmath -gons are precisely the
@xmath -th roots of unity in @xmath (another choice will amount to
multiplying everything with a constant factor). Write @xmath . Then
clearly @xmath is obtained from the rectangle with vertices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Hence it has width

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and circumference

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The cylinder @xmath is glued from two trapezia; one of them has vertices
@xmath , @xmath and their complex conjugates, the other is obtained from
this by multiplication with @xmath . Hence this cylinder has width equal
to the width of each trapezium, which is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it has circumference equal to the sum of the lengths of the two
vertical sides of each trapezium, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Regular Polygons II.

Next consider @xmath , i.e. the translation surface obtained from gluing
two regular @xmath -gons, with @xmath . We may assume that one of the
@xmath -gons has as vertices the @xmath -th roots of unity, the other
one has minus the @xmath -th roots of unity (or, if you so wish, some
large enough number minus the @xmath -th roots of unity, in order that
the two polygons do not intersect). Write @xmath . Again the vertical
direction is a Jenkins-Strebel direction; in the example @xmath the
cylinder decomposition looks as follows:

[]

Here we have @xmath cylinders @xmath , where @xmath is glued from two
trapezia (possibly degenerate): one of them has vertices @xmath , @xmath
and their complex conjugates, the other is minus one times the first.
Hence we see that @xmath has width

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and circumference

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## 4. Abelian Differentials: Global Theory

In the previous chapter we have studied the geometry of one single
abelian differential; now we go on to see how it can be deformed. We
exploit the fact that abelian differentials can be understood in two
ways, with different intuitions behind them: as objects of complex or
algebraic geometry, or as objects of euclidean geometry. We begin by
constructing moduli spaces for abelian differentials @xmath , together
with variants analogous to moduli spaces with level structures and
Teichmüller spaces. On all such spaces, the interpretation in terms of
euclidean geometry gives a natural @xmath -operation.

Now let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath , equipped
with a Teichmüller marking and an abelian differential @xmath . We may
consider @xmath as an object of @xmath . Its @xmath -orbit in @xmath
will not be a complex submanifold, but the image of this orbit in @xmath
will be. Even better, it will be an isometrically embedded hyperbolic
plane. In order to understand the details and to be able to do explicit
computations in examples, we have to go through a painfully pedantic
analysis of the different avatars of the hyperbolic plane. Recall that
the hyperbolic plane can be constructed as “the symmetric space of
@xmath ”, the unit disk @xmath or the upper half plane @xmath . These
can be identified by several “canonical” isomorphisms. This is common
wisdom, but we have to fix some compatible system of isomorphisms and
check that they are indeed compatible.

Once this is settled, one can indeed construct for every @xmath as above
a Teichmüller disk @xmath . Since such disks are obtained with the help
of abelian differentials, we call them abelian Teichmüller disks . The
next question is then: how does the image of an abelian Teichmüller disk
in moduli space look like? In general this will be very complicated, but
in some rare cases it happens that the image is an algebraic curve. Such
curves in moduli space are called (abelian) Teichmüller curves . We take
a closer look at the associated families of algebraic curves.

Whether a translation surface gives rise to a Teichmüller curve or not
can also be rephrased in terms closer to Euclidean geometry. For a
translation surface @xmath one defines a discrete subgroup of @xmath ,
called the Veech group of the surface. Then for some conjugate @xmath of
the Veech group, called the mirror Veech group , the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

factors over the quotient @xmath . Hence @xmath will give rise to a
Teichmüller curve if the Veech group is a lattice in @xmath . The
converse is also true; surfaces that satisfy this condition are called
Veech surfaces .

We also sketch a helpful method for the construction of nontrivial
elements in the Veech group. This will enable us to determine (finite
index subgroups of) the Veech groups of our favourite examples @xmath
and @xmath . Both are Veech surfaces, with hyperbolic triangle groups as
(mirror) Veech groups.

### 4.1. The @xmath-Action

###### Moduli of Abelian Differentials.

Let once again @xmath be a family of algebraic curves of genus @xmath .
For such a family we have the sheaf of relative holomorphic one-forms ,
@xmath . This is an invertible @xmath -module; its restriction to every
fibre @xmath can be identified with the canonical bundle on this fibre.
A section @xmath of this sheaf hence defines a holomorphic one-form on
each fibre @xmath .

###### Definition 4.1.1.

Let @xmath be a complex space. A family of abelian differentials of
genus @xmath over @xmath consists of the following data:

1.   a family of curves @xmath of genus @xmath ,

2.   a section @xmath such that for every @xmath the induced holomorphic
    one-form @xmath on the fibre @xmath is not identically zero, i.e. an
    abelian differential by our definition.

There is an obvious notion of isomorphism of families of abelian
differentials, giving rise to different moduli functors on the category
of complex spaces. First consider the moduli functor @xmath whose value
on a complex space @xmath is the set of isomorphism classes of families
of abelian differentials over @xmath . We would like to represent this
moduli functor, but since the moduli functor of curves itself is not
representable, chances are bad that this is possible. So we introduce
rigidifications, as for curves.

Again there are two options: Teichmüller markings and level structures.
Hence we define the moduli functor @xmath on complex spaces which for a
complex space @xmath gives the set of isomorphism classes of families of
abelian differentials together with a Teichmüller marking of the
underlying family of curves. We impose no compatibility conditions on
the Teichmüller markings and the abelian differentials. This functor is
representable, and the representing space can be constructed as follows:
let @xmath be the universal curve over Teichmüller space. Consider the
associated sheaf of relative holomorphic one-forms @xmath and take its
direct image by @xmath ; this gives a locally free @xmath -module @xmath
of rank @xmath . The associated holomorphic vector bundle @xmath is
(sometimes) called the Hodge bundle . Define then @xmath to be this
bundle minus its zero section. So this is a complex manifold together
with a holomorphic map to @xmath which turns it into a holomorphic fibre
bundle with fibre @xmath . Clearly it represents the functor @xmath . In
particular the points of @xmath are in canonical one-to-one
correspondence with the isomorphism classes of marked genus @xmath
Riemann surfaces together with an abelian differential.

There is a natural action of the mapping class group @xmath on @xmath :
for a mapping class @xmath represented by a diffeomorphism @xmath of
@xmath and a point @xmath represented by a marked Riemann surface @xmath
and an abelian differential @xmath on @xmath , let @xmath be the point
of @xmath represented by the same Riemann surface and the same abelian
differential, but now with the marking @xmath . This action is
continuous and properly discontinuous, and the map @xmath is @xmath
-equivariant.

The quotient @xmath is now, in an obvious way, a coarse moduli space for
@xmath . It is called the moduli space of abelian differentials . The
map @xmath , being equivariant for the action of the mapping class
group, descends to a holomorphic map @xmath . This is, however, no
longer a fibre bundle. Instead its fibre over the point of @xmath
represented by a Riemann surface @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may also introduce level structures: the quotient @xmath is, for
@xmath , a fine moduli space for Riemann surfaces with an abelian
differential and a level- @xmath -structure (again no compatibility
between the latter two is demanded). And here the map @xmath is indeed a
fibre bundle with fibre @xmath .

###### The @xmath-Action.

These moduli spaces come equipped with some important and interesting
structure. Abelian differentials can also be interpreted as translation
structures; hence we also have two points of view on their moduli
spaces, linked to different intuitions and with highly nontrivial
interactions.

The starting point is the following observation: Translation structures
can be distorted by real-linear maps. This is not very surprising, but
this operation is quite difficult to understand from the point of view
of algebraic curves and one-forms.

As usual, we identify @xmath with @xmath . Hence a matrix @xmath
operates @xmath -linearly on @xmath ; we denote this operation by @xmath
(please do not confuse this with Möbius transformations!). This map is
holomorphic if and only if @xmath .

###### Definition 4.1.2.

Let @xmath be a translation surface with corners and cone points, and
let @xmath . Then the distortion of @xmath by @xmath , denoted by @xmath
, is the following translation surface with corners and cone points: the
underlying topological surface, the set of corners and the set of cone
points is the same. If @xmath is the atlas defining the translation
structure on @xmath , the atlas of @xmath consists of all @xmath where
@xmath is a chart in @xmath . Here @xmath is understood as a real linear
self-map of @xmath .

This can of course also be applied to Riemann surfaces: let @xmath be a
Riemann surface with an abelian differential @xmath . Interpreting
@xmath as a closed translation surface with cone points, we can apply
the previous definition and obtain a new Riemann surface with abelian
differential @xmath . In order to avoid nasty orientation problems we
restrict ourselves to the case @xmath and, in a moment, in fact @xmath .

Write @xmath . Note that @xmath has the same underlying topological
(and, in fact, smooth) surface as @xmath , but possibly a different
complex structure. It is in general quite difficult to determine this
new complex structure as an algebraic curve. But it is easy to describe
@xmath from the point of view of real analysis: this is the one-form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More conceptually: under our identification @xmath , we can interpret
@xmath as a vector-valued real one-form. Then @xmath is the
vector-valued real one-form obtained by applying the matrix @xmath to
@xmath .

The assignment @xmath as defined above is an action of the group @xmath
on @xmath . This action commutes with the action of the mapping class
group @xmath , and therefore descends to @xmath -actions on the moduli
spaces @xmath and @xmath .

### 4.2. The Various Guises of the Hyperbolic Plane

One often identifies the following four spaces:

-   the unit disk @xmath ,

-   the upper half plane @xmath ,

-   the left coset space @xmath and

-   the right coset space @xmath .

Considering the ambiguities involved we need to spell out explicitly
which identifications we take and how they relate with each other. More
precisely, we construct a commutative diagram of homeomorphisms

  ----- -- -- --
  (7)         
  ----- -- -- --

Let us now define these maps:

-   @xmath is induced by an anti-involution on the Lie group @xmath .
    Namely consider @xmath as a normal subgroup of @xmath , then
    conjugation with any element of @xmath is a well-defined
    automorphism of @xmath . Hence we can define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath and @xmath , this descends to a homeomorphism

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Considering the entries of a matrix, it is easy to see that

      ----- -- -------- --
      (8)      @xmath   
      ----- -- -------- --

-   @xmath is the standard identification: @xmath acts transitively on
    @xmath by Möbius transformations, in formulæ:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and the stabilizer of the point @xmath is @xmath . Hence we get

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath is obtained by considering the natural action of @xmath on
    @xmath . Viewing @xmath as an @xmath -linear self map of @xmath , we
    ask: how far is it apart from being @xmath -linear? Certainly it is
    @xmath -linear if and only if @xmath , so a good measure for this
    deviation would be the complex number

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which is in the upper half plane since @xmath has determinant one.
    Now every orthogonal matrix @xmath operates on @xmath by
    multiplication with some complex number @xmath of norm one, hence

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So @xmath descends to a map @xmath .

-   In order to define @xmath we take the same setup, and again we ask:
    how far apart is @xmath , as an @xmath -linear map on @xmath , from
    being conformal? Since it is linear and orientation-preserving, it
    is quasi-conformal for some constant Beltrami coefficient. This
    means that it satisfies the Beltrami equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for a unique @xmath . Again, orthogonal matrices @xmath operate on
    @xmath by conformal maps, so that @xmath . This again means that
    @xmath descends to a well-defined map @xmath .

-   Finally @xmath is the Möbius transformation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with inverse

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This differs from the classical Cayley map by @xmath on @xmath or,
    equivalently, by @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

The five maps @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined above
are all homeomorphisms, and the diagram ( 7 ) commutes.

###### Proof.

We have already seen that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are homeomorphisms,
so if the diagram commutes, @xmath and @xmath are also homeomorphisms.

Hence it remains to show that the diagram commutes, which amounts to the
two identities @xmath and @xmath . As to the first one, take @xmath and
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, recalling ( 8 ), we can write

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is the same. Hence @xmath .

The commutativity of the lower left triangle can be seen as follows:
take again some @xmath . In order to compute its Beltrami coefficient,
we need to write it as a sum of a @xmath -linear map and a @xmath
-antilinear map:

  ----- -- -------- --
  (9)      @xmath   
  ----- -- -------- --

so the Beltrami coefficient of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, @xmath and thus @xmath , what was to be shown. ∎

### 4.3. Affine maps and the Veech Group

###### Affine Maps.

In this section we introduce an important class of self-maps of
translation surfaces.

###### Definition 4.3.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath be translation surfaces with cone points. An affine
map from @xmath to @xmath is an orientation-preserving homeomorphism
@xmath with the following properties:

1.   Let @xmath be the set of cone-points of @xmath , then @xmath .

2.   For every pair of charts on @xmath and @xmath in the atlases
    defining the translation structures, @xmath obtains the form @xmath
    for some @xmath and @xmath . Here we identify @xmath in the usual
    way.

When @xmath is an affine map and @xmath is connected, the matrix @xmath
in (ii) is the same in every chart; it is called the linear part of
@xmath .

How do affine maps behave from the point of view of complex analysis?

###### Proposition 4.3.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be Riemann surfaces, let @xmath be an abelian
differential on @xmath and regard @xmath as translation surfaces with
cone points.

1.   Let @xmath be an affine map. Then @xmath is holomorphic (or,
    equivalently, biholomorphic) if and only if the affine part of
    @xmath is an element of @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath be a homeomorphism. Then @xmath is an affine map with
    linear part equal to the identity if and only if @xmath is
    holomorphic and @xmath . @xmath

From now on, to ease formulations, we identify closed translation
surfaces with cone points and compact Riemann surfaces with abelian
differentials. We also restrict our attention to the case where the
domain and the target agree. So let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface
and let @xmath be an abelian differential on @xmath . Then the set of
affine self-maps of @xmath forms a group under composition, which we
denote by @xmath . This is often called the affine group of @xmath .
Although we will not make use of it now, we anticipate the following
important statement (see Proposition 4.3.11 ): the canonical
homomorphism from @xmath to the mapping class group of @xmath is
injective. This explains one of the motivations for studying affine
groups of translation surfaces: they provide more or less easily
accessible subgroups of mapping class groups. From this point of view it
is natural to look for “big” affine groups.

###### The Veech Group.

There is a natural homomorphism @xmath which sends every affine map to
its linear part. If @xmath is compact, as we assumed, the image of this
homomorphism is even contained in @xmath :

###### Lemma 4.3.3.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface, let @xmath be a nonzero
holomorphic one-form on @xmath and let @xmath . Then the determinant of
@xmath is one.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the volume element of the Riemannian metric on @xmath ,
see above. Then @xmath , and using that the total volume of @xmath is
finite we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath . ∎

So indeed @xmath defines a group homomorphism @xmath , and it is
straightforward to see that this is a group homomorphism. It is also
clear that the kernel of this map is precisely @xmath . The image is
harder to describe and hence deserves a name of its own:

###### Definition 4.3.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above. The image of the group homomorphism
@xmath is called the Veech group of @xmath and denoted by @xmath .

The Veech group is also closely connected with the @xmath -action on
moduli spaces discussed in the previous section.

###### Proposition 4.3.5.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface with an abelian differential.
Then the Veech group @xmath is equal to the stabilizer of the point in
@xmath represented by @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proof.

To ease notation, denote this stabilizer by @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We first show that @xmath is contained in @xmath . Let @xmath , then
there is some affine self-map @xmath of @xmath with derivative @xmath .
A local coordinate computation ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The map @xmath is an isomorphism
of translation surfaces confirms that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism of translation surfaces. Hence @xmath .

For the other inclusion let @xmath . This means that there is some
isomorphism of translation surfaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, this is an affine map with derivative equal to the
identity. On the other hand we claim that the identity map

  ------ -- -------- --
  (10)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

is an affine map with derivative @xmath . This can again be seen by a
local coordinate computation: look at the identity map from @xmath to
@xmath . In the following diagram, the vertical maps are charts of the
respective translation structures:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Thus indeed the identity map from @xmath to @xmath is affine with
derivative @xmath , which proves our statement about the map ( 10 ).

Hence the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an affine self-map of @xmath with derivative @xmath . Thus @xmath is
in the Veech group. ∎

Summarizing we get a short exact sequence

  ------ -- -------- --
  (11)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Since the group @xmath is finite, the Veech group and the affine group
are not terribly far apart. The Veech group however, as a group of
matrices, is easier to describe. It has some nice properties:

###### Proposition 4.3.6.

The Veech group @xmath is a discrete and non-cocompact subgroup of
@xmath . Operating upon @xmath , it permutes the holonomy vectors of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The second statement is clear; the discreteness statement is originally
due to Veech [ 45 ] . A much more elegant proof can be found in [ 19 ,
section 1.3.2] . In that same section one also finds a proof for
non-cocompactness. We briefly sketch the ideas.

As to discreteness, the set of holonomy vectors of @xmath is a discrete
subset of @xmath . Hence @xmath also has to be discrete.

Now Hubert and Schmidt consider the function @xmath with @xmath being
the length of the shortest holonomy vector of @xmath . This is
continuous and descends to a function on the quotient @xmath . Hence if
this quotient were compact, the image of @xmath would have to be
compact. But one can make a given saddle connection arbitrarily short by
@xmath -transformations, hence the image of @xmath comes arbitrarily
close to zero, contradiction. ∎

###### Parabolics in the Veech Group.

Now we describe a method to find nontrivial elements in the affine
group, and hence the Veech group, of a translation surface. Let @xmath
be a compact Riemann surface with an abelian differential @xmath .
Assume that @xmath is a Jenkins-Strebel direction for @xmath , so that
we get a complete cylinder decomposition. The idea is now to define some
simple affine maps on the cylinders and investigate when they can be
glued together to an affine self-map of the whole surface.

So let @xmath and consider the cylinder @xmath . We consider this, as
described above, as the quotient of a closed strip @xmath in direction
@xmath of width @xmath in the complex plane. Say this strip has boundary
lines @xmath and @xmath where, when viewed in direction @xmath , the
line @xmath is the left boundary of @xmath and @xmath is the right
boundary:

[]

Then let @xmath be the unique real-affine map @xmath with the following
properties: @xmath sends each of the two lines @xmath and @xmath to
itself; it is the identity on @xmath and translation by @xmath on @xmath
. This descends to a well-defined map on @xmath which induces the
identity on the boundary and is an affine map in the interior; it is
called the affine Dehn twist of @xmath .

Let us compute the linear part of this affine map for two important
special cases. First let @xmath , so that the direction of the cylinder
is horizontal. Assume without loss of generality that @xmath is the real
axis. Then we have @xmath for real @xmath , and @xmath , hence @xmath .
In other words the affine part of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To ease terminology we introduce the following notion:

###### Definition 4.3.7.

The modulus of a cylinder @xmath is the positive real number @xmath ,
i.e. its circumference divided by its width.

So we find: the affine part of the affine Dehn twist of a cylinder in
direction @xmath of modulus @xmath is the matrix

  ------ -- -------- --
  (12)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Since a cylinder in direction @xmath can be obtained from one in
direction zero by rotation with @xmath , we see that the affine part of
the affine Dehn twist of a cylinder in direction @xmath of modulus
@xmath is the conjugate of the matrix ( 12 ) by this rotation, in other
words

  ------ -- -------- --
  (13)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

One particular case deserves to be mentioned: for @xmath , i.e. in the
vertical direction, we get the matrix

  ------ -- -------- --
  (14)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

So let us return to Veech groups. Assume that @xmath is a
Jenkins-Strebel direction for @xmath ; then we get a complete cylinder
decomposition, say into @xmath . For simplicity we assume that @xmath ;
else we replace @xmath by @xmath . On every @xmath we have the affine
Dehn twist @xmath . If all the cylinders have the same moduli, all these
Dehn twists have the same linear part and hence glue to an affine map
@xmath . But also in the case where the moduli are commensurable (i.e.
where they span a one-dimensional vector space over @xmath or,
equivalently, where they have some common integer multiple) we can do
this trick: let the modulus of @xmath be @xmath , then by assumption
there are integers @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then on each @xmath , the map @xmath has affine part

  ------ -- -------- --
  (15)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Hence the maps @xmath glue to an affine self-map of @xmath , with affine
part ( 15 ). We summarize:

###### Proposition 4.3.8.

Assume that @xmath is a Jenkins-Strebel direction for @xmath , and
assume that the cylinders in the associated complete cylinder
decomposition have commensurable moduli, where @xmath is a common
integer multiple of these moduli. Then the matrix

  ------ -- -------- --
  (16)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

is an element of @xmath . @xmath

The proposition remains of course true if zero is replaced by an
arbitrary @xmath and the matrix ( 16 ) is replaced by its conjugate ( 13
).

So if one finds two different Jenkins-Strebel directions ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16
meaning that they do not merely differ by a sign , one finds two
distinct parabolic elements of @xmath with different eigenvectors, which
means that @xmath is quite large. Let us apply this method in order to
find nontrivial elements in the Veech groups of our examples.

###### Regular Polygons I.

First consider the Wiman curve @xmath . Recall that this can be
described as a regular @xmath -gon with opposite sides identified, where
@xmath . Rescaling the @xmath -gon does not change the Veech group. We
have shown that, after a suitable normalization, the vertical direction
is a Jenkins-Strebel direction. Using the notation from above, let
@xmath be the modulus of the cylinder @xmath . Then using the
trigonometrical formulæ ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 These follow directly from the addition
theorems of sine and cosine

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we see that @xmath contains the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also rotation around the center of the regular @xmath -gon by an angle
of @xmath clearly defines an affine self-map of @xmath , so we get that
the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is contained in @xmath . These two matrices already generate a finite
covolume Fuchsian group, which must then be a finite index subgroup of
@xmath , see section 3.5.

###### Regular Polygons II.

Next we turn to @xmath , i.e. two regular @xmath -gons with parallel
sides identified, again with @xmath . With the notation from section
2.4, we find that the modulus of the cylinder @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is in the Veech group, as well as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

coming from an obvious rotation of the @xmath -gons. Again we will see
in section 3.5 that these two generate a finite covolume Fuchsian group.

###### Affine Maps as Quasiconformal Maps.

Let us now consider affine maps between different translation surfaces.
These provide important examples of quasiconformal maps. In the previous
section we noted that every matrix @xmath , interpreted as a self-map of
@xmath , is quasiconformal with constant Beltrami coefficient, which we
computed in that section. Hence we can also compute its quasiconformal
dilatation as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a corollary we get:

###### Proposition 4.3.9.

Let @xmath , @xmath be closed Riemann surfaces, let @xmath be an abelian
differential on @xmath and let @xmath be an affine map with linear part
@xmath . Then @xmath is quasiconformal with dilatation @xmath . @xmath

Affine maps have minimal quasiconformal dilatation in their homotopy
class:

###### Theorem 4.3.10.

Let @xmath , @xmath be closed Riemann surfaces, let @xmath be a
quadratic differential on @xmath and let @xmath be an affine map with
derivative @xmath and hence quasiconformal dilatation @xmath . Let
@xmath be any quasiconformal homeomorphism homotopic to @xmath , with
dilatation @xmath . Then @xmath , with equality precisely for @xmath .

###### Proof.

In the case where @xmath is diagonal, this statement is a special case
of Teichmüller’s theorem . ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Teichmüller’s theorem is the
analogous statement for quadratic differentials There are many proofs of
this theorem in the literature, see e.g. [ 17 , Thm. 5.3.8] , hence we
only show how to reduce the proof to this special case.

Write @xmath in the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is diagonal. We can then find real numbers
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we use the following elementary observations:

1.  Let @xmath , and let @xmath be a Riemann surface with an abelian
    differential. Then the identity map @xmath has derivative @xmath ,
    and the identity map @xmath has derivative @xmath .

2.  Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then @xmath .

Applying this to our situation, consider the following composition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is an affine map with derivative @xmath from @xmath to @xmath ,
hence we can apply Teichmüller’s theorem to it. But now forgetting the
abelian differentials, this is the same quasiconformal map from @xmath
to @xmath as @xmath , hence the minimality statement transfers to @xmath
. ∎

###### The Image in the Mapping Class Group.

The affine group of a translation surface can also be interpreted as a
subgroup of the mapping class group. Namely if @xmath is a Teichmüller
marked surface, then every orientation-preserving self-diffeomorphism of
@xmath can be pulled back along the Teichmüller marking to give a
self-diffeomorphism of @xmath , which is only well-defined up to
isotopy. Hence a group homomorphism @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.3.11.

Let @xmath be a Teichmüller marked closed Riemann surface of genus
@xmath , and let @xmath be an abelian differential on it. Then the map
@xmath is injective.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an affine self-map of @xmath which maps to the identity in
@xmath , in other words, which is isotopic to the identity. Now the
identity is conformal, hence its quasiconformal dilatation is minimal in
its isotopy class. By Theorem 4.3.10 this is only possible if @xmath is
the identity. ∎

### 4.4. Abelian Teichmüller Disks

Now let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath together
with a Teichmüller marking and an abelian differential @xmath . In this
section we define an embedding of the hyperbolic plane into @xmath
associated with these data; it has different descriptions, using the
different models of the hyperbolic plane discussed in the previous
section.

To begin with, the marking allows us to identify @xmath with “the” model
surface @xmath of genus @xmath , and hence to identify @xmath with the
Teichmüller space of @xmath ; so a point in @xmath is represented by a
compact Riemann surface @xmath of genus @xmath together with an isotopy
class of diffeomorphisms @xmath .

###### Teichmüller Disks via @xmath-Orbits.

The @xmath -action on @xmath defines a smooth map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

composing this with the forgetful map @xmath defines a map

  ------ -- -------- --
  (17)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

We shall see in a minute that this factors over the left quotient by
@xmath . But from this construction it is not clear at all that we
arrive at something complex analytic. So let us first introduce another
way to look at this map.

###### Teichmüller Disks via Beltrami Forms.

The quotient @xmath is a well-defined Beltrami form on @xmath of norm
one. Hence for any @xmath the Beltrami form @xmath will be an element of
@xmath . So using the map ( 1 ) we obtain a holomorphic map

  ------ -- -------- --
  (18)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

###### Comparison.

These two constructions give the same image in Teichmüller space:

###### Proposition 4.4.1.

Let @xmath be a marked compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath and let
@xmath be a nonzero holomorphic one-form on @xmath . Let @xmath be the
map defined in ( 18 ), let @xmath as in ( 17 ) and let @xmath be as in
the previous section. Then the following diagram commutes:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath sends @xmath to the marked Riemann surface
underlying @xmath , which is the surface @xmath with a new complex
structure. For the moment we denote it by @xmath (although this notation
is in general dangerous since it suppresses the dependence on @xmath ).
On the other hand, @xmath sends @xmath to the marked Riemann surface
@xmath which is again @xmath with a new complex structure. Hence we will
be done if we show that the identity map @xmath is conformal.

We first show the corresponding local statement. So consider the complex
plane @xmath with two new complex structures:

-   Consider the holomorphic one-form @xmath and the associated
    translation structure. Distort this by @xmath to obtain a new
    translation structure and hence a new complex structure on @xmath
    which we denote, in accordance with our general notation, as @xmath
    . By definition the map @xmath is a translation, in particular
    holomorphic, chart (in fact it is an isomorphism of Riemann
    surfaces).

-   Now consider the Beltrami form @xmath and associated new complex
    structure on @xmath ; we denote @xmath endowed with this new complex
    structure by @xmath . Now the map @xmath satisfies the Beltrami
    equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and is hence a holomorphic chart (again it is even an isomorphism of
    Riemann surfaces).

We wish to show that the identity map @xmath is a holomorphic map:
checking this in holomorphic charts boils down to the trivial statement
that the diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

commutes.

Now on @xmath we have natural flat coordinates determined by @xmath . In
these coordinates @xmath becomes @xmath and @xmath consequently becomes
@xmath . Thus in these coordinates the inclusion @xmath becomes the
identity map from (an open subset of) @xmath to (an open subset of)
@xmath which is, as just shown, holomorphic. But by Riemann’s theorem on
removable singularities, the whole identity map @xmath must then be
holomorphic and thus, since it is a homeomorphism, biholomorphic. ∎

This has several interesting implications. For example the map @xmath
factors over @xmath , but this means nothing else than that it is
constant on left @xmath -cosets. In other words, it descends to a map
@xmath , and the following diagram commutes:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Also the two maps @xmath and @xmath from @xmath to @xmath agree, so we
may denote either of them by @xmath ; this @xmath is then a holomorphic
map. It will turn out that this is the easiest one to understand.

###### Kobayashi Isometries.

The maps constructed above give Kobayashi isometric holomorphic
embeddings of @xmath into Teichmüller spaces.

###### Theorem 4.4.2.

Let @xmath be a marked compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath , and let
@xmath be an abelian differential on @xmath . Then the map @xmath is a
Teichmüller disk, i.e. a holomorphic Kobayashi isometry.

###### Proof.

The map is holomorphic by construction; to prove the other statement
recall that the Kobayashi metric on the unit disk is equal to the
Poincaré metric, and the Kobayashi metric on Teichmüller space is equal
to the Teichmüller metric. Hence we have explicit formulæ for these
metrics.

Next, note that if @xmath and @xmath belong to the same @xmath -orbit,
then @xmath is a Kobayashi isometry if and only if @xmath is a Kobayashi
isometry. This is because there is some automorphism @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath . Vice versa for every automorphism @xmath of @xmath
there is some pair @xmath which is @xmath -equivalent to @xmath and such
that @xmath . From this we see that it suffices to show the following:

Let @xmath . Then the hyperbolic distance from @xmath to @xmath is the
same as the Teichmüller distance from @xmath to @xmath . But both
distances can be directly computed: the hyberbolic distance from @xmath
to @xmath is

  ------ -- -------- --
  (19)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

To compute the Teichmüller distance, note that the identity map @xmath
is an affine map with quasiconformal constant @xmath , hence
quasiconformal dilatation @xmath . So by Theorem 4.3.10 we get that the
Teichmüller distance between @xmath and @xmath is also given by ( 19 ).
∎

###### Definition 4.4.3.

An abelian Teichmüller disk is a map of the form @xmath for some @xmath
. Sometimes we also call the image @xmath an abelian Teichmüller disk.

Also note that pulling back @xmath or @xmath along any appropriate
composition of maps in the commutative diagram ( 7 ) we also obtain maps
from the other two incarnations of the hyperbolic plane into Teichmüller
space. In particular we obtain a map @xmath . This is a again
holomorphic Kobayashi isometry; we will also call the maps @xmath and
@xmath abelian Teichmüller disks since there is no danger of confusion.

### 4.5. The Mirror Veech Group

Let again @xmath be a marked compact Riemann surface of genus @xmath and
let @xmath be an abelian differential on @xmath . We now take a closer
look at the image of the Teichmüller disk @xmath in moduli space. It
turns out that this is closely connected with the Veech group.

###### The Affine Group Acting on the Teichmüller Disk.

Recall that every affine self-map @xmath of @xmath induces an element
@xmath of the mapping class group @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.5.1.

Let @xmath with derivative @xmath . Then @xmath , acting on @xmath ,
sends the image of @xmath to itself. Hence pulling its action back along
@xmath , @xmath and our system of compatible homeomorphisms @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we obtain automorphisms of @xmath
, @xmath and the two quotients of @xmath by @xmath . These are as
follows:

1.   On @xmath it acts by right multiplication with @xmath .

2.   On @xmath it acts by left multiplication with

      ------ -- -------- --
      (20)      @xmath   
      ------ -- -------- --

3.   On @xmath it acts by the matrix ( 20 ) interpreted as a Möbius
    transformation.

4.   On @xmath it acts by the matrix

      ------ -- -------- --
      (21)      @xmath   
      ------ -- -------- --

    again interpreted as Möbius transformation.

###### Proof.

First we show that @xmath sends the Teichmüller disk to itself. For this
purpose we view the Teichmüller disk as the image of the map @xmath .
Then for any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The third equality is justified by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

being conformal, in fact an isomorphism of translation surfaces, because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism of translation surfaces, as remarked earlier.

By this computation we have at the same time shown (i). Concerning (ii),
the action of @xmath on @xmath is the pullback of the action (i) along
the homeomorphism @xmath . Hence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now (iii) easily follows from (ii), and (iv) follows by a
straightforward computation, which we omit, from (iii). ∎

###### Proposition 4.5.2.

Consider once again the inclusion @xmath . Its image is the setwise
stabilizer of the Teichmüller disk @xmath , and the image of the
subgroup @xmath is contained in the pointwise stabilizer of the
Teichmüller disk.

###### Proof.

As to the first statement, it follows from the proposition above that
the image of @xmath is contained in the stabilizer. The other inclusion
is proved in [ 8 , Thm. 1] .

Now an automorphism of the pair @xmath has the identity as derivative,
so it acts trivially on the Teichmüller disk. ∎

###### The Mirror Veech Group.

Now recall the short exact sequence ( 11 ). This can be re-interpreted
in our context as follows: by Proposition 4.5.2 , the quotient @xmath
acts on the Teichmüller disk @xmath ; the short exact sequence
identifies this quotient with the Veech group @xmath . Pulling back
along @xmath we obtain an action of @xmath on the upper half plane. This
is, up to a conjugation by @xmath , the usual action by Möbius
transformations. Hence we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a non-cocompact Fuchsian group by Proposition 4.3.6 , called the
mirror Veech group of @xmath . We will sometimes also consider its image
in @xmath , which we denote by @xmath and call the projective mirror
Veech group of @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.5.3.

Consider the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this factors over the quotient of @xmath by the Fuchsian group @xmath ,
giving a holomorphic immersion @xmath @xmath

Let us make some remarks on how the Veech group changes under some
simple operations on the translation surface.

###### Proposition 4.5.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be equivalent under the @xmath -operation on
@xmath . Then the groups @xmath and @xmath are conjugate within @xmath .
Hence also the groups @xmath and @xmath are conjugate within @xmath .
@xmath

###### The Image in Moduli Space.

We are primarily interested in the case where this group is as big as
possible:

###### Definition 4.5.5.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface and let @xmath be an abelian
differential on @xmath . Then @xmath is called a Veech surface if the
group @xmath (or, equivalently, @xmath ) is a lattice.

We recall that a Fuchsian group @xmath is a lattice if it has finite
covolume or, equivalently, if the quotient surface @xmath is of finite
type, hence an algebraic curve.

###### Theorem 4.5.6.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface and let @xmath be an abelian
differential. Denote the image of @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . Then the
following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Veech surface;

2.  @xmath is an algebraic subvariety;

3.   there exists a complete algebraic curve @xmath , where @xmath is
    the Deligne-Mumford compactification of @xmath , such that @xmath is
    finite and @xmath .

###### Proof.

The implications (iii) @xmath (ii) @xmath (i) are clear. It is shown in
[ 15 , section 4.2] that (i) implies the “analytic version” of (iii),
i.e. (iii) with “complete algebraic curve” replaced by “complete
analytic subspace”. But using the GAGA theorem [ 43 ] , one sees that
this is equivalent to (iii). ∎

Note that this Theorem justifies the name “Teichmüller curve”.

###### Theorem 4.5.7.

Let @xmath be a Veech surface, then the algebraic curve @xmath and its
embedding into @xmath are defined over @xmath . Furthermore, for any
automorphism @xmath , the curve @xmath with the embedding @xmath is also
a Teichmüller curve.

###### Proof.

The first part was first shown by McMullen in [ 32 ] by a rigidity
argument; the second part was shown under some extra condition by Möller
in [ 35 ] . We give a combination of both proofs which is, as we think,
simpler, but still relies on a result in [ 35 ] that we will not discuss
in the present work, in order to keep it shorter.

First we cite Proposition 2 in [ 32 ] ; actually a weakening which says
that there exist at most countably many Teichmüller curves in each
@xmath . The proof is simple: each Teichmüller curve is, by analytic
continuation, completely determined by giving one closed (real) geodesic
@xmath it contains. But these geodesics are in bijection with
pseudo-Anosov elements of the mapping class group @xmath , which is
clearly countable.

Then we use Theorem 5.3 in [ 35 ] : it tells us that we can detect
whether a curve in @xmath is a Teichmüller curve by looking at its Higgs
bundle. We do not need to know what that precisely means; the crucial
point is that Möller’s criterion is purely algebraic-geometric, making
no use of complex analysis (in the proof, of course, it does, but not in
the formulation). So the property of being a Teichmüller curve is
invariant under the operation of @xmath .

Finally let us take a Teichmüller curve @xmath and consider it as a
point in a suitable Hilbert scheme. Combining the two observations drawn
so far, its orbit in this Hilbert scheme under @xmath must be countable.
But this actually means that the orbit must be finite , and the curve
defined over a number field. ∎

###### The Family of Curves over a Teichmüller Curve.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus @xmath together with a
Teichmüller marking, and let @xmath be an abelian differential on @xmath
. We get a Teichmüller disk @xmath . By the universal property of
Teichmüller space, this corresponds to a family of algebraic curves
@xmath . Topologically this family is trivial, i.e. can be interpreted
as the constant family @xmath , but the complex structure on @xmath for
@xmath in @xmath is a new one, namely the complex structure underlying
@xmath for any @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath operates on @xmath as
in Proposition 4.5.1 .

It is also interesting to see what happens when going down to a quotient
by a subgroup of the mirror Veech group. There is a finite index
torsion-free subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath factors over
@xmath . This gives a family of curves @xmath . This is particularly
interesting when @xmath is a Veech surface. Then @xmath is also a
lattice, so that the quotient @xmath becomes an algebraic curve. Since
the classifying map of the family @xmath is algebraic, the whole family
is algebraic and, by McMullen’s result, even defined over a number
field.

Let us now consider our examples.

###### Origamis.

The Veech group, and hence also the mirror Veech group, of the unit
torus @xmath is @xmath . The induced Teichmüller curve is the classical
isomorphism @xmath . In particular any translation surface in genus one
is a Veech surface. In a later section (see Theorem 6.2.3 ) we will see
how Veech groups behave under finite covers; this will entail that the
Veech group of any Origami is a finite index subgroup of @xmath . Hence
every origami is a Veech surface.

Before turning to the more complicated examples, a helpful observation
in hyperbolic geometry:

###### Lemma 4.5.8.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be the unique hyperbolic geodesic with the
following properties:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is a euclidean semi-circle with centre @xmath ;

3.  @xmath meets the imaginary axis with an angle of @xmath .

Let further @xmath the unique positive endpoint of @xmath . Then @xmath
and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider the following sketch:

[]

Then @xmath , since both of them add up with the angle @xmath to @xmath
. By the central angle theorem we then get @xmath . Hence by definition
of the cotangent, the lemma follows. ∎

###### Regular Polygons I.

Let us compute the (projective) mirror Veech group @xmath , i.e. of a
regular @xmath -gon with opposite sides identified, where @xmath is odd.
In section 3.3 we have identified two elements of @xmath ; conjugating
them by @xmath gives the following two elements of the mirror Veech
group:

  ------ -- -------- --
  (22)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.5.9.

The image of the two matrices ( 22 ) in @xmath generate a triangle group
of signature @xmath . In particular the projective mirror Veech group
@xmath contains (a conjugate of) @xmath as a finite index subgroup.

###### Proof.

The triangle group @xmath is well-defined up to conjugation in @xmath .
We shall give generators for a specific incarnation and show that they
are simultaneously conjugate to the matrices ( 22 ). Let @xmath be the
unique horocycle which hits @xmath with angle @xmath , and let @xmath be
the endpoint of @xmath which, considered as a real number, is positive.
Then the ideal triangle with vertices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath has
internal angles @xmath at @xmath , @xmath at @xmath and @xmath at @xmath
. So we get an incarnation of @xmath which is generated by the rotation
around @xmath with angle @xmath and the translation of twice the width
of this triangle to the right. But the width of this triangle is @xmath
, as one sees from Lemma 4.5.8 . These two hyperbolic isometries are the
Möbius transformations with matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conjugating both by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one obtains exactly the inverses of the matrices ( 22 ). Hence the
projective mirror Veech group of @xmath contains a copy of @xmath .
Since this triangle group has finite covolume, the index must be finite.
∎

So we see that @xmath is a Veech surface, which gives rise to a
Teichmüller curve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is no contradiction to our earlier remark that one only has
isotrivial families of curves over @xmath , since triangle groups always
have fixed points. Hence if one wishes to construct a family of curves
out of this map, one has to pass to a finite index subgroup of @xmath .

###### Regular Polygons II.

A very similar game can be played with the surfaces @xmath , i.e. with
two @xmath -gons with corresponding opposite sides identified.

###### Proposition 4.5.10.

The projective mirror Veech group @xmath contains a conjugate of the
triangle group @xmath as a finite index subgroup.

###### Proof.

As above, we construct explicit generators of @xmath . Take the unique
horocycle @xmath which contains @xmath , has positive euclidean centre
and meets the imaginary axis with angle @xmath . Let @xmath be the point
in @xmath with maximal imaginary part. Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are the vertices of an ideal triangle with angles @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (in that order). Hence we get a copy of the triangle group which
is generated by the rotation around @xmath with angle @xmath , and the
translation by twice the width of the triangle to the right. The matrix
of the rotation is as above, but the matrix of the translation now has
(by Lemma ( 4.5.8 ) @xmath instead of @xmath . Conjugating with the same
matrix as above, we can identify @xmath with a subgroup of @xmath .
Again, this triangle group has finite covolume, so the index must be
finite. ∎

Since for our constructions we will often have to pass to finite index
subgroups of a given Veech group, this information suffices for our
purposes. Yet we note that the Veech groups just discussed have been
determined exactly (and not only their commensurability classes). There
is no Fuchsian group properly containing @xmath , see [ 11 , Thm. 3B] ,
so we really have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, a hyperbolic ideal triangle with angles @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath can be cut into two ideal triangles with angles @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath which are mirror images of each other. So we have an
inclusion up to conjugation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of index two, and one can show (see e.g. [ 45 ] ) that indeed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Pierre Lochak has determined the thus obtained map @xmath : the complex
number @xmath is sent to the hyperelliptic curve with affine equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . This is [ 26 , Proposition 5.8] .

## 5. Jacobians: Local Theory

We wish to apply cohomological methods to the study of Teichmüller disks
and Teichmüller curves. To see more clearly what happens, we again first
consider just one abelian differential at a time. We first briefly
recall the very classical notions of Jacobian varieties and period
matrices. For our purposes it will be useful to think of them not as
abelian varieties but as Hodge structures. Usually one only considers
Hodge structures over one fixed coefficient ring (mostly @xmath , @xmath
or @xmath ); for us it is important to distinguish between Hodge
structures over different coefficient rings, and to change coefficient
rings. Also we have to slightly extend the concept to coefficient rings
that are contained in @xmath but not necessarily in @xmath . Since there
are different approaches in the literature how to do this, and since we
have to go into the theory of decompositions of Hodge structures in
quite a detailed way, we have to fix some notation, and therefore
introduce the notion of a “pseudo-Hodge structure”. With this we want to
emphasize that Hodge symmetry, a very important tool in the theory of
Hodge structures, gets sacrificed.

After these more abstract considerations, we return to translation
surfaces and explain how affine automorphisms of the translation surface
act on its cohomology. The relation with Hodge theory, which in this
form still seems quite artificial, releases its full power only in the
study of families, see chapter seven.

### 5.1. Pure Hodge Structures

We begin by considering the situation over a single point, i.e. for a
single cohomology group instead of a local system. If @xmath is a closed
Riemann surface, the cohomology group @xmath underlies a pure Hodge
structure. This notion was introduced in [ 6 ] . We recall the basic
definitions and properties around pure Hodge structures, beginning with
real Hodge structures; these can be defined in several different but
equivalent ways, of which we recall two.

###### Pure Real Hodge Structures.

A real Hodge structure is a “real vector space with a Hodge
decomposition”:

###### Definition 5.1.1.

A pure real Hodge structure is a finite-dimensional @xmath -vector space
@xmath together with a direct sum decomposition of @xmath -vector spaces

  ------ -- -------- --
  (23)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

such that @xmath for all @xmath .

This decomposition is called the Hodge decomposition , and we sometimes
refer to the equation @xmath as the “Hodge symmetry”.

We shall only consider Hodge structures of one single weight (which is
mostly @xmath ):

###### Definition 5.1.2.

Let @xmath be an integer. A pure real Hodge structure @xmath is called
of weight @xmath if in the decomposition ( 23 ) one has @xmath whenever
@xmath .

Every pure real Hodge structure can be written in a canonical way as a
direct sum of its weight components. Namely for a pure real Hodge
structure @xmath and an integer @xmath set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by Hodge symmetry we find that @xmath , so it can be written
uniquely as @xmath for some @xmath -sub-vector space @xmath of @xmath .
¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This follows from the following elementary lemma: let @xmath be
a real vector space and let @xmath be a complex sub-vector space of
@xmath satisfying @xmath . Then there is a unique real sub-vector space
@xmath of @xmath with @xmath . This can be seen as follows: the
uniqueness of @xmath is clear by @xmath . That @xmath can then be seen
by noting that for @xmath one can write @xmath . An analogous statement
can be shown for any finite Galois extension of fields, by a similar
trick. It also holds for infinite field extensions under some mild
conditions, but the proof is more technical. See Lemma 7.1.9 Hence
indeed @xmath underlies a sub-Hodge structure of @xmath which we just
denote by @xmath . It is clear that we get a direct sum decomposition of
Hodge structures @xmath . So there is no real restriction in only
considering Hodge structures of some single weight.

There is a second way how one can define Hodge structures of a single
weight. Namely let @xmath be a pure real Hodge structure of weight
@xmath , and define a descending filtration @xmath on @xmath , indexed
by all integers, as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This filtration satisfies

  ------ -- -------- --
  (24)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Also it is exhausting , i.e. @xmath for sufficiently large @xmath and
@xmath for sufficiently small @xmath . This filtration is called the
Hodge filtration . Vice versa, start with a real vector space @xmath and
an exhausting descending filtration @xmath by complex sub-vector spaces,
indexed by the integers, such that ( 24 ) holds. This defines a pure
real Hodge structure of weight @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These constructions are mutually inverse.

###### Pure @xmath-Hodge Structures.

So far we have only considered real Hodge structures, but also Hodge
structures over subrings of @xmath (these will mostly be @xmath or a
number field) are important for what follows.

###### Definition 5.1.3.

Let @xmath be a subring. A pure Hodge structure @xmath over @xmath
consists of the following data:

1.   a finitely generated free ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Some authors drop this condition
    @xmath -module @xmath ,

2.   a direct sum decomposition of @xmath -modules @xmath and

3.   a real pure Hodge structure of weight @xmath on @xmath .

A pure Hodge structure @xmath of weight @xmath over @xmath is a pure
Hodge structure over @xmath satisfying @xmath for @xmath ; equivalently,
this is a finitely generated free @xmath -module @xmath together with a
real pure Hodge structure of weight @xmath on @xmath .

We also talk of pure @xmath -Hodge structures, and so on. An integral
Hodge structure is a @xmath -Hodge structure and a rational Hodge
structure is a @xmath -Hodge structure.

###### Constructions.

Owing to the complicated definition, a great amount of abstract nonsense
can be done with Hodge structures. We just list the most important
topics:

1.   Morphisms: For pure @xmath -Hodge structures @xmath and @xmath ,
    let @xmath be the set of all @xmath -module homomorphisms @xmath
    such that the @xmath -linear extension @xmath satisfies @xmath .
    Note this also ensures that @xmath preserves the weight grading.

    Alternatively we can define @xmath to be the set of all @xmath
    -module homomorphisms @xmath that respect the weight grading and on
    each weight component the Hodge filtration. These two definitions
    are equivalent.

    In this way we get the category of pure @xmath -Hodge structures,
    denoted by @xmath . If @xmath is a field, it is an abelian category
    ²¹ ²¹ 21 This is quite a nontrivial statement, see [ 6 ] .

2.   Sub-Hodge-Structures: Let @xmath be a pure @xmath -Hodge structure.
    Then a sub-Hodge structure of @xmath is an @xmath -Hodge structure
    @xmath whose underlying @xmath -module @xmath is a submodule of
    @xmath , and such that the inclusion @xmath is in fact a morphism of
    @xmath -Hodge structures. Clearly then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so on every submodule of @xmath there is at most one Hodge
    decomposition which turns it into a sub-Hodge structure.

    ###### Lemma 5.1.4.
    Let @xmath be a pure @xmath -Hodge structure of weight @xmath , and
    let @xmath be a sub- @xmath -module. Then, writing @xmath , we have

      ------ -- -------- --
      (25)      @xmath   
      ------ -- -------- --

    Then the following are equivalent:

    1.  @xmath is a sub-Hodge structure of @xmath .

    2.   The inclusion in ( 25 ) is in fact an equality.

    3.   For every @xmath , its components for the Hodge decomposition
        of @xmath also lie in @xmath . @xmath

3.   Tensor product: let @xmath and @xmath be pure @xmath -Hodge
    structures. Their tensor product is a pure Hodge structure @xmath
    with @xmath ; in order to define its Hodge decomposition, note that
    there is a canonical identification

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and the right hand side carries the tensor product decomposition,
    given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This turns the category of pure Hodge structures into a tensor
    category. Note that if @xmath is pure of weight @xmath and @xmath is
    pure of weight @xmath , then @xmath is pure of weight @xmath .

4.   Tate twists: For any @xmath , the pure Hodge structure @xmath of
    weight @xmath is defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    One checks that @xmath and that @xmath is a unit for the tensor
    product (i.e. for any pure Hodge structure @xmath one has canonical
    isomorphisms @xmath . We also write @xmath ; this is called the
    @xmath -th Tate twist of @xmath .

5.   Internal @xmath s: These can be explicitly described in the way
    that one would guess: let @xmath and @xmath be pure Hodge
    structures. Then @xmath is described as follows: first, set @xmath ;
    then we can identify @xmath . So the following definition is
    sensible:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    If @xmath is pure of weight @xmath and @xmath is pure of weight
    @xmath , then @xmath is pure of weight @xmath . Finally these
    internal @xmath objects relate to the “ordinary” groups of
    homomorphisms as follows: if @xmath is the Hodge structure @xmath ,
    then @xmath is equal to the intersection @xmath .

6.   Duals: As a special case of (iv) we get duals by @xmath . For
    example, @xmath is the dual of @xmath . For every @xmath there is a
    canonical morphism (“evaluation”) @xmath . If on the other hand
    @xmath is any morphism of pure Hodge structures, we get an
    associated morphism @xmath . We call @xmath a perfect pairing if
    this last map is an isomorphism (this condition is symmetric in
    @xmath and @xmath ).

7.   Base extension: Let @xmath be subrings and let @xmath be a pure
    @xmath -Hodge structure. We can define from this in a canonical way
    a pure @xmath -Hodge structure which we denote by @xmath or, if
    @xmath is clear from the context, @xmath . Its underlying @xmath
    -module is @xmath , with the weight components @xmath . Noting that
    we can then canonically identify @xmath with @xmath , we can
    transfer the real Hodge structure on @xmath to a real Hodge
    structure on @xmath . These data define in an obvious way a @xmath
    -Hodge structure.

    This construction defines an @xmath -linear functor from @xmath
    -Hodge structures to @xmath -Hodge structures.

###### Hodge Structures on Cohomology.

If @xmath is a projective complex manifold, its @xmath -th cohomology
can (and should) be considered not as a group or a vector space but
rather as a pure integral Hodge structure @xmath of weight @xmath , with
@xmath . This Hodge structure can be constructed as follows:

Introduce a Kähler metric @xmath on @xmath (for example embed @xmath
into some @xmath and restrict the Fubini-Study metric to @xmath ).
Identifying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(harmonic @xmath -forms with respect to @xmath ), the latter space
decomposes as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the space of harmonic forms of type @xmath . It of
course depends on the choice of the Kähler metric, but its image in
@xmath under the above identification does not. The conjugate of a form
of type @xmath is a form of type @xmath , so setting @xmath we obtain a
pure Hodge structure @xmath of weight @xmath . In fact this also works
for an arbitrary Kähler manifold.

Let us discuss some examples of Hodge structures appearing as the
cohomology of a complex projective variety.

1.  The simplest example: @xmath (provided that @xmath is connected).

2.  If @xmath is connected and has complex dimension @xmath , its “top
    cohomology” @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . If we demand in
    addition that the fundamental class ²² ²² 22 Note that every complex
    manifold has a canonical orientation @xmath be mapped to @xmath ,
    the isomorphism is uniquely determined. On @xmath it is given as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This is Proposition 1.14 in [ 39 ] .

3.  The cup product in cohomology gives rise to a morphism of pure Hodge
    structures @xmath .

4.  Poincaré duality can also be formulated in the context of pure Hodge
    structures; it involves a Tate twist which is “invisible” in the
    classical formulation. Namely if @xmath is a connected projective
    complex manifold of complex dimension @xmath we get (by (ii) and
    (iii)) morphisms

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    applying a Tate twist we get

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which sets up an isomorphism between @xmath and the dual of @xmath .

5.  There are canonical identifications @xmath ; hence we can just
    define @xmath as the dual to @xmath — it is thus a pure Hodge
    structure of weight @xmath .

###### Hodge Structures of Smooth Curves.

Let us now concentrate on the Hodge structures @xmath for @xmath a
smooth curve. Since there are canonical isomorphisms @xmath and @xmath
we only need to consider @xmath . We have @xmath which is a free abelian
group of rank @xmath where @xmath is the genus of @xmath . The Hodge
decomposition on @xmath is given by @xmath (the space of holomorphic
one-forms) and @xmath , the space of antiholomorphic one-forms.

###### Polarizations.

We now introduce polarizations of Hodge structures. These can be roughly
thought of as scalar products on Hodge structures. First we need another
definition:

###### Definition 5.1.5.

Let @xmath be a pure Hodge structure of weight @xmath . The Weil
operator is the unique @xmath -linear map @xmath which respects the
Hodge decomposition and acts as @xmath times the identity on @xmath .

The reason for introducing the Weil operator is basically the
multilinear algebra one has to tackle when constructing something
positive definite.

###### Definition 5.1.6.

Let @xmath be a subring and let @xmath be a pure @xmath -Hodge structure
of weight @xmath .

1.   A polarization of @xmath is a morphism of @xmath -Hodge structures

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which is @xmath -symmetric ²³ ²³ 23 i.e., symmetric when @xmath is
    even and antisymmetric when @xmath is odd and such that the
    Hermitian form

      ------ -- -------- --
      (26)      @xmath   
      ------ -- -------- --

    on @xmath is positive definite.

2.  @xmath is called polarizable if there exists a polarization of
    @xmath .

This definition is motivated by the Poincaré duality pairing on
primitive cohomology. In the only case interesting to us, it takes the
following form:

###### Proposition 5.1.7.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface. Then the Poincaré duality
pairing @xmath is a polarization.

###### Proof.

This is a special case of [ 46 , Théorème 6.32] . ∎

Not every Hodge structure is polarizable, and in fact the existence of a
polarization has strong consequences on a Hodge structure:

###### Proposition 5.1.8.

Let @xmath be a subfield (!), let @xmath be a pure @xmath -Hodge
structure of weight @xmath and let @xmath be a polarization.

1.   Let @xmath and @xmath , and assume that @xmath is different from
    @xmath (note the twist!). Then @xmath .

2.   With respect to the Hermitian form @xmath as in ( 26 ), the Hodge
    decomposition of @xmath is orthogonal.

3.   Let @xmath be a sub-Hodge structure. Then the sub- @xmath -vector
    space

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    underlies a sub-Hodge structure @xmath such that @xmath .

4.   In particular every polarizable pure @xmath -Hodge structure is
    semisimple.

###### Proof.

(i) follows from the fact that @xmath is a morphism of Hodge structures.
Namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath only consists of elements of Hodge type @xmath . So @xmath
only has a chance to be nonzero if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As to (ii), note that the Weil operator preserves the Hodge
decomposition and that @xmath , so this follows from (i).

Concerning (iii), note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Bearing in mind the remarks just before Lemma 5.1.4 we have no other
possibility than setting @xmath . Now from (ii) we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that by Lemma 5.1.4 @xmath is a sub-Hodge structure. By the explicit
description we have given, @xmath as Hodge structures .

(iv) follows directly from (iii). ∎

Note that (i) only uses that @xmath is a morphism of Hodge structures.
Hence we can rephrase the conditions on @xmath being a polarization as
follows: the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence:

###### Corollary 5.1.9.

A @xmath -symmetric morphism @xmath is a polarization if and only if the
form @xmath on @xmath is positive definite whenever @xmath is even and
negative definite whenever @xmath is odd.

For later reference we state again the motivating example: the Hodge
structure associated with a smooth compact curve.

###### Proposition 5.1.10.

Let @xmath be a smooth compact curve. Then the Poincaré pairing @xmath
is a principal polarization of @xmath . In particular it induces a
canonical isomorphism @xmath . @xmath

The latter isomorphism comes directly from the definition of @xmath as
@xmath .

### 5.2. Pseudo-Hodge Structures

For every subring @xmath we have defined Hodge structures with
coefficients in @xmath . They consist of a free @xmath -module @xmath
and some additional structure on the base change @xmath . The axioms for
these additional structures make use of the inclusion @xmath (via the
existence of a canonical complex conjugation on @xmath ). If @xmath and
@xmath is a Hodge structure defined over @xmath , we can “forget
structure” and obtain a Hodge structure defined over @xmath . For what
follows it will be necessary to even pass to objects which are only
defined over @xmath . For this we have to sacrifice some of the axioms
defining a Hodge structure since they would need a complex conjugation.
Thus we introduce the following notion:

###### Definition 5.2.1.

Let @xmath be a subring, and let @xmath be a finitely generated free
@xmath -module. Write @xmath . A pseudo-Hodge decomposition on @xmath is
a direct sum decomposition of complex vector spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that both the weight and the additional conditions using complex
conjugation are missing here. The omission of the weight is more or less
irrelevant for the mathematics (at least for our purposes) and just a
means to ease notation; the omission of the additional conditions,
however, is necessary if we want to work over rings not contained in the
reals, and it also drastically changes the behaviour of the considered
objects.

To begin with, one can switch forth and back between Hodge
decompositions and Hodge filtrations. This becomes false for their
“pseudo-Hodge” versions, where there is only one direction (with a
partial converse). Namely let @xmath be a finitely generated @xmath
-module and let @xmath be a pseudo-Hodge decomposition on @xmath . Then
we can associate with this a filtration as follows:

  ------ -- -------- --
  (27)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Clearly there is no canonical way of reconstructing the pseudo-Hodge
decomposition from this filtration. There is one as soon as a
polarization is added, see below.

###### Definition 5.2.2.

Let @xmath be a subring of @xmath . A pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath over
@xmath consists of a finitely generated free @xmath -module @xmath
together with a pseudo-Hodge decomposition on @xmath .

So in particular a pseudo-Hodge structure over the complex numbers is
merely a @xmath -graded finite-dimensional complex vector space. It will
turn out that this notion is simple enough to provide strong
decomposition theorems but close enough to Hodge structures to be
valuable for us.

We now describe the forgetful functors from Hodge-structures to
pseudo-Hodge structures. Let @xmath be a subring of @xmath and let
@xmath be a pure Hodge structure of weight @xmath over @xmath , with
Hodge decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the associated pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath is defined by @xmath
and @xmath . Note that if one fixes the weight there is no information
lost in this process:

###### Proposition 5.2.3.

Fix an integer @xmath and a subring @xmath .

1.   Let @xmath be a pseudo-Hodge structure over @xmath . If there exist
    a pure Hodge structure @xmath of weight @xmath over @xmath and an
    isomorphism @xmath , these data are unique up to unique isomorphism.

2.   Let @xmath and @xmath be pure Hodge structures of weight @xmath
    over @xmath . Then the canonical map @xmath is a bijection.

3.   Let @xmath be a pure Hodge structure of weight @xmath over @xmath ,
    and let @xmath be a sub-pseudo-Hodge structure of @xmath . Then
    there exists a unique sub-Hodge structure @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

The only non-obvious statement is (iii), but it follows easily from
Lemma 5.1.4 . ∎

Finally one more notation: if @xmath are subrings and @xmath is an
@xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure, we obtain a canonical @xmath
-pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath by “forgetting structure”: we let @xmath
; the base changes to the complex numbers are canonically isomorphic,
and we demand the Hodge decompositions to be equal.

###### Definition 5.2.4.

Let @xmath be a subring, stable under complex conjugation.

1.   Let @xmath be an @xmath -module. A hermitian form on @xmath is a
    map @xmath with the following properties:

    1.  @xmath is @xmath -linear in the first variable,

    2.  @xmath is @xmath -antilinear in the second variable (in the
        sense that it is additive and @xmath , where the bar denotes
        conjugation in @xmath ), and

    3.  @xmath for all @xmath .

    Note that for @xmath this gives back the usual definition. If @xmath
    is a hermitian form, we obtain a hermitian form on @xmath , which we
    again denote by @xmath , by “ @xmath -sesquilinear extension”:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   Now let @xmath be a pseudo-Hodge structure over @xmath . Then a
    polarization of @xmath is a hermitian form @xmath such that for the
    induced hermitian form on @xmath , the decomposition ( 5.2 ) is
    orthogonal and such that @xmath is positive definite on @xmath .

We extend the usual terminology: a pseudo-Hodge structure is polarizable
if there exists some polarization of it, and so on. How do these notions
relate to the corresponding notions for Hodge structures?

Let @xmath be a subring of @xmath , let @xmath be a pure Hodge structure
of weight @xmath over @xmath , and let @xmath be a @xmath -symmetric
morphism of @xmath -Hodge structures. Then as @xmath -modules, @xmath ,
and we may consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lemma 5.1.9 tells us that @xmath is a polarization of the Hodge
structure @xmath if and only if @xmath is a polarization of the
pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath . In particular @xmath is polarizable if
and only if @xmath is. Of course the definition of a polarization of a
pseudo-Hodge structure was just made such that this holds.

Here is the promised remark about pseudo-Hodge decompositions,
filtrations and polarizations: let @xmath be a polarized pseudo-Hodge
structure over @xmath , with associated filtration @xmath as in ( 27 ).
Then one can reconstruct the pseudo-Hodge decomposition, given
filtration and the polarization: @xmath is the @xmath -orthogonal
complement of @xmath in @xmath .

### 5.3. Hodge Structures of Jacobian Type

The integral Hodge structure @xmath for a smooth compact curve @xmath is
a pure Hodge structure of weight one which comes equipped with a
principal polarization and only has (possibly) nontrivial components of
Hodge type @xmath and @xmath . We will almost exclusively deal with such
Hodge structures. Since their direct characterization gives quite a
lengthy expression which we do not like to repeat again and again, we
introduce the following notion:

###### Definition 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be a subring of @xmath . An @xmath -Hodge structure of
Jacobian type (of rank @xmath ) is a pure @xmath -Hodge structure @xmath
of weight one together with a principal polarization @xmath , such that
@xmath and all other Hodge components are zero.

So if @xmath is a closed Riemann surface, @xmath is an integral Hodge
structure of Jacobian type. Also note that if @xmath are subrings and
@xmath is an @xmath -Hodge structure of Jacobian type, then @xmath is a
@xmath -Hodge structure of Jacobian type.

###### Abelian Varieties.

Integral Hodge structures of Jacobian type are closely related to
complex abelian varieties; in fact the category of these Hodge
structures is canonically equivalent to the category of polarized
complex abelian varieties, and for many purposes the point of view of
Hodge structures gives a clearer picture than that of abelian varieties.
Although we will not need it, we record for the convenience of the
reader how these two points of view are related.

So let @xmath be an integral Hodge structure of Jacobian type with
polarization @xmath . Let @xmath be the projection coming from the Hodge
decomposition, then @xmath is a full lattice in @xmath . Hence we have a
complex torus @xmath . We can identify @xmath with @xmath , hence @xmath
times the polarization gives an alternating two-form @xmath , i.e. an
element of @xmath . This is the Chern class of a holomorphic
line-bundle, well defined up to analytic equivalence, defining a
polarization of the torus @xmath .

This construction defines a functor from integral Hodge structures of
Jacobian type to polarized complex abelian varieties which is in fact an
equivalence of categories.

Now let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface. The abelian variety
associated with the Hodge structure @xmath is the Jacobian variety of
@xmath (whence the name). Note that the classical construction of the
Jacobian is slightly different: this is obtained by first using the
isomorphism @xmath and then applying the above sketched equivalence of
categories.

For further details and proofs see [ 46 , section 7.2.2] .

###### Abelian Varieties up to Isogeny.

In the same spirit we can re-interpret rational Hodge structures of
Jacobian type. To explain this, first some notation. Let @xmath denote
the category of integral Hodge structures of Jacobian type, and let
@xmath denote the category of rational Hodge structures of Jacobian
type. The former is a @xmath -linear abelian category, the latter is a
@xmath -linear abelian category. There is an obvious functor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the above we can identify @xmath with the category of polarized
abelian varieties. Then a morphism @xmath of abelian varieties is an
isogeny if and only if @xmath is an isomorphism of Hodge structures.
Also it is easily seen that every functor from @xmath to an abelian
category which sends all isogenies to isomorphisms factors uniquely over
@xmath . Hence @xmath is the localization of the category of polarized
abelian varieties in the class of isogenies, and we can say that @xmath
is the category of “abelian varieties up to isogeny”.

This category, although less intuitive than the category of polarized
abelian varieties, has some advantages. For example it is semisimple,
whereas the latter is not. For this reason we shall almost all the time
work only up to isogeny, i.e. with rational Hodge structures.

So for a closed Riemann surface @xmath we can view @xmath as “the
Jacobian variety of @xmath , up to isogeny”. Since we are going to use
it very often, we shall denote this rational Hodge structure of Jacobian
type by @xmath .

###### Period Matrices.

Explicit computations surrounding Hodge structures of Jacobian type are
often done using period matrices. Again we need to fix notations. So let
@xmath be a subring of @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath -Hodge
structure of Jacobian type, say of rank @xmath . Then we may choose some
symplectic basis of @xmath ; to choose such a basis is the same as to
give an isomorphism @xmath such that the polarization becomes the
standard symplectic form. This means that if the canonical basis vectors
of @xmath are denoted by @xmath , @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we can also identify @xmath with @xmath , and the only nontrivial
information left is the complex subspace @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
projection @xmath coming from the Hodge decomposition.

###### Lemma 5.3.2.

With the above notation, @xmath is a @xmath -basis of @xmath .

###### Proof.

It suffices to show that @xmath generate @xmath as a @xmath -vector
space, where @xmath . Let @xmath be the real sub-vector space generated
by @xmath . We have to show that @xmath .

Indeed, @xmath is a complex sub-vector space of @xmath on which @xmath
vanishes identically. But this means that @xmath itself vanishes
identically on @xmath . Since @xmath is positive definite, we must have
@xmath ; for dimension reasons we then must have @xmath . ∎

So there is a unique @xmath -linear map @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .
This has in the standard bases a matrix of the form @xmath with some
@xmath . In coordinates:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition and Proposition 5.3.3.

The matrix @xmath is called the period matrix of @xmath with respect to
the given basis. It is a symmetric matrix, and its imaginary part (taken
entry-wise) is positive definite.

###### Proof.

This is a nasty matrix calculation. We follow an analogous calculation
with different conventions in [ 5 , proof of Thm. 6.2] . Consider two
different @xmath -bases of @xmath and express the form @xmath in each of
these bases.

1.  Note that @xmath establishes an isomorphism @xmath . It further maps
    @xmath bijectively to @xmath . Hence the image of @xmath under
    @xmath is an @xmath -basis of @xmath ; it is explicitly given as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In this basis, @xmath is simply given by the matrix

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Clearly also the following is an @xmath -basis of @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In this basis, @xmath has the matrix

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The base change matrix to pass from one to another is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Multiplying the matrices on the left hand side we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So comparing entries we find that both @xmath and @xmath are symmetric,
hence @xmath is symmetric. Finally @xmath describes the Hermitian form
@xmath in the complex basis @xmath and hence is positive definite, so
also @xmath is positive definite. ∎

The set of all symmetric matrices in @xmath with positive definite
imaginary part is called the Siegel upper half space and denoted by
@xmath . This naturally has a structure as a complex manifold of
dimension @xmath . Note that @xmath , the upper half plane.

###### Period Matrices of Jacobians.

Period matrices have a particularly nice description for the Jacobians
of Riemann surfaces.

###### Proposition 5.3.4.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus @xmath , let @xmath be a
subring and let @xmath be a symplectic basis of @xmath . Let @xmath be
the corresponding dual basis of @xmath , which is also symplectic. Then
the period matrix @xmath of @xmath with respect to this basis is
computed as follows: for every @xmath there exists a unique holomorphic
one-form @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We use the isomorphism @xmath and rather describe @xmath than @xmath .

So consider @xmath with the symplectic basis @xmath ; this also defines
a basis of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The projection @xmath is just the restriction to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This maps @xmath to a @xmath -basis of @xmath ; denote the dual basis of
@xmath by @xmath . It is thus uniquely characterized by the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now one of the remaining basis elements @xmath of @xmath is mapped by
@xmath to the linear form “integration over the cycle @xmath ” on @xmath
. But then it is mapped to the same element as @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the period matrix of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

### 5.4. The Action on Cohomology

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface with an abelian differential
@xmath . The affine group @xmath , consisting of (special)
orientation-preserving homeomorphisms @xmath , acts on the first
cohomology @xmath by symplectic automorphisms. Let us take a closer look
at this action.

###### The Canonical Subspace.

First we tensor with @xmath , to the effect that we can describe @xmath
as de Rham cohomology, which in turn can be identified with the space of
harmonic real-valued one-forms on @xmath . Clearly the real part and the
imaginary part of @xmath are harmonic; they are also linearly
independent over @xmath . This can be checked locally in any chart of
the translation structure, and that @xmath and @xmath on @xmath are
linearly independent is a triviality. Hence they span a two-dimensional
vector space which will be very important in what follows, so it
deserves a name of its own.

###### Definition 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface and let @xmath be an abelian
differential on @xmath . The canonical subspace @xmath is the real
sub-vector space generated by the de Rham cohomology classes of the
one-forms @xmath and @xmath .

The canonical subspace has several nice properties which are easily
checked:

###### Proposition 5.4.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above. Then the canonical subspace @xmath is a
real sub-Hodge structure of the real Hodge structure @xmath .

###### Proof.

Clearly @xmath is the complex sub-vector space of @xmath generated by
@xmath and @xmath , i.e. a holomorphic one-form and its complex
conjugate. Hence the Hodge components of elements of @xmath are again in
@xmath , and Lemma 5.1.4 can be applied. ∎

###### Proposition 5.4.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above and let @xmath with linear part @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath sends the canonical subspace @xmath to itself; the induced map
@xmath is, in the basis @xmath , given by the matrix @xmath .

###### Proof.

It suffices to check this locally in translation charts. But a simple
computation confirms that for the real linear map @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can of course be written shorter as @xmath .

But this means that the matrix of @xmath in the given basis is the
transpose of @xmath , not @xmath itself! ∎

###### Eigenvalues.

The aforementioned properties of the canonical subspace have strong
implications for the eigenvalues of elements of the Veech group:

###### Corollary 5.4.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above, and let @xmath . Then the eigenvalues of
@xmath are algebraic integers.

###### Proof.

Write @xmath for @xmath . By the above proposition we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now clearly the characteristic polyonomial of @xmath on @xmath is monic
with integer coefficients, so all the eigenvalues of @xmath are
algebraic integers. ∎

We also note a general property of eigenvalues on cohomology, which has
nothing particular to do with translation structures.

###### Proposition 5.4.5.

Let @xmath be an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism of @xmath . Let
@xmath be an eigenvalue of @xmath acting on @xmath . Then @xmath is also
an eigenvalue, with the same multiplicity.

###### Proof.

Choose a standard basis of @xmath ; then the intersection pairing on
@xmath is represented by the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath preserves the intersection pairing, it is represented by a
matrix @xmath with @xmath . This implies that @xmath is conjugate to the
transpose of @xmath , hence @xmath and @xmath have the same
characteristic polynomial. But then the characteristic polynomial of
@xmath satisfies the following equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that if @xmath is a root of multiplicity @xmath of @xmath ,
then so is @xmath . ∎

###### Trichotomy for Elements of the Veech Group.

Let us take a closer look at the eigenvalues of an element @xmath for a
translation surface @xmath , according to whether @xmath is elliptic,
parabolic or hyperbolic.

If @xmath is elliptic, it must be of finite order since the Veech group
@xmath is Fuchsian. Hence it is conjugate to a matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some positive integer @xmath . Hence the eigenvalues of @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath . Now since the characteristic
polynomial of @xmath on @xmath has integer coefficients, all Galois
conjugates of @xmath must occur in the spectrum of @xmath . We fix this:

###### Proposition 5.4.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above, and let @xmath be such that @xmath is
elliptic. Then @xmath is of finite order say @xmath , and all primitive
@xmath -th roots of unity occur as eigenvalues of @xmath on @xmath .
@xmath

Next we consider the parabolic case. If @xmath is parabolic, it has
either a double eigenvalue @xmath or a double eigenvalue @xmath . In any
case there is a unique (up to scale) eigenvector @xmath ; let @xmath be
the direction of that eigenvector. Then [ 45 , Prop. 2.4] says that
@xmath is a Jenkins-Strebel direction for @xmath , and that some
positive power of @xmath is a product of powers of Dehn twists along the
cylinders in the associated complete cylinder decomposition. Now a Dehn
twist operates on cohomology by a unipotent map; the Dehn twists about
the different cylinders commute, and hence so do their induced maps on
cohomology. A product of commuting unipotent linear maps is unipotent.
So a positive power of @xmath acting on @xmath is unipotent. Recall that
a linear endomorphism is called quasi-unipotent if some positive power
of it is unipotent or, equivalently, if all its eigenvalues are roots of
unity. ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 The equivalence of the two definitions follows from the
existence of the Jordan decomposition

###### Proposition 5.4.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above, and let @xmath be such that @xmath is
parabolic. Then the induced map @xmath is quasi-unipotent, but not of
finite order. @xmath

It remains to consider the hyperbolic case which is most interesting
from an arithmetic point of view. So let @xmath be hyperbolic; then it
has two distinct positive eigenvalues whose product is one, say @xmath
and @xmath , where @xmath . Now by Corollary 5.4.4 both @xmath and
@xmath are algebraic integers. In particular @xmath must be irrational:
if it were rational, it could only be plus or minus one (these are the
only rational integers whose inverses are also rational integers). But
then the trace of @xmath would be plus or minus two, and @xmath would
not be hyperbolic.

By what we have seen above, @xmath and @xmath are also eigenvalues of
@xmath acting on the first cohomology of @xmath . It turns out that they
appear with multiplicity one and that @xmath is the leading eigenvalue:

###### Proposition 5.4.8.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above, and let @xmath be such that @xmath is
hyperbolic. Let @xmath and @xmath be the eigenvalues of the matrix
@xmath , where @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath each occur as simple
eigenvalues of @xmath acting on @xmath , and all other eigenvalues
@xmath satisfy @xmath .

The direct sum of the eigenspaces for @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is
precisely the canonical subspace @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is [ 29 , Thm. 5.3] together Proposition 5.4.5 . ∎

## 6. Trace Fields and Primitivity

We now introduce an important invariant of translation surfaces: the
trace field of the Veech group. The trace field of a Fuchsian group
@xmath is the subfield of @xmath generated by all traces of elements of
@xmath . In general one cannot say very much about these fields. But if
@xmath is the Veech group of a closed translation surface of genus
@xmath , then the trace field of @xmath is an algebraic number field of
degree at most @xmath . The trace field then also admits a more
geometric interpretation: it is the subfield of @xmath generated by all
cross-ratios of directions of saddle connections. We quote several
theorems about the behaviour of trace fields, in order to outline their
significance in the theory of translation surfaces. For us, however, the
trace field will be important for understanding the structure of the
Jacobian of a Veech surface; this will be done in chapter 7.

Finally we compute the trace fields of the Veech groups of the Wiman
curves. It turns out that the trace field of @xmath is generated by
@xmath , where @xmath , as always. This is done by using only elementary
trigonometry.

### 6.1. Trace Fields

In this section we review some algebraic invariants of Fuchsian groups,
with particular attention towards Veech groups.

###### Quaternion Algebras.

The reference for this paragraph is [ 47 , Chapter IX] .

Let @xmath be any field of characteristic zero. In what follows,
algebras are always tacitly assumed to be associative and unital. A
central simple algebra over @xmath is a finite-dimensional @xmath
-algebra @xmath , such that the center of @xmath is precisely @xmath
(which we identify with @xmath ) and such that @xmath has no both-sided
ideals other than @xmath and @xmath .

For every @xmath the algebra @xmath of @xmath matrices is central
simple. If @xmath is algebraically closed, then every central simple
@xmath -algebra is isomorphic to some @xmath . In general if @xmath is
any extension of fields of characteristic zero and if @xmath is a
finite-dimensional @xmath -algebra, then @xmath is central simple if and
only if @xmath is central simple. Hence a finite-dimensional @xmath
-algebra @xmath is central simple if and only if there is a finite
extension @xmath such that @xmath as a @xmath -algebra. In particular
the dimension of a central simple algebra is always a square.

The classification of central simple algebras over @xmath is equivalent
to the classification of skew field extensions of @xmath :

###### Theorem 6.1.1 (Wedderburn).

Let @xmath be a central simple algebra over a field @xmath of
characteristic zero. Then there exist a finite-dimensional @xmath
-algebra @xmath which is a division algebra and has @xmath as its
center, and an integer @xmath such that @xmath as @xmath -algebras. The
algebra @xmath is unique up to isomorphism.

Vice versa, any such @xmath is a central simple @xmath -algebra. @xmath

Since the dimension of a central simple algebras is always a square, the
simplest nontrivial examples are those of dimension four; these are
called quaternion algebras . The name is derived from Hamilton’s
quaternions which form a quaternion algebra over @xmath .

From Wedderburn’s Structure Theorem we easily deduce:

###### Lemma 6.1.2.

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic zero, and let @xmath be a
quaternion algebra over @xmath . Then exactly one of the following
statements is true:

1.   As a @xmath -algebra, @xmath .

2.  @xmath is a division algebra. @xmath

Another fact about central simple algebras is worth mentioning.

###### Theorem 6.1.3 (Skolem-Noether).

Let @xmath be a central simple algebra over @xmath , and let @xmath be a
@xmath -algebra automorphism of @xmath . Then @xmath is an inner
automorphism, i.e. there exists some invertible element @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath . @xmath

###### Elementary Subgroups.

A subgroup @xmath is called elementary if there is a finite @xmath
-orbit in the closure of hyperbolic three-space @xmath , i.e. in @xmath
. For subgroups of @xmath , this can also be characterized by their
action on the hyperbolic plane @xmath (here we mean the usual action by
Möbius transformations on the upper half plane): @xmath is elementary if
and only if at least one of the following statements hold:

1.  @xmath fixes a point in @xmath ;

2.  @xmath preserves a geodesic in @xmath .

A subgroup @xmath is elementary if and only if it is solvable as an
abstract group. Every Fuchsian group of finite covolume is
non-elementary. Every non-elementary subgroup of @xmath contains an
infinite set of hyperbolic elements such that no two of them share a
fixed point in the closure of @xmath . ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 The last statement is [
3 , Thm. 5.1.3]

###### Trace Fields.

Let @xmath be a subgroup. The trace field of @xmath , denoted @xmath ,
is the subfield of @xmath generated by all traces @xmath for @xmath .

Clearly the trace field is a conjugacy invariant. When @xmath is
conjugate to a subgroup of @xmath for some field @xmath , then the trace
field will be contained in @xmath . The converse is not necessarily
true, but we can always conjugate a non-elementary subgroup into @xmath
for @xmath a finite extension of its trace field. In order to see this
we have to introduce another algebraic object associated with a Fuchsian
group. Consider the space of real @xmath -matrices @xmath as a vector
space (in fact, as an algebra) over the trace field @xmath , and
consider @xmath as a subset of @xmath . Then let @xmath be the sub-
@xmath -vector space of @xmath generated by @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.1.4.

Let @xmath be non-elementary. The space @xmath is a sub- @xmath -algebra
of @xmath . As such, it is a quaternion algebra over @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be two elements of @xmath without a common fixed
point. Then the elements @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath form a @xmath
-basis of @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is a special case of [ 27 , Cor. 3.2.3] . ∎

###### Corollary 6.1.5.

Let @xmath be a non-elementary subgroup with trace field @xmath and let
@xmath be hyperbolic. Let the eigenvalues of @xmath be @xmath and @xmath
. Then @xmath is conjugate within @xmath to a subgroup of @xmath .

The proof we give follows the argument in [ 27 , p. 115] .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be another hyperbolic element such that @xmath and @xmath
have no common fixed point. After conjugation we may assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are nonzero (else @xmath and @xmath would have a
common fixed point). Also after further conjugation with a diagonal
matrix (which does not change @xmath ) we may assume that @xmath . By
definition of the trace field, we find that @xmath and (using @xmath )
that @xmath . So @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are elements of @xmath .

From this and the second part of Theorem 6.1.4 , we see that after
conjugation we may assume that @xmath , and hence @xmath . ∎

Note that by the Cayley-Hamilton theorem, @xmath satisfies a quadratic
equation over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the degree of the extension @xmath is at most two.

###### Proposition 6.1.6.

Let @xmath be non-elementary and assume that it contains a parabolic
element. Let @xmath . Then the quaternion algebra @xmath is isomorphic
to @xmath as a @xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be parabolic, then @xmath is a nonzero, non-invertible
element of @xmath . Apply Lemma 6.1.2 . ∎

###### Corollary 6.1.7.

Let @xmath be a non-elementary subgroup containing a parabolic element.
Then @xmath is conjugate within @xmath to a subgroup of @xmath , where
@xmath .

###### Proof.

By the previous proposition we know that @xmath is abstractly isomorphic
to @xmath . By tensoring with @xmath we obtain an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by the Skolem-Noether theorem, every automorphism of a matrix
algebra is inner. In other words we get a matrix @xmath with @xmath .
Possibly replacing @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can assume that @xmath . Then we can replace @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and finally assume that @xmath .

But then also @xmath , and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Trace Fields of Veech Groups.

After these general considerations we now concentrate on Veech groups of
translation surfaces. Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface and let
@xmath be an abelian differential on @xmath . We have already seen that
every eigenvalue of every element in the Veech group @xmath , and hence
also its trace, is an algebraic integer. Therefore the trace field of
@xmath is an algebraic extension of @xmath . But we can say more:

###### Proposition 6.1.8 (McMullen).

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus @xmath and let @xmath be
an abelian differential on @xmath . Then the trace field @xmath is a
finite extension of @xmath , of degree at most @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the sub- @xmath -vector space of @xmath generated by the
traces of @xmath . We claim that @xmath is the trace field.

To start with, @xmath is a @xmath -algebra because of the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also it is a finite-dimensional @xmath -vector space: it is contained in
the image of the @xmath -linear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a finite field extension of @xmath , and equal to the
trace field of @xmath . It remains to show the degree bound. By the
theorem of the primitive element there is some @xmath with @xmath . We
can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Define then an endomorphism @xmath of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now in @xmath the following equation holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath acts as @xmath times the identity on @xmath . Hence @xmath
is an eigenvalue of @xmath with multiplicity @xmath . Thus any Galois
conjugate of @xmath is also an eigenvalue with multiplicity @xmath .
Since the dimension of @xmath is @xmath , this means that @xmath can
have at most @xmath Galois conjugates, i.e. it can have at most degree
@xmath over @xmath . ∎

This result is special for Veech groups. By using Fricke coordinates on
Teichmüller space, we see that a “generic” Fuchsian group of finite
covolume has transcendental traces. The situation changes in dimension
three, i.e. for Kleinian groups acting on hyperbolic three-space: by
Mostow Rigidity, every finite covolume Kleinian group has an algebraic
number field as trace field, see [ 27 , Thm. 3.1.2] .

###### The Field of Cross-Ratios.

Gutkin and Judge in [ 14 ] give an alternative description of the trace
field of a Veech group, closer to the geometry of translation surfaces.
Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface with an abelian differential
@xmath , and consider the set of all slopes of saddle connections @xmath
. Recall that for four disctinct points @xmath , where @xmath is any
field, there exists a unique Möbius transformation @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The element @xmath , where we identify the latter
with @xmath , is called the cross-ratio of the four points and denoted
by @xmath . Now let @xmath be the subfield of @xmath generated by all
cross-ratios of families of four distinct elements in @xmath . Then
Theorem 7.1 in op.cit. reads:

###### Theorem 6.1.9 (Gutkin, Judge).

The trace field of @xmath is contained in @xmath . If @xmath is a Veech
surface, the two fields are equal.

The trace field of a lattice Veech group can be explicitly computed as
soon as one knows a single hyperbolic element:

###### Proposition 6.1.10.

Let @xmath be a Veech surface and let @xmath be a hyperbolic element of
@xmath . Then the trace field of @xmath is generated by @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from the Theorem of Gutkin and Judge just quoted together
with Theorem 28 in the appendix of [ 22 ] . ∎

###### Corollary 6.1.11.

Assume that @xmath is a Veech surface, and let @xmath be a finite index
subgroup of @xmath . Then the trace fields of @xmath and of @xmath are
the same. @xmath

In general the trace field of a finite covolume Fuchsian group is not
stable under passing to a finite index subgroup. ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Here is a
counterexample, taken from [ 27 , Exercise 3.3.6] . Consider the
Fuchsian triangle group @xmath and its subgroup @xmath . This is a
finite index subgroup by op.cit., Lemma 3.3.3. By formula (3.25) in
op.cit. we see that

@xmath

By the remark right before formula (3.28) in op.cit., we see that

@xmath

Also worthwile to mention is the following:

###### Proposition 6.1.12.

Let @xmath be a Veech surface. Then the Veech group @xmath is conjugate
to a subgroup of @xmath , where @xmath is the trace field of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is a non-cocompact lattice, it contains a parabolic
element. Now apply Corollary 6.1.7 . ∎

### 6.2. Primitive and Imprimitive Abelian Differentials

Given a translation surface @xmath , one can construct translation
surfaces in higher genera which do not differ very much in their
behaviour under the @xmath -operation from @xmath . We start with a
covering which is ramified over periodic points:

###### Definition 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a compact Riemann surface and let @xmath be an abelian
differential on @xmath . A point @xmath is called periodic if its orbit
under @xmath is finite.

Since every affine map permutes the zeros of @xmath and there are only
finitely many zeros, we see that every zero of @xmath is periodic in
this sense.

For a less trivial example, consider the Wiman curve @xmath with the
abelian differential @xmath . Recall that it can be interpreted as a
regular @xmath -gon with opposite sides identified. By our determination
of the Veech group, we find that the points above @xmath and the @xmath
-th roots of unity, i.e. the fixed points of the hyperelliptic
involution, are periodic. The same holds for @xmath , i.e. two regular
@xmath -gons with respective sides identified.

###### Definition 6.2.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be compact Riemann surfaces with abelian
differentials. A finite holomorphic map @xmath is called a translation
cover if it satisfies the following conditions:

1.  @xmath ,

2.   (only for @xmath ) the ramification locus of @xmath in @xmath
    consists entirely of periodic points,

3.   (only for @xmath ) after fixing a suitable base point in the
    elliptic curve @xmath , the ramification locus of @xmath only
    consists of torsion points. ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 equivalently: for all @xmath ,
    the difference @xmath in the Jacobian of @xmath is torsion

Also here the Wiman curves provide a nice series of examples. Let as
always @xmath , and let @xmath be a divisor of @xmath with @xmath . Then
the quotient @xmath is also odd, say equal to @xmath for some
nonnegative integer @xmath . Consider then the following map between
Wiman curves:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is easily checked to be well-defined. Pulling back our standard
differentials, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Veech groups, and hence also mirror Veech groups, behave nicely under
translation covers:

###### Theorem 6.2.3 (Gutkin, Judge).

Let @xmath be a translation cover. Then @xmath and @xmath are
commensurable.

###### Proof.

This is [ 14 , Thm. 4.9] . ∎

Hence if a translation surface is a translation cover of another
translation surface, then one of them is Veech if and only if the other
is. In particular we see:

###### Corollary 6.2.4.

Let @xmath , let @xmath be a divisor of @xmath . Write @xmath . Then
@xmath and @xmath are Veech surfaces.

We shall see later that this gives a complete list of the pairs @xmath
such that @xmath is a Veech surface.

###### Definition 6.2.5.

A translation surface @xmath is called geometrically primitive if at
least one of the following statements holds:

1.   the genus of @xmath is one;

2.   every translation cover @xmath is already an isomorphism
    (equivalently ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 by the Riemann-Hurwitz formula : there does
    not exists a translation cover @xmath with @xmath ).

Every Veech surface covers a unique geometrically primitive translation
surface, in the following sense:

###### Proposition 6.2.6 (McMullen).

Let @xmath be a Veech surface. Then there exist a geometrically
primitive translation surface @xmath and a translation cover @xmath .
For every such @xmath , one has @xmath .

If @xmath , these data are unique up to isomorphism. If @xmath and in
addition one demands that @xmath induces a surjection on fundamental
groups, they are also unique.

###### Proof.

This is a synthesis of Thm. 2.1, Cor. 2.2 and Cor. 2.3 from [ 30 ] . ∎

The trace field of the Veech group, as discussed in the previous
section, provides a powerful tool for deciding whether a given Veech
surface is geometrically primitive. This is based in the following
simple observation:

###### Corollary 6.2.7.

Let @xmath be a translation cover of Veech surfaces. Then @xmath and
@xmath have the same trace field.

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem 6.2.3 and Corollary 6.1.11 . ∎

Recall that the trace field of a Veech group is always an algebraic
number field, of degree at most the genus of the surface. Now if @xmath
is a Veech surface and @xmath is as in Proposition 6.2.6 , then the
degree of the trace field of @xmath is at most the genus of @xmath . So
we get the following important chain of inequalities (always provided
that @xmath is a Veech surface):

  ------ -- -------- --
  (28)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is geometrically primitive if and only if in the last
step equality holds. So the following definition is sensible:

###### Definition 6.2.8.

A translation surface @xmath is called algebraically primitive if the
degree of the trace field of @xmath is equal to the genus of @xmath .

For Veech surfaces, algebraic primitivity implies geometric primitivity
by ( 28 ); the converse is wrong. For a counterexample see [ 36 ,
section 2, example iii] .

Consider again the Wiman curves @xmath , i.e. consider two regular
@xmath -gons with respective sides identified, where @xmath is odd. The
genus of @xmath is @xmath , and the degree of the trace field is @xmath
, where @xmath is Euler’s totient function. These two integers are equal
if and only if @xmath is prime. Hence @xmath is algebraically primitive
if and only if @xmath is prime.

We finally note that the case where equality holds in the first step of
( 28 ) is particularly interesting: then it also holds in the second
step.

###### Theorem 6.2.9.

Let @xmath be a Veech surface. Then the following are equivalent:

1.   the trace field of @xmath is @xmath ;

2.   the cross-ratio field @xmath as discussed before Theorem 6.1.9 is
    @xmath ;

3.   the Veech group @xmath is commensurable to @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is in the @xmath -orbit of an origami;

5.  @xmath can be tiled by translations of one and the same Euclidean
    parallelogram;

6.   the genus of @xmath as in Prop. 6.2.6 is one.

###### Proof.

The equivalence of (i) and (ii) is a special case of Theorem 6.1.9 . The
equivalence of (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) is [ 14 , Theorem 5.5] .
Finally the equivalence of (v) and (vi) is obvious. ∎

### 6.3. The Trace Fields of the Wiman Curves

Now we compute the trace fields of our examples. This can be done by
using their explicit description as translation surfaces. The occurring
fields will be the maximal real subfields of cyclotomic fields, hence we
first summarize some elementary properties of these.

###### Reminder on Cyclotomic Fields.

Denote by @xmath a primitive @xmath -th root of unity; we identify
@xmath with the complex number @xmath . This is an algebraic integer of
degree @xmath (Euler’s totient function); its minimal polynomial over
@xmath is the @xmath -th cyclotomic polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The number field generated by @xmath is called the @xmath -th cyclotomic
field. Its embeddings into @xmath are the

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs through the integers in @xmath that are coprime to
@xmath . In particular we see that the extension @xmath is Galois, and
that for @xmath the field @xmath is totally imaginary.

Assume from now on @xmath , and assume that @xmath is odd, @xmath . Then
@xmath contains the subfield @xmath generated by @xmath ; we claim that
the former is a quadratic field extension of the latter. Namely any
field embedding @xmath extends to a field embedding @xmath , and we have
just listed the latter. So every field embedding @xmath is given by
sending @xmath to a complex number of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But this remains the same number if @xmath is replaced by @xmath , so we
only have need to consider those @xmath with @xmath , coprime to @xmath
. These do give pairwise different embeddings.

For later reference let us write down these embeddings explicitly. For
every @xmath with @xmath set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows, among other things, that @xmath is an algebraic integer of
degree @xmath and that its Galois conjugates are the @xmath . Thus we
may identify @xmath with the number field generated by @xmath . Also
@xmath is totally real, @xmath , and indeed the extension @xmath is
quadratic.

Note that this implies the following identities of number fields: for a
rational number @xmath in lowest terms, say with @xmath , the field
generated by @xmath is equal to @xmath , and the field generated by
@xmath is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.3.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be positive integers, with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Recall de Moivre’s formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(this is a finite sum since all terms with @xmath are zero). This
directly gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Plugging in @xmath we obtain the desired statement. ∎

###### Lemma 6.3.2.

Let @xmath be an integer, and let @xmath be an @xmath -linear map with
the property @xmath . Then the trace of @xmath is contained in the
number field @xmath .

###### Proof.

Choosing the @xmath -basis @xmath of @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath is an element of @xmath , hence so is @xmath and hence also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is evidently real, it must therefore be an element of
@xmath . So it remains to show that @xmath is an element of @xmath .

We use that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(which is nonzero!) and that @xmath is @xmath -linear to conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption, @xmath is an element of @xmath and can therefore be
written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 6.3.1 this is an element of @xmath . ∎

The connection to Wiman curves is given by the following observation:

###### Lemma 6.3.3.

Let @xmath be odd, and let @xmath . Then for a suitable complex number
@xmath , the sub- @xmath -vector space @xmath of @xmath generated by all
holonomy vectors of saddle connections of @xmath is equal to the field
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We choose @xmath such that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . Set @xmath .
The vertices of all triangles used in the construction of the surface
are in @xmath ; the translations which define the necessary
identifications of the sides are also in @xmath . Hence all holonomy
vectors of saddle connections are elements of @xmath , and we have
@xmath .

For the other inclusion we note that for each @xmath there is a saddle
connection with holonomy vector @xmath . Thus @xmath is contained in

  ------ -- -------- --
  (29)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

and the lemma is shown. ∎

###### Proposition 6.3.4.

Let @xmath be odd, let @xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the trace field of the Veech group @xmath is equal to @xmath .

###### Proof.

First note that the Veech group does not change if @xmath is replaced by
a constant multiple, hence we may replace @xmath by @xmath such that the
previous lemma holds, i.e. such that the translation surface in question
is given by glueing triangles as described above. Then there is an
obvious element in @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath ; this element
has derivative equal to the rotation by @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to show the converse inclusion.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath , considered as an @xmath -linear map @xmath ,
sends holonomy vectors to holonomy vectors. By Lemma 6.3.3 this implies
that @xmath . Note that @xmath . Then apply Lemma 6.3.2 to conclude that
the trace of @xmath is contained in @xmath . Since this holds for every
@xmath in the Veech group, we have the desired inclusion of fields. ∎

We could also have determined the trace fields of @xmath and @xmath with
the help of Proposition 6.1.10 . But note that the method given here,
apart from being elementary, gives the trace field of all Wiman curves,
regardless of whether or not they are Veech surfaces (it will turn out
below that not all of them are).

## 7. Jacobians: Global Theory

We now go on to globalize the considerations of chapter 4, i.e. we study
how Jacobians of translation surfaces behave under the @xmath
-operation. Since we view Jacobians as a sort of “enriched cohomology”,
we first look at the underlying topological phenomena, i.e. the singular
cohomology. Given a translation surface @xmath , we get a family of
Riemann surfaces @xmath , where @xmath for a suitable finite index
subgroup @xmath of the mirror Veech group of @xmath . Then the first
cohomology groups of the fibres form a local system on @xmath . Since
vector spaces behave considerably nicer than abelian groups, we take
rational instead of integral cohomology (on the level of Jacobians, this
means working with abelian varieties up to isogeny). So we have a local
system of @xmath -vector spaces @xmath on @xmath . On the other hand,
the canonical subspaces in real cohomology of each fibre form a local
subsystem of @xmath . To reconcile these two points of view, we have to
carefully examine extensions of the base field and direct sum
decompositions for local systems. A crucial rôle is played by the notion
of moduli fields of local systems. In a sense to be made precise, the
moduli field of a local system is the smallest field over which it can
be defined. For simple subsystems of systems which are defined over
@xmath , such as the system of cohomology groups introduced above, the
moduli field is (under some mild condition) always a number field. This
implies that for large enough Veech groups (i.e., such that @xmath is
nonelementary) the canonical subsystem can already be defined over its
moduli field. Moreover, this moduli field agrees with the trace field of
the Veech group. Also we get Galois conjugates of the canonical
subvariation, which is not evident at all from its definition.

Then we take the additional structures on the cohomology spaces, i.e.
their Hodge decompositions, into account. This is equivalent to
considering the Jacobians as abelian varieties (up to isogeny) and not
merely tori. Using deep results of Deligne and Schmid, we find that in
the case where the Veech group is a lattice, the canonical subsystem and
its Galois conjugates are actually sub-variations of Hodge structure.

### 7.1. Local Systems

The material in this section is classical and well-known, but different
authors use different conventions, so we need to make some things quite
explicit.

###### Local Systems and Monodromy Representations.

Let @xmath be a topological space which is path-connected, locally
path-connected and locally simply connected, and let @xmath be some
fixed point. By a local system of sets, groups, vector spaces, whatever
…, we mean a sheaf of sets, groups, vector spaces, whatever …, which is
locally isomorphic to a constant sheaf. To give such an object is
equivalent to giving a set, group, vector space, whatever … with an
action of the fundamental group.

To state this well-known principle in a form suitable for explicit
computations, introduce the following convention for the fundamental
group: @xmath consists of the homotopy classes of loops @xmath with
@xmath , this condition being preserved through the homotopies. If
homotopy classes @xmath are represented by loops @xmath , then @xmath is
the homotopy class of the loop @xmath which is defined as first @xmath ,
then @xmath . ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 To be very explicit: @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath This is opposite to the convention used by most topologists,
but current in algebraic geometry.

Now let @xmath be a local system on @xmath , and let @xmath be
represented by @xmath . The pullback @xmath is a constant sheaf on
@xmath , so we get an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One checks that this only depends on the homotopy class @xmath of @xmath
, and that @xmath . Hence we get a left action of @xmath on @xmath ,
called the monodromy representation .

This construction gives an equivalence of categories: for instance when
talking about local systems of sets, the monodromy representation gives
a functor from local systems of sets on @xmath to sets with a left
@xmath -action. When talking about local systems of @xmath -vector
spaces, it gives a functor from local systems of @xmath -vector spaces
on @xmath to @xmath -vector spaces with a linear left @xmath -action,
and so on. All these functors are equivalences of categories. ³⁰ ³⁰ 30
The construction works for all categories of the kind “sets with some
extra structure” where the morphisms are maps which respect this extra
structure in some way. It is possible to make this mathematically sound
using machinery from category theory, but this leads to far apart. We
shall only need it for groups and vector spaces

###### Fundamental Groups and Deck Transformations.

The local systems that we shall be interested in are as follows: let
@xmath be a Riemann surface and let @xmath be a family of Riemann
surfaces of genus @xmath . We consider the cohomologies of the fibres,
i.e. the local systems @xmath on @xmath . The only nontrivial case here
is @xmath ; any fibre of @xmath is a free abelian group of rank @xmath .
Hence we get some representation of the fundamental group of @xmath on a
free abelian group; this representation will be of great importance
later on. As argued in section 1.3, this setup will be particularly
interesting in the case where @xmath is hyperbolic, hence where we can
write @xmath for some torsion-free Fuchsian group @xmath . It is common
wisdom, but again with messy details, that we can identify the
fundamental group of @xmath with @xmath . Here come the messy details.

We need to fix base points; for this we take @xmath and its image @xmath
. Then @xmath is the universal covering space of @xmath . Let @xmath be
represented by a path @xmath , then there exists a unique continuous
lift @xmath with @xmath . Now there is a unique Deck transformation
@xmath with @xmath ; but the Deck group of the covering @xmath is
precisely @xmath . So we have @xmath . This depends only on @xmath , so
we get a well-defined map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is seen to be an isomorphism of groups. ³¹ ³¹ 31 The only thing to
check is that it is a group homomorphism. Let @xmath be represented by
paths @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath is the unique
continuous lift of @xmath satisfying @xmath . Since Deck transformations
are determined by their action on a single point, we see that @xmath .
Now one checks that @xmath , hence by the same argument @xmath , which
implies @xmath Hence composing with the inverse of that isomorphism, we
can view the monodromy representation as a representation of the
Fuchsian group @xmath .

###### Elementary Constructions.

Let @xmath be a nice ³² ³² 32 meaning path-connected, locally
path-connected and locally simply connected topological space with fixed
base point @xmath ; set @xmath . We regard this as an abstract group
@xmath which need not be finite, but we assume it to be finitely
generated. Take a field @xmath of characteristic zero, then by the above
remarks, local systems of @xmath -vector spaces on @xmath can be
identified with finite-dimensional @xmath -vector spaces @xmath on which
@xmath operates linearly from the left. We call such spaces @xmath
-modules . Note that if @xmath is the group algebra, a @xmath -module is
the same as a @xmath -module whose underlying @xmath -vector space is
finite dimensional.

We begin with some formalities on @xmath -modules and their
interpretation in terms of local systems. So let @xmath be a nice
topological space with base point @xmath and fundamental group @xmath ;
we denote @xmath -modules by italic letters @xmath and the corresponding
local systems of @xmath -vector spaces on @xmath by calligraphic letters
@xmath .

-    Direct sums: These are defined in the obvious way, both on the
    representation side and on the local systems side.

-    Tensor products: The tensor product of @xmath and @xmath is the
    vector space @xmath together with the tensor product of the given
    actions, i.e. @xmath ; the tensor product of @xmath and @xmath is
    the locally constant sheaf @xmath . These constructions correspond
    to each other under the above equivalence of categories.

-    Duals: The dual of @xmath is the vector space @xmath together with
    the action @xmath , where @xmath is a linear form on @xmath . This
    corresponds to the local system @xmath which is the sheaf associated
    with the presheaf

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    Fixed part / global sections: The fixed point set @xmath of the
    given action of @xmath is the largest submodule on which @xmath acts
    trivially; the space @xmath of global sections of @xmath is mapped
    isomorphically to @xmath by the map @xmath (“fibre at @xmath ”).

-    Internal @xmath objects: We set @xmath and, mutatis mutandis, on
    local systems. There is a more concrete description of this: @xmath
    is the vector space @xmath with the @xmath -operation @xmath for
    @xmath . This corresponds to the local system @xmath which is the
    sheaf associated with the presheaf

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It is readily checked that these really are the internal @xmath
    -objects for the given tensor structure on the category of @xmath
    -modules or local systems.

-    Space of homomorphisms: The space @xmath of @xmath -linear and
    @xmath -equivariant homomorphisms is equal to the fixed part @xmath
    of the internal @xmath defined above. In terms of local systems this
    means that @xmath .

###### Semisimplicity.

Recall that if @xmath is a finite group, the category of @xmath -modules
is semisimple. For infinite @xmath this need no longer be the case, as
the example @xmath shows.

Every @xmath -module has a largest semisimple submodule; this is the sum
of all simple submodules, in particular (as soon as the module itself is
not zero) it is not reduced to zero.

If @xmath is a semisimple @xmath -module and @xmath is a simple @xmath
-module, denote by @xmath the @xmath -isotypical component , i.e. the
sum of all submodules isomorphic to @xmath . This is then isomorphic to
@xmath for a unique positive integer @xmath , called the multiplicity of
@xmath in @xmath . For two non-isomorphic simple modules @xmath and
@xmath the isotypical components @xmath and @xmath have zero
intersection, and for dimension reasons @xmath is nonzero only for
finitely many isomorphism classes of simple modules @xmath . Let these
be @xmath , so that we get a decomposition

  ------ -- -------- --
  (30)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

and (non-canonical) isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us now examine the structure of endomorphism algebras of semisimple
modules. To begin with, if @xmath be a simple @xmath -module, then its
endomorphism algebra @xmath is a finite-dimensional skew field over
@xmath (this is Schur’s lemma). For @xmath algebraically closed it must
therefore be equal to @xmath . Then for a positive integer @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally for a general semisimple @xmath -module @xmath , every
endomorphism respects the decomposition ( 30 ), whence an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath .

From this we obtain an almost trivial characterization of simple modules
over algebraically closed fields:

###### Proposition 7.1.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraically closed field and let @xmath be a
semisimple @xmath -module. Then @xmath is simple if and only if @xmath .
@xmath

###### Base Change.

We now study how properties of @xmath -modules behave under base change.

###### Proposition 7.1.2.

Let @xmath be a field extension, and let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath
-modules with corresponding local systems @xmath and @xmath . Denote a
base extension @xmath by a subscript “ @xmath ”.

1.   The formation of direct sums, tensor products, duals and inner
    @xmath objects is compatible with base extension, in the sense that
    there are natural identifications @xmath etc.

2.   Taking fixed parts resp. global sections is also compatible with
    base extension, in the sense that the natural maps

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    are isomorphisms.

3.   Finally also spaces of homomorphisms are compatible with base
    extension, meaning that the natural maps

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    are isomorphisms.

###### Proof.

In (i), the statement for direct sums, tensor products and duals is
clear; from this the statement for iternal @xmath objects follows using
@xmath .

In (ii) it suffices to prove the statement about representations (the
one about local systems is equivalent). But this is clear if one uses a
@xmath -basis @xmath of @xmath and uses that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath -modules .

Now (iii) follows from (ii) and (i) using that @xmath ; again the
statement about local systems is equivalent. ∎

###### Galois Conjugation of Local Systems.

In this paragraph let @xmath be a field extension in characteristic
zero, and set @xmath . There are two notions of Galois conjugations of
@xmath -local systems or, equivalently, of @xmath -modules: an
“abstract” construction and a construction for submodules of a module
which is defined over @xmath . We begin with the “abstract” definition:

###### Definition 7.1.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -vector space and let @xmath . Then by @xmath we
denote the @xmath -vector space whose underlying abelian group is the
same as that of @xmath , but with the “new” scalar multiplication @xmath
given as @xmath (where the dot denotes the multiplication in @xmath ).

It is easily checked that this indeed defines a vector space structure
on @xmath , which is different from the old one as soon as @xmath is not
the identity. More interesting is to observe what happens to linear
maps. Namely if @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -vector spaces and @xmath
is a @xmath -linear map, then @xmath remains @xmath -linear if
interpreted as a map from @xmath to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us now be a bit more concrete and assume that @xmath and @xmath are
finite-dimensional, of dimensions @xmath and @xmath , say. Introduce
bases @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Then we can write @xmath
as a matrix, with entries @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But now upon interpreting @xmath as a @xmath -linear map between @xmath
and @xmath , its matrix in the given bases becomes @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by definition of @xmath . This is the reason for defining @xmath the way
we did.

So conjugation by an element of @xmath can change the isomorphism type
of @xmath . For example in the case @xmath , the eigenvalues of @xmath
are the images under @xmath of the eigenvalues of @xmath . Hence the
following definition is sensible:

###### Definition 7.1.4.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath . Then the conjugate
@xmath -module @xmath is the @xmath -vector space @xmath as defined
above, together with the given action of @xmath (which is then again
@xmath -linear).

This may of course be restated in terms of local systems: if @xmath
corresponds to the local system @xmath of @xmath -vector spaces, the
local system @xmath corresponding to @xmath is obtained by applying the
“conjugation of vector spaces” construction fiberwise.

If we choose a basis of @xmath as a @xmath -vector space, we can view
the @xmath -module structure on @xmath as a group homomorphism @xmath ;
then the homomorphism @xmath belonging in the same way to @xmath is
described as follows: @xmath , with @xmath being applied to each entry
of the matrix @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.1.5.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath .

1.   Let @xmath be a sub- @xmath -vector space. Then @xmath is a sub-
    @xmath -module if and only if @xmath is a sub- @xmath -module of
    @xmath . The assignment @xmath sets up a bijection between the
    submodules of @xmath and the submodules of @xmath .

2.  @xmath is simple if and only if @xmath is simple.

3.  @xmath is semisimple if and only if @xmath is semisimple.

###### Proof.

(i) is clear, and (ii) and (iii) evidently follow from (i). ∎

Hence @xmath permutes the isomorphism classes of simple @xmath -modules.
This can be made more precise for simple summands occuring in a module
defined over @xmath :

###### Proposition 7.1.6.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and set @xmath . Let @xmath be a simple
@xmath -module and let @xmath . Then the multiplicity of @xmath in
@xmath is the same as that of @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proof.

How can we express the multiplicity of a simple module in a module in an
invariant way? First look at @xmath : this is a finite skew field
extension of @xmath , say of @xmath -dimension @xmath . Then the
multiplicity of @xmath in @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What happens if @xmath is replaced by @xmath ? The denominator does not
change, since @xmath on the nose , and the numerator also remains
untouched: since @xmath is defined over @xmath , we have @xmath and
hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence also the multiplicity stays the same. ∎

Now we introduce the second notion of Galois conjugation. Namely let
@xmath be a @xmath -module, and let @xmath be a sub- @xmath -module of
@xmath . Then we can consider the sub- @xmath -module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we let @xmath act on the second factor of @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.1.7.

In this situation, the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines an isomorphism of @xmath -modules @xmath .

###### Proof.

Clearly @xmath is additive, and it intertwines the @xmath -operation
because that is defined over @xmath , so it only remains to be shown
that it is a @xmath -linear map from @xmath to @xmath . Denoting the
scalar multiplication on @xmath by a dot and the one on @xmath by @xmath
, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this is again a justification for defining @xmath the way we
did. ∎

###### Being Defined over a Subfield.

We extend the notion of Galois extensions to transcendental extensions,
in the following sense:

###### Definition 7.1.8.

A field extension @xmath is called Galois if the fixed field of @xmath
acting on @xmath is equal to @xmath .

For algebraic extensions this agrees with the usual definition of Galois
extensions. As to the transcendental case, note that every extension
@xmath in characteristic zero with @xmath algebraically closed is
Galois.

For a Galois extension of fields @xmath one often constructs algebraic
objects which are “defined over @xmath ” and makes them descend to
“objects over @xmath ” by showing that they are in a suitable sense
invariant under @xmath . We now make this general principle precise for
local systems of vector spaces or, equivalently, @xmath -modules.

###### Lemma 7.1.9.

Let @xmath be a Galois field extension in the sense of Definition 7.1.8
. Write @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional @xmath -vector space
and let @xmath be a sub- @xmath -vector space of @xmath such that @xmath
(as sets) for all @xmath . Then @xmath “is defined over @xmath ”, i.e.
there is a unique sub- @xmath -vector space @xmath with @xmath .
Furthermore we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

The hypotheses imply that @xmath . It is clear that if @xmath exists, it
has to be equal to @xmath , so we denote the latter by @xmath and show
that this does the job. Write @xmath . Clearly @xmath , so we have to
show the converse inclusion. Assume that it does not hold.

Now @xmath is a sub- @xmath -vector space of @xmath , so we can choose a
basis @xmath of @xmath and complete it to a basis @xmath of @xmath . Now
by assumption @xmath is nonempty, and every element of this set can be
uniquely written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choose then a @xmath for which the number of nonzero coefficients @xmath
in this representation becomes minimal. Then @xmath has at most as many
nonzero coefficients, i.e. we can assume that @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption at least one of @xmath is nonzero (say @xmath ), so we may
as well multiply the whole expression by @xmath and thereby assume that
@xmath . Then for any element @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is by construction either zero or still an element of @xmath , but with
less nonzero coefficients than @xmath , so by the properties of @xmath
the second possibility is ruled out and @xmath must be zero. But this
holds for any @xmath , so @xmath , contradiction. ∎

###### Corollary 7.1.10.

Let @xmath be a Galois field extension, with @xmath perfect. Let @xmath
be a @xmath -module and let @xmath be a sub- @xmath -module of @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath . Then there exists a unique sub- @xmath
-module @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 7.1.9 , @xmath is a sub- @xmath -vector space of @xmath such
that @xmath , and since the operation of @xmath is defined over @xmath ,
this construction obviously respects the @xmath -module structures. ∎

###### Semisimplicity and Base Change.

Now comes the central statement of this section: semisimplicity is
stable under base change, in both directions.

###### Proposition 7.1.11.

Let @xmath be a field extension in characteristic zero, and let @xmath
be a @xmath -module. Then @xmath is a semisimple @xmath -module if and
only if @xmath is a semisimple @xmath -module.

###### Proof.

This is a special case of [ 16 , Chap. V, Prop. 1.2] . ∎

###### Simplicity and Base Change.

What about simple modules? Clearly if @xmath is simple then @xmath is
simple, but the converse does not necessarily hold — we will see
examples below. It does hold if both fields are algebraically closed. To
see this, we need some elementary remarks concerning the structure of
semisimple modules. Given the nice behaviour of spaces of homomorphisms
(and hence of endomorphism rings), we get from this:

###### Corollary 7.1.12.

Let @xmath be an extension of algebraically closed fields and let @xmath
be a semisimple @xmath -module. Then @xmath is a simple @xmath -module
if and only if @xmath is a simple @xmath -module.

###### Proof.

Algebraically closed fields are perfect, so if @xmath is semisimple then
also @xmath is semisimple by Proposition 7.1.11 . Now Proposition 7.1.2
(iii) yields that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath -vector spaces, so using Proposition 7.1.1 we see that @xmath
is simple if and only if @xmath is simple. ∎

###### Corollary 7.1.13.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath be the largest semisimple
sub- @xmath -module, i.e. the sum of all simple sub- @xmath -modules.
Then @xmath is also the largest semisimple sub- @xmath -module of @xmath
.

###### Proof.

By Proposition 7.1.11 , @xmath is semisimple, so it is obviously
contained in the largest semisimple submodule. For the converse
implication, let @xmath be a semisimple sub- @xmath -module. Then the
sub- @xmath -module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is stabilized by @xmath and semi-simple (as a sum of simple @xmath
-modules, so it is of the form @xmath for some semisimple sub- @xmath
-representation @xmath of @xmath which is therefore contained in @xmath
. Hence @xmath . ∎

### 7.2. Local Systems of @xmath-Vector Spaces

Let us apply the considerations in the previous section to the case
@xmath . So let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath be its maximal
semisimple submodule. Then @xmath is also the largest semisimple
submodule of @xmath . We obtain a decomposition into isotypical
components over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath are pairwise non-isomorphic simple @xmath -modules, and
@xmath . Now the @xmath are also simple @xmath -modules, and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the isotypcial decomposition of @xmath . In other words, all simple
submodules which occur in @xmath are already defined over @xmath . In
fact they can be defined over a number field. Before showing this we
introduce some reminders about number fields.

###### Galois Theory of Number Fields.

We are going to study how @xmath -modules behave under base extension.
For this purpose we have to fix some notations concerning field
extensions.

By @xmath we always mean the algebraic closure of @xmath in @xmath (not
some abstract algebraic closure obtained by the axiom of choice), i.e.
the field of all algebraic numbers in @xmath . A number field is a
finite field extension of @xmath , not necessarily contained in @xmath .
The degree of a number field @xmath is the degree of the field extension
@xmath . If @xmath is a number field of degree @xmath , it has precisely
@xmath distinct embeddings

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Often we will encounter the situation where @xmath is given as some
subfield of @xmath . In this case there is a “preferred embedding”,
namely the identical embedding; we then enumerate the embeddings in such
a way that this is @xmath .

###### Definition 7.2.1.

Let @xmath be a number field. By its Galois closure we mean the subfield
@xmath of @xmath generated by the images of all embeddings @xmath .

This is again a number field, and equal to the Galois closure of each
@xmath in @xmath in the usual sense.

By the absolute Galois group of a number field @xmath which is given as
a subfield of @xmath we mean the group @xmath . This is, with the Krull
topology, a profinite group. It is furthermore an open subgroup of
@xmath , and this assignment gives a bijection between finite
subextensions of @xmath and open subgroups of @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.2.2.

Let @xmath be a number field which is contained in @xmath . Then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a bijection between the quotient @xmath and the set of
embeddings @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Then their restriction to @xmath is the same if and only if
the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is the identity, hence if and only
if @xmath and @xmath are in the same left coset modulo @xmath . Hence
the map is injective. It is also clearly surjective: any embedding
@xmath can, by virtue of Zorn’s lemma, be extended to some automorphism
of @xmath . ∎

###### The Field of Moduli of a Simple Local System.

Let @xmath be a simple @xmath -module, and set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.2.3.

Assume that @xmath is finitely generated. Then the subgroup @xmath is
open.

###### Proof.

A subgroup of @xmath is open if and only if it contains @xmath for some
finite subextension @xmath of @xmath . Now let @xmath be generated by
@xmath , and let @xmath correspond to a representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the number field generated by the entries of the matrices
@xmath . Then the image of @xmath is contained in @xmath , which means
that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath for some @xmath -module @xmath . But
then @xmath . ∎

###### Definition 7.2.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above. The field of moduli of @xmath is the
number field @xmath .

Note that the field of moduli really is a number field by Lemma 7.2.3 .

###### Proposition 7.2.5.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath be a simple @xmath -module
which occurs with multiplicity one in @xmath . Then @xmath is defined
over @xmath , i.e. there is a unique simple sub- @xmath -module @xmath
of @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any @xmath , the submodule @xmath of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath
and hence, because of multiplicity one, must be actually equal to @xmath
. So @xmath is invariant under @xmath , and using Corollary 7.1.10 we
see that it is defined over @xmath . ∎

These considerations can be carried out in a very similar way when
@xmath is replaced by @xmath . Every field automorphism of @xmath
restricts to an automorphism of @xmath , hence we have a well-defined
group homomorphism @xmath . It is surjective by an application of Zorn’s
lemma. For a simple @xmath -module @xmath we can define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 7.2.6.

Let @xmath be a simple @xmath -module. Then its field of moduli @xmath
is the fixed field @xmath .

In general we cannot say much about this field. But when @xmath is
defined over @xmath , say @xmath for some simple @xmath -module @xmath ,
then @xmath is the preimage of @xmath under the restriction homomorphism
@xmath . In particular the field of moduli of @xmath is the same as the
field of moduli of @xmath , in particular a number field. Hence also the
Proposition has a direct analogue:

###### Proposition 7.2.7.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -module and let @xmath be a simple @xmath -module
which occurs with multiplicity one in @xmath . Then the moduli field
@xmath is a number field, and there is a unique simple sub- @xmath
-module @xmath of @xmath with @xmath . @xmath

### 7.3. The Local System of a Teichmüller Disk

Recall that for a translation surface @xmath one obtains a family of
curves @xmath . We shall apply the results of the previous section to
the local system @xmath on @xmath . We first take a look at its
monodromy representation.

###### Monodromy Representation.

Recall that the fibre over the base point @xmath is identified with
@xmath . Let @xmath be the image of @xmath , so that we can also
identify the fibre of @xmath over @xmath with @xmath . Hence we can
identify the fibre of the local system @xmath with the cohomology group
@xmath . Now let @xmath be represented by a path @xmath ; lift this to a
path @xmath with @xmath . Recall that under our identification of the
fundamental group with @xmath , the element @xmath corresponds to the
unique element @xmath with @xmath . By construction of the mirror Veech
group we can write

  ------ -- -------- --
  (31)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

for some @xmath in the Veech group @xmath . This means that there exists
some affine map @xmath with linear part @xmath . This map can for our
purposes now better be viewed as an isomorphism of translation surfaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is precisely the isomorphism which identifies the two fibres @xmath
and @xmath of @xmath — the first is the fibre over @xmath , the second
is the fibre over @xmath (here the operation of the Veech group on the
upper half plane is as in Proposition 4.5.1 ). Hence if @xmath is the
monodromy action of @xmath and if we, for one moment, write @xmath for
the Riemann surface underyling @xmath , we get a commutative diagram:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

So we have shown the following:

###### Proposition 7.3.1.

The monodromy representation of @xmath on @xmath is given as follows:
let @xmath ; identify @xmath with @xmath as above, giving an element
@xmath . Write this as in ( 31 ) for some @xmath in the Veech group.
This @xmath is the linear part of some affine map @xmath . Then the
monodromy operation of @xmath on @xmath is the map @xmath . @xmath

###### The Canonical Subsystem.

We have seen that the canonical subspace @xmath is preserved by the
action of the affine group, hence it is also preserved by the monodromy
operation, and we can write down this operation explicitly. So:

###### Proposition and Definition 7.3.2.

There is a unique sub-local system of @xmath -vector spaces @xmath ,
called the canonical subsystem , whose fibre in @xmath is the canonical
subspace @xmath . In the @xmath -basis @xmath of @xmath , the monodromy
operation of an element @xmath is given by the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence in the basis @xmath , the monodromy operation of @xmath on @xmath
becomes the identity inclusion @xmath . @xmath

We can describe this subsystem in a more revealing way. Namely consider
its lift to @xmath ; this is a subsystem of the trivial local system
@xmath on @xmath (this is the lift of @xmath along the projection @xmath
). Now let @xmath be any point, and write @xmath . Then the fibre @xmath
is the Riemann surface @xmath underlying @xmath . But then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath and @xmath span the same real vector space as @xmath and
@xmath ; in other words: @xmath . So the fibre of the canonical
subsystem at any point in @xmath is the canonical subspace of any of the
one-forms corresponding to that point.

###### The Moduli Field of the Canonical Subvariation.

In the case where the Veech group is a large enough, we can say much
more about the local system.

###### Proposition 7.3.3.

Assume that the Veech group of @xmath is non-elementary. Then the
canonical subsystem @xmath is simple, and its multiplicity in @xmath is
one.

###### Proof.

Any finite index subgroup of a non-elementary group is non-elementary.
Hence also @xmath is non-elementary.

The canonical subsystem has rank two. If it were not simple, its
monodromy would be contained in @xmath , in particular be commutative.
But the monodromy representation of @xmath is faithful, and @xmath is
noncommutative. Hence @xmath is simple.

Now choose some hyperbolic element in @xmath . It operates on a
one-dimensional subspace of @xmath with the unique maximal eigenvalue
(see Prop. 5.4.8 ). Hence @xmath appears only once in @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 7.3.4.

Assume that @xmath is non-elementary and contains a parabolic element
(this condition is always satisfied if @xmath is Veech). Then the moduli
field of @xmath is equal to the trace field @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have seen that @xmath can be conjugated into @xmath , hence the
moduli field is contained in the trace field. The other inclusion always
holds. ∎

In particular, the canonical subsystem is defined over the trace field.
It hence has well-defined Galois conjugates @xmath for every @xmath .

### 7.4. Variations of (Pseudo-) Hodge Structure

We now study how the Hodge decomposition (or rather the Hodge
filtration) behaves in families.

###### Definition 7.4.1.

Let @xmath be a complex space and let @xmath be a subring of @xmath . A
variation of (pure) @xmath -Hodge structure (short: VHS) @xmath of
weight @xmath on @xmath consists of a local system @xmath of finitely
generated free @xmath -modules and an exhausting filtration of the
holomorphic vector bundle @xmath by holomorphic sub-vector bundles
@xmath for @xmath , such that the following conditions hold:

1.   For every point @xmath , identifying the fibre @xmath with @xmath ,
    the data @xmath define a pure @xmath -Hodge structure of weight
    @xmath . We denote this pure Hodge structure by @xmath .

2.   “Griffiths’ transversality”: if @xmath denotes the unique
    integrable connection on @xmath for which the sections of @xmath are
    flat, then @xmath .

Note that a VHS on @xmath is the same as a pure Hodge structure. Easy
examples of VHS are constant variations of Hodge structure (which of
course do not really deserve the name): let @xmath be a pure Hodge
structure of weight @xmath and let @xmath be any complex space. Then we
construct the constant VHS @xmath (often by abuse of notation just
denoted by @xmath ) as follows: The underlying local system of @xmath
-modules @xmath is the constant sheaf @xmath . Note that then @xmath is
the constant vector bundle constructed from the vector space @xmath ,
and we let @xmath be the constant subbundle constructed from the
sub-vector space @xmath . This is easily checked to define a pure VHS on
@xmath ; it is effective if and only if @xmath is.

###### Definition 7.4.2.

Let @xmath be a complex space and let @xmath be a pure variation of
@xmath -Hodge structure on @xmath . Then a polarization of @xmath is a
morphism of VHS @xmath such that the induced morphism of pure Hodge
structures @xmath is a polarization for every @xmath .

We now extend our notion of “Jacobian type” to variations:

###### Definition 7.4.3.

Let @xmath be a complex space, and let @xmath be a subring of @xmath .
An @xmath -VHS of Jacobian type of rank @xmath on @xmath is a pure
variation of @xmath -Hodge structure @xmath on @xmath of weight one
together with a principal polarization @xmath , such that every fibre
@xmath with the induced polarization is a Hodge structure of Jacobian
type of rank @xmath .

When @xmath is a family of curves of genus @xmath , we can construct a
canonical variation of @xmath -Hodge structure of Jacobian type of rank
@xmath which we denote by @xmath . Its underlying local system is @xmath
, and the Hodge filtration and the polarization are defined fiberwise.
The connection @xmath is then called the Gauss-Manin connection of the
family. That this really defines a polarized variation of Hodge
structure is [ 39 , Corollary 10.32] .

###### Hodge Subbundles.

So let @xmath be a subring of @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath
-variation of Hodge structures of weight @xmath on @xmath , with
associated holomorphic vector bundle @xmath . Denote its total space by
@xmath . The connection can then also be interpreted as a connection of
the smooth vector bundle underlying @xmath , with the additional nice
property that it sends holomorphic sections to holomorphic @xmath
-valued differential forms.

The Hodge subbundles @xmath of @xmath are holomorphic subbundles, and
their complex conjugates (with respect to the real structure given by
@xmath ) are antiholomorphic subbundles of @xmath . Their intersections
can still be understood as smooth subbundles, so upon defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get a “Hodge decomposition” in the @xmath category:

  ------ -- -------- --
  (32)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

as smooth vector bundles. This decomposition induces a Hodge
decomposition on every fibre of @xmath , and we can reconstruct the
whole variation of Hodge structures from the local system @xmath plus
the decomposition. So the obvious question is, starting from a local
system and a smooth decomposition ( 32 ), when do these data define a
variation of Hodge structures?

###### Proposition 7.4.4.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold, let @xmath be a local system of
finitely generated free @xmath -modules on @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
associated complex local system which can in turn be interpreted as a
holomorphic vector bundle @xmath with a flat holomorphic connection
@xmath . Furthermore let there be given a decomposition ( 32 ) of smooth
complex vector bundles. Then these data define a variation of Hodge
structure if and only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:

1.   For every point @xmath , the fibres of ( 32 ) define a Hodge
    decomposition on @xmath .

2.   The subbundles @xmath are holomorphic (equivalently, the subbundles
    @xmath are antiholomorphic).

3.   The @xmath formulation of Griffiths’ transversality: denote by
    @xmath the @xmath tangential bundle of @xmath . Then @xmath sends
    (smooth sections of) @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath to @xmath .

###### Variations of Pseudo-Hodge Structure.

This proposition makes it clear how to extend the concept of variations
of Hodge structure to pseudo-Hodge structures:

###### Definition 7.4.5.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold and let @xmath be a subring of @xmath .
A variation of pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath (over @xmath ) on @xmath
consists of the following data:

1.   a local system of finitely generated free @xmath -modules @xmath on
    @xmath — write @xmath and interpret this as a holomorphic vector
    bundle @xmath on @xmath with integrable holomorphic connection
    @xmath ,

2.   a decomposition of smooth vector bundles

      ------ -- -------- --
      (33)      @xmath   
      ------ -- -------- --

subject to the following axioms:

1.   the subbundles @xmath are holomorphic,

2.   the subbundles @xmath are antiholomorphic and

3.   Griffiths’ transversality as in Proposition 7.4.4 , (iii).

Note that since there is in general no complex conjugation defined on
@xmath , the notation @xmath is purely symbolical and intended to remind
the reader of the classical situation. Also note that a variation of
pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath on @xmath really defines a pseudo-Hodge
structure @xmath for every @xmath by “taking fibres”. We leave out the
usual abstract nonsense (definition of morphisms etc.) and rather
explain how to obtain a variation of pseudo-Hodge structure from a
variation of Hodge structure.

If @xmath is a subring of @xmath and @xmath is a variation of @xmath
-Hodge structure of weight @xmath on @xmath , Proposition 7.4.4 shows
that we can define an associated variation of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge
structure @xmath on @xmath along the lines of the forgetful functor from
Hodge structures to pseudo-Hodge structures described above. Of course
Definition 7.4.5 is just made in the most reasonable way to make this
possible. We now give an explicit description of @xmath .

The underlying local system is the same as that of @xmath , i.e. @xmath
. The holomorphic bundle @xmath is decomposed into smooth subbundles as
described in ( 32 ), and we set @xmath . Note that then the definition
of the Hodge filtration for the variation of Hodge structures and the
variation of pseudo-Hodge structures agree; yet the image of the complex
conjugate @xmath of the Hodge subbundles with respect to the @xmath
-structure is (in the pseudo-Hodge notation) not @xmath but @xmath .
This may be confusing, but it is the price we have to pay for ignoring
weights on the pseudo-Hodge side. This will not play a rôle in
subsequent considerations.

###### Definition 7.4.6.

Let @xmath be a subring of @xmath which is stable under complex
conjugation, let @xmath be a complex manifold and let @xmath be a
variation of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath . A polarization
of @xmath is a map of local systems @xmath which defines a polarization
on each fibre @xmath .

The discussion of the relation between this notion of polarization and
the corresponding notion for variations of Hodge structure is completely
parallel to the case over a point, so we omit it.

### 7.5. Structure Theorems for Variations of Hodge Structure

###### A Theorem of Schmid and its Consequences.

A complex manifold @xmath is called compactifiable if there exists a
compact complex manifold @xmath and a normal crossings divisor @xmath
such that @xmath . By Hironaka’s theorem on the resolution of
singularities, every smooth complex algebraic variety is compactifiable.
On a compactifiable complex manifold, every plurisubharmonic function
which is bounded above is constant. In particular a bounded domain in
@xmath is never compactifiable. We also see that a Riemann surface is
compactifiable if and only if it is of finite type.

There are strong results about variations of Hodge structure which need
that the base manifold be compactifiable. Their proofs can all be
reduced to the following theorem of Wilfried Schmid, see [ 42 , Thm.
7.22] :

###### Theorem 7.5.1 (Schmid).

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold, let @xmath be a
polarizable variation of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath and
let @xmath . Viewing this @xmath as a flat section of the associated
smooth vector bundle, its components in the Hodge decomposition are also
flat.

Schmid in loc.cit. only formulates this theorem for variations of Hodge
structure which are defined over the integers, but his proof does not
make any use of the assumption that the underlying local system be
defined over @xmath , nor of the Hodge symmetry, and hence applies
without changes to complex variations of pseudo-Hodge structure. Note
that Schmid includes polarizability in the axioms for a variation of
Hodge structure (contrary to us) and does make use of that assumption
during the proof.

This theorem might not seem very surprising on first sight, but it has
several surprising consequences. ³³ ³³ 33 We also note that it fails for
@xmath , the pointed unit disk, since these consequences do no longer
hold there The first is just a mild reformulation:

###### Corollary 7.5.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in the theorem, and assume that @xmath is
connected. If a global flat section @xmath is of pure Hodge type @xmath
at some point of @xmath , then it is of this Hodge type everywhere.
@xmath

This directly implies the next very strong result. Note that if @xmath
is a variation of @xmath -Hodge structure and if @xmath , then the
underlying local system @xmath gives rise to a linear representation of
@xmath on the @xmath -vector space @xmath . This operation does in
general not preserve the Hodge structure, i.e. the endomorphisms of
@xmath induced by the elements of the fundamental group are in general
not morphisms of Hodge structure. ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 Note that this does not
contradict the Rigidity Theorem. Namely to prove that the Hodge
structure is preserved we would need the Rigidity Theorem not for @xmath
but for its universal covering space which may fail to be
compactifiable. In fact in all cases we consider, this universal
covering space is the unit disk for which all these theorems are wrong
But:

###### Corollary 7.5.3 (Rigidity Theorem).

Let @xmath be as in the previous corollary, let @xmath be a subring
stable under complex conjugation, and let @xmath and @xmath be
polarizable variations of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath . Let
@xmath , and let @xmath be a morphism of Hodge structures such that the
underlying map of @xmath -modules is equivariant for the action of
@xmath . Then @xmath extends uniquely to a morphism of variations of
@xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath .

###### Proof.

The equivariance means that @xmath extends to a morphism of local
systems @xmath . We have to show that it is in fact a morphism of
variations of pseudo-Hodge structure. But that is equivalent to showing
that it is a flat section of the variation of pseudo-Hodge structure
@xmath which is everywhere of Hodge type @xmath . But it is so at @xmath
(since it there preserves the pseudo-Hodge structures), so it is
everywhere by Schmid’s theorem. ∎

###### Semisimplicity of Variations of Hodge Structure.

There are several questions around semisimplicity one can ask about
variations of Hodge structure: under which conditions are variations of
Hodge structures semisimple as such? And when the underlying local
system? There is a satisfactory answer (at least for our purposes) to
the first question:

###### Corollary 7.5.4.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold and let @xmath be a field. Then the
category of polarizable @xmath -variations of Hodge structure on @xmath
is semisimple.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a polarizable @xmath -variation of Hodge structure on
@xmath and let @xmath be a sub-variation of @xmath . Denote the
underlying local systems of @xmath -vector spaces by @xmath . Choose a
polarization @xmath of @xmath ; then the orthogonal complement @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath with respect to @xmath is a well-defined local
subsystem, and at every point @xmath its fibre underlies by Proposition
5.1.8 a sub-Hodge structure of @xmath . Hence @xmath underlies a
sub-variation of Hodge structure @xmath , and we have @xmath . ∎

###### Semisimplicity of Monodromy Representations.

The other question is more delicate. In particular we need to assume
that the variations of Hodge structure in question are defined over the
integers (or at least can be embedded into some that are).

###### Theorem 7.5.5 (Deligne, Schmid).

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold, and let @xmath be a
variation of @xmath -Hodge structure on @xmath . Then the local system
of @xmath -vector spaces @xmath is semisimple.

###### Proof.

There is a proof for this statement in [ 6 , sect. 4.2] , which is
formulated as a conditional proof with the condition being precisely
that Schmid’s theorem (which was not yet known at that time) holds. ∎

###### Comparison.

Now consider some polarizable variation of @xmath -Hodge structure
@xmath on a compactifiable complex manifold @xmath such that the
underlying local system @xmath can be defined over @xmath . We do not
need the exact form of this @xmath -structure, just its existence, in
order to be able to apply Theorem 7.5.5 . Then there are several ways of
decomposing @xmath , forgetting different kinds of structure:

1.  First of all we may decompose @xmath as a variation of @xmath -Hodge
    structure: it is semisimple by Corollary 7.5.4 .

2.  Considering the underlying local system of @xmath -vector spaces
    @xmath , each simple summand of the decomposition (i) further
    decomposes into simple local systems of @xmath -vector spaces by
    Theorem 7.5.5 .

3.  Finally the simple summands in (ii) further decompose into simple
    local systems of complex vector spaces after tensoring with @xmath .
    This gives a decomposition of @xmath .

4.  But we may also start again from (i) and forget the @xmath
    -structure first, in order to get a variation of @xmath
    -pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath . We will show below that this also
    is semisimple, and in a sense to be made precise, its decomposition
    into simple parts is governed by the decomposition (iii).

###### Monodromy Governs the Hodge Decomposition.

So the conditions to work with are as follows: @xmath is a
compactifiable complex manifold, and @xmath is a polarizable variation
of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath such that the underlying
local system of @xmath -vector spaces is semisimple. This is for example
true if @xmath is a sub-variation of a variation of pseudo-Hodge
structure which comes from a polarizable variation of @xmath -Hodge
structure, as we have seen. Astonishingly, the underlying local system
then almost completely determines the variation of pseudo-Hodge
structure!

The next lemma and the next proposition are due to Deligne, see [ 7 ] .

###### Lemma 7.5.6 (Deligne).

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold and let @xmath be a
semisimple local system of complex vector spaces on @xmath such that
there exists some polarizable @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath .
Decompose @xmath as

  ------ -- -------- --
  (34)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

with pairwise non-isomorphic simple local systems of @xmath -vector
spaces @xmath and nonzero complex vector spaces @xmath . Then for each
@xmath there exists some structure of a polarizable variation of @xmath
-pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath .

Note that the polarizablility of the variations on @xmath is the point
which makes the whole lemma nontrivial. Namely every local system of
complex vector spaces @xmath underlies a trivial variation of @xmath
-pseudo-Hodge structure by setting, say, @xmath and @xmath for all other
@xmath , but this variation need not be polarizable.

###### Proposition 7.5.7 (Deligne).

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in the previous lemma, and choose some
polarizable variation of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on each @xmath
(writing it as @xmath ). Then for every polarizable variation of @xmath
-pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath , say @xmath , there exist unique
@xmath -pseudo-Hodge structures on the @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as variations of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure.

###### Corollary 7.5.8.

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold and let @xmath be a
simple local system of complex vector spaces on @xmath . Then any two
polarizable variations of pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath only differ
by a shift of the grading.

###### Proof.

Evidently it suffices to assume that there exists some polarizable
variation of pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath , and then we can apply
the previous proposition with @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 7.5.9.

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold, let @xmath be a
subfield and and let @xmath be an absolutely simple ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 I.e. @xmath
is simple local system of @xmath -vector spaces. Then given an integer
@xmath , there is at most one polarizable variation of @xmath -Hodge
structure of weight @xmath on @xmath . @xmath

###### Proof.

Every polarizable variation of @xmath -Hodge structure of weight @xmath
on @xmath defines in an obvious manner a polarizable variation of @xmath
-pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath to which we can apply the previous
corollary. Now a variation of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure on @xmath ,
even if only given up to a shift of the grading ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 Here is the
point where we use that we have fixed a weight. , uniquely determines
the variation of @xmath -Hodge structure, and even the ambiguity of a
shift of the grading gets lost when fixing the weight. ∎

### 7.6. The Variation of Hodge Structure over a Teichmüller Disk

Now we finally apply the various findings of this chapter to the
variation of Hodge structure over a Teichmüller disk or curve. So let
@xmath be a translation surface. Recall that this defines holomorphic
isometric embeddings @xmath and @xmath , which differ from each other by
composition with @xmath as in section 3.2. This amounts to a family
@xmath . For a suitable finite index subgroup @xmath , which may well be
the trivial group, we also get a family of Riemann surfaces @xmath whose
lift to @xmath is the family @xmath . We get then a variation of
rational Hodge structures of Jacobian type @xmath on the quotient @xmath
, and its lift @xmath to the upper half plane @xmath . We now summarize
what we can say about these variations.

###### The General Case.

In general we can only say the following:

###### Proposition 7.6.1.

Let @xmath be any translation surface, with family @xmath as above. Then
the canonical subsystem @xmath is in fact a sub-variation of Hodge
structure @xmath .

###### Proof.

This can be checked fiberwise. But we have already seen that the
canonical subspace at every point is a sub-Hodge structure. ∎

###### Nonelementary Veech Group Containing a Parabolic Element.

Assume now that the finite index subgroup @xmath can be chosen
non-elementary and containing a parabolic element. This is for example
possible when @xmath is a Veech surface. Then the moduli field @xmath of
the canonical subsystem @xmath is equal to the trace field of @xmath .
Denote by @xmath the Galois closure of @xmath . Then both the canonical
subvariation and each of its Galois conjugates @xmath occur with
multiplicity one in @xmath ; their sum is defined over @xmath . Yet we
can, under these conditions, not prove that the Galois conjugates also
define sub-variations of pseudo-Hodge structure. This changes when we
assume that @xmath is a Veech surface:

###### The Veech Group a Lattice.

Assume now that @xmath is a Veech surface, i.e. that @xmath , and hence
also @xmath , is a lattice. This is equivalent to @xmath being of finite
type, which in turn is equivalent to @xmath being compactifiable as a
complex manifold. To begin with, in this case the trace field of @xmath
is equal to the trace field of @xmath , in particular it only depends on
@xmath and not on a particular choice of @xmath . Now since all the
Galois conjugates appear with multiplicity one ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 Note that we
need not use that the canonical subsystem itself underlies a variation
of Hodge structure — this follows already by its having multiplicity
one! , we can conclude that they all underlie sub- @xmath -variations of
pseudo-Hodge structure. In particular their sum is a sub- @xmath
-variation of Hodge structure of @xmath . There is a way to describe
this structure closer to the intuition of abelian varieties, using real
multiplication , see the next chapter.

In fact we can get rid of the “pseudo”: M. Möller has shown in [ 35 ,
Prop. 2.6] that the trace field of a lattice Veech group is always
totally real; we reproduce his argument in chapter 7. Thus @xmath is
contained in @xmath , and we can talk about “honest” Hodge structures.

### 7.7. Ahlfors’ Variational Formula

Now we have talked about the global structure of the family of Jacobians
over a Teichmüller curve; we also need some information on how it
behaves locally. For this we first quote Ahlfors’ variational formula:
let @xmath be a Teichmüller marked surface; then its Jacobian @xmath is
a Hodge structure of Jacobian type (with our definition), whose
underlying abelian group has a “standard” symplectic basis induced by
the Teichmüller marking. We refer to the period matrix of this Jacobian
with respect to this basis simply as “the period matrix of @xmath ” and
denote it by @xmath . Also denote the adapted basis of @xmath by @xmath
, so that we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath ; then @xmath is also a Teichmüller marked Riemann
surface. The formula now gives an estimate on how @xmath behaves when
@xmath is small.

###### Theorem 7.7.1 (Ahlfors).

With the above notation (for fixed @xmath and varying @xmath ), one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This formula is originally due to Ahlfors, see [ 1 , p. 56] , albeit in
a somewhat different language. A proof of the formulation given here can
be found in [ 38 , section 4.1.6] . Our formula is precisely formula
(1.25) in loc.cit. ∎

Now let @xmath be a Teichmüller marked translation surface, with
associated Teichmüller disk @xmath or @xmath . As above, we obtain
variations of Hodge structure of Jacobian type @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath on @xmath , such that the latter is the pullback of the former
along @xmath .

###### Corollary 7.7.2.

With the above notation, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For the difference quotient we compute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second formula follows by noting that @xmath and applying the chain
rule (one has @xmath ). ∎

## 8. Real Multiplication

In this chapter we finally turn to real multiplication on Jacobian
varieties. By real multiplication on an abelian variety @xmath , one
usually means a monomorphism @xmath with certain properties, where
@xmath is a totally real number field. For the situation we are
interested in it is more convenient to use a more flexible convention
where the field is also allowed to operate on an abelian subvariety.
Since we had to consider abelian varieties only up to isogeny before, we
also do this here, which allows us to avoid number-theoretic subtleties
associated with orders in number fields.

There are deep relations between properties of translation surface and
the existence of real multiplication (in this wider sense) on the
Jacobian of the underlying Riemann surface. Namely for a Veech surface
@xmath , the results of section 6.6 can be reformulated in the following
vein: one has real multiplication by the trace field of @xmath on the
Jacobian of @xmath , with @xmath as an eigenform. The real
multiplication structure is uniquely characterized by the operation of
the trace field on the canonical subspace. Furthermore, this structure
is preserved by the @xmath -operation. This theorem, due to Möller,
rests upon the results of Deligne and Schmid discussed in the previous
chapter.

Now in genus two, there is an elementary argument due to McMullen which
shows that one does not need @xmath to be Veech. Hence the following
question is natural: can this elementary argument perhaps be extended to
higher genera? The answer, provided by Theorem 8.3.3, is: no. In all
genera @xmath , for suitable @xmath (e.g. @xmath coprime to @xmath ,
which can always be achieved) the Jacobian of @xmath carries a real
multiplication structure by the trace field of @xmath with @xmath as an
eigenform, but which is not preserved by the @xmath -action.

### 8.1. Real Multiplication

###### Definition of Real Multiplication.

In analogy to the more classical notion of complex multiplication on
elliptic curves, real multiplication is a slogan for certain
endomorphism structures on abelian varieties (up to isogeny). One is
very naturally led to real multiplication when considering large
families of self-adjoint endomorphisms:

###### Proposition 8.1.1.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold, let @xmath be a rational variation of
Hodge structures of Jacobian type, of rank @xmath , let @xmath be a
number field of degree @xmath and let @xmath be a ring homomorphism
whose image consists entirely of self-adjoint maps (with respect to the
polarization). Then @xmath is totally real, and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a primitive element, and let @xmath be the minimal
polynomial of @xmath over @xmath . Its roots are precisely the Galois
conjugates of @xmath . Since @xmath is a field, the homomorphism @xmath
must be injective, and consequently the minimal polynomial of the
endomorphism @xmath is also @xmath . Its roots are the eigenvalues of
@xmath , but the eigenvalues of a self-adjoint map are always real. So
all Galois conjugates of @xmath must be real. Also we see that @xmath
has precisely @xmath distinct eigenvalues, which implies that @xmath . ∎

The definition of real multiplication that we shall work with is the
following:

###### Definition 8.1.2.

Let @xmath be a polarized @xmath -Hodge structure of Jacobian type of
rank @xmath and let @xmath be a totally real number field of degree
@xmath . Then a real multiplication structure by @xmath on @xmath
consists of the following data:

1.   a splitting @xmath of @xmath -Hodge structures, orthogonal with
    respect to the polarization, such that @xmath has rank @xmath ;

2.   a ring homomorphism @xmath such that every element of @xmath is
    sent to a self-adjoint endomorphism of @xmath .

For the special case when @xmath is actually defined over @xmath , i.e.
the Hodge structure corresponding to an abelian variety @xmath , and
when @xmath , we retrieve the classical definition of real
multiplication. Namely we have @xmath , and the subring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an order in @xmath , i.e. finitely generated as a group and
generating @xmath as a @xmath -vector space. Then @xmath defines an
injection @xmath .

We analogously define real multiplication for variations of Hodge
structure:

###### Definition 8.1.3.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold, let @xmath be a polarized variation of
@xmath -Hodge structure of Jacobian type of rank @xmath on @xmath , and
let @xmath be a totally real number field of degree @xmath . Then a real
multiplication structure by @xmath on @xmath consists of the following
data:

1.   a splitting @xmath of variations of @xmath -Hodge structure,
    orthogonal with respect to the polarization, such that @xmath has
    rank @xmath ;

2.   a ring homomorphism @xmath such that every element of @xmath is
    sent to a self-adjoint endomorphism of @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is a variation of Hodge structures with real
multiplication in the above sense, we get a real multiplication
structure on every fibre @xmath . This uniquely determines the real
multiplication structure on the whole of @xmath (as soon as @xmath is
connected), in the following sense:

###### Lemma 8.1.4.

Let @xmath be a polarized variation of @xmath -Hodge structure of
Jacobian type on a connected complex manifold @xmath , and for some
point @xmath let there be given a real multiplication structure by a
totally real number field @xmath on the fibre @xmath . Then there is at
most one real multiplication structure on @xmath whose restriction to
@xmath is the given one.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a polarized variation of @xmath -Hodge structure of
Jacobian type of rank @xmath on @xmath together with a real
multiplication structure in the above sense. We show that it is possible
to reconstruct this structure from the real multiplication structure on
the fibre @xmath ; this will prove the lemma.

So write @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The sub-variations of Hodge
structure @xmath and @xmath are uniquely determined by the underlying
local systems @xmath , and these in turn are, by the usual monodromy
correspondence, uniquely determined by their fibres @xmath and @xmath .
Hence the splitting @xmath can be reconstructed from the splitting
@xmath .

Also by the monodromy correspondence, any endomorphism of a local system
is uniquely determined by the induced endomorphism on one fibre. Hence
the map @xmath is uniquely determined by the map @xmath . ∎

Hence if we are given a polarized variation of Hodge structure together
with a real multiplication structure on one fibre, we can ask whether it
extends to the whole variation, and if it does, the extension is unique.

###### Orthogonal Decomposition.

Real multiplication as above induces an orthogonal decomposition over
the Galois closure of the involved field (see Definition 7.2.1 ):

###### Proposition 8.1.5.

Let @xmath be a rational variation of Hodge structure of Jacobian type
of rank @xmath , let @xmath be a totally real number field of degree
@xmath and let the splitting @xmath and the homomorphism @xmath define a
real multiplication structure on @xmath . Then we have a unique
orthogonal decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath -variations of Hodge structure with the following properties:

1.  @xmath has rank one for every @xmath ,

2.   the action @xmath of @xmath on @xmath respects this decomposition
    and

3.   every @xmath operates on @xmath by multiplication with @xmath .

###### Proof.

We only need to show the existence of such a decomposition; uniqueness
then follows automatically. So let @xmath be a primitive element, i.e.
such that @xmath . Note that then the elements @xmath of @xmath are
pairwise different. Let then @xmath be the kernel of the morphism of
@xmath -variations of Hodge structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is self-adjoint, the @xmath are mutually orthogonal. It
remains to show that they all have rank at least one, i.e. are not
reduced to zero, since then by dimension reasons they must have rank
exactly one.

For this note that the minimal polynomial of the endomorphism @xmath is
the same as the minimal polynomial of the algebraic number @xmath . Its
roots are precisely the @xmath . By the Cayley-Hamilton theorem then all
@xmath are eigenvalues of @xmath , hence the @xmath are nonzero. ∎

###### Constructing Real Multiplication from a Subsystem.

By the deep structure results on variations of Hodge structure over
compactifiable complex manifolds, we can give a partial inverse to this
construction:

Let @xmath be a compactifiable complex manifold and let @xmath be a
rational variation of Hodge structure of Jacobian type on @xmath , of
rank @xmath . Assume in addition that @xmath can be defined over @xmath
, i.e. there is some principally polarized integral variation of Hodge
structure @xmath such that @xmath , respecting the polarizations. This
is e.g. the case for variations of the form @xmath where @xmath is a
family of algebraic curves. Let @xmath be the underlying local system of
@xmath -vector spaces; by Theorem 7.5.5 , @xmath is semisimple.

Assume further that there exists a number field @xmath , which we for
simplicity assume to be contained in @xmath , and a simple local system
of @xmath -vector spaces @xmath which occurs with multiplicity one in
the semisimple local system @xmath . Let @xmath be the embeddings of
@xmath into @xmath , then the Galois conjugates

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

all appear with multiplicity one in @xmath , and are all mutually
orthogonal. Furthermore by Proposition … they all underly uniquely
defined subvariations of @xmath -pseudo-Hodge structure @xmath . Their
sum is defined over @xmath , say equal to @xmath for some rational
subvariation @xmath . Denote its orthogonal complement by @xmath .

Then we can define a ring homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by sending @xmath to @xmath . By Galois invariance, @xmath in fact has
image contained in @xmath , and the image clearly consists only of
self-adjoint endomorphisms. For further reference:

###### Proposition 8.1.6.

Under the above assumptions, @xmath is totally real. The decomposition
@xmath together with the homomorphism @xmath as constructed above define
a real multiplication datum by @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part follows from Proposition 8.1.1 ; the second part has
already been shown. ∎

###### Real Multiplication and Teichmüller Curves.

We now take up again the discussion of section 7.6. Assume that @xmath
is a Veech surface. Then the construction just explained can be applied
to the variation of Hodge structure @xmath of the associated family
@xmath . We summarize

###### Theorem 8.1.7 (Möller).

Let @xmath be a Veech surface. Then the trace field @xmath of the Veech
group @xmath is totally real. The Jacobian @xmath has a canonical real
multiplication structure given by @xmath and @xmath .

This real multiplication structure is uniquely characterized by the
following properties: @xmath is the smallest sub- @xmath -Hodge
structure containing the canonical subspace, and @xmath operates on the
canonical subspace by multiplication with @xmath .

This theorem is essentially [ 35 , Theorem 2.7] .

### 8.2. Real Multiplication and the @xmath-Action

In this section we shall explain known results about the interplay
between real multiplication on the Jacobian and the @xmath -action on
the moduli space of abelian differentials.

###### Transporting Real Multiplication.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface, and assume we are given some
real multiplication structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the Jacobian of @xmath . Let @xmath be an abelian differential on
@xmath . Then we obtain a Teichmüller disk @xmath and an associated
rational variation of Hodge structure @xmath of Jacobian type on @xmath
. We can identify the fibre of @xmath over @xmath with @xmath , and the
question is now: does the real multiplication structure on @xmath extend
to a real multiplication structure (which is then necessarily unique) on
@xmath ? If it does, we say that the real multiplication structure is
preserved by the @xmath -action on @xmath . Note that the real
multiplication structure on the Jacobian for a Veech surface @xmath , as
specified in Theorem 8.1.7 , is preserved by the @xmath -action because
of its very construction.

This condition can also be expressed directly in terms of the @xmath
-action. The real multiplication structure can be interpreted as a
splitting @xmath and a homomorphism @xmath with certain properties. Now
for any @xmath we can identify the topological surface @xmath underlying
@xmath with @xmath . Hence we also have a splitting of @xmath and an
action of @xmath on one part of it. The condition to be satisfied is
then that these data also define a real multiplication structure on
@xmath .

###### Eigenforms.

Assume now that the real multiplication structure is preserved. Then as
above we get an orthogonal decomposition of @xmath which in turn induces
an orthogonal decomposition of the associated variation of @xmath -Hodge
structure:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the @xmath are simple variations of @xmath -Hodge structure. On the
other hand we have the canonical subvariation @xmath which is also
simple. Hence if it is contained in @xmath , i.e. the part of @xmath
where something interesting happens, it has to be equal to one of the
@xmath .

But this in turn means that @xmath already has to lie in @xmath and that
it is an eigenform for the real multiplication structure, i.e. @xmath .
So the following picture will appear:

For every @xmath , the real multiplication structure carries over to the
Jacobian @xmath , where @xmath . Furthermore @xmath is also an eigenform
for this structure, for the same eigencharacter as @xmath .

###### Veech Surfaces.

We can rephrase Theorem 8.1.7 in this context as follows:

###### Corollary 8.2.1.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface and let @xmath be an abelian
differential on it, such that the Veech group @xmath is a lattice. Then
@xmath is an eigenform for the real multiplication structure on @xmath
by the trace field constructed above, and this real multiplication
structure is preserved by the @xmath -action on @xmath . @xmath

###### Genus Two.

There is also a complete picture of when real multiplication is
transported along the orbit of an eigenform in genus two: always! To
understand why, let us first remark that real multiplication structures
in genus two cannot be very complicated. The number field has to have
degree at most two, hence it is either @xmath or a real quadratic field.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus two and let @xmath be an
abelian differential on @xmath . A real multiplication structure by
@xmath on @xmath is then nothing but an orthogonal decomposition of
rational Hodge structures @xmath , where each summand has rank one.
Furthermore, @xmath is an eigenform for this real multiplication
structure if and only if @xmath . This is equivalent to @xmath being
equal to the canonical subspace in @xmath . Since @xmath is the
orthogonal complement of @xmath , this means that we can reconstruct the
real multiplication structure on @xmath solely from @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.2.2.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus two, together with some
real multiplication structure by @xmath on @xmath . Let further @xmath
be an abelian differential on @xmath which is an eigenform for this real
multiplication structure. Then the real multiplication structure is
preserved by the @xmath -action on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the real multiplication structure, so that @xmath . Then
@xmath . Hence @xmath extends to a local subsystem @xmath with the
property that @xmath . Hence @xmath underlies a subvariation of @xmath
-Hodge structure @xmath (in other words, the canonical subvariation is
defined over @xmath ), and we can set @xmath . ∎

Consider now a real quadratic number field @xmath , where @xmath is a
squarefree positive integer. Let @xmath be a rational Hodge structure of
Jacobian type of rank two; then a real multiplication datum on @xmath is
the same as a ring homomorphism @xmath whose image consists entirely of
self-adjoint endomorphisms.

###### Proposition 8.2.3.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus two, let @xmath be an
abelian differential and let @xmath be a real multiplication structure
by a real quadratic number field @xmath , such that @xmath is an
eigenform for this structure. Then the real multiplication structure is
preserved by the @xmath -action on @xmath .

###### Proof.

We get a decomposition into eigenspaces @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath
are sub- @xmath -Hodge structures, the decomposition is orthogonal, and
@xmath operates on @xmath by multiplication with @xmath . Here @xmath
and @xmath are the two embeddings @xmath .

Now by assumption @xmath is an eigenform, and without loss of generality
we may assume that @xmath . Then we have @xmath . So by the same
argument as above, the canonical subvariation is defined over @xmath ,
i.e. equal to @xmath for some sub-variation of @xmath -Hodge structure
@xmath of @xmath , of rank one. Let @xmath be its orthogonal complement.
Then define a real multiplication structure on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This actually has image in @xmath and hence defines a real
multiplication structure which extends the given one on @xmath . ∎

###### Real Multiplication by the Trace Field.

If @xmath is a Veech surface, we get real multiplication by the trace
field of the Veech group with @xmath as an eigenform, and this structure
is transported by the @xmath -action. In genus two, this is also true
without the assumption of @xmath being Veech.

###### Lemma 8.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold, let @xmath be a rational variation of
Hodge structure of Jacobian type on @xmath , of rank two. Let @xmath be
a sub- @xmath -variation of Hodge structure of @xmath , and let @xmath
be an endomorphism of the local system of @xmath -vector spaces @xmath
underlying @xmath , which is self-adjoint with respect to the
polarization and which takes the sub-variation @xmath to itself. Then
@xmath is actually an endomorphism of @xmath (i.e. a morphism of
variations of Hodge structure).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the orthogonal complement of @xmath ; this is a sub-
@xmath -variation of Hodge structure of @xmath , and @xmath . Since
@xmath is self-adjoint, it also has to map @xmath to itself. Since any
self-adjoint endomorphism of a two-dimensional symplectic vector space
is a constant times the identity, @xmath as well as @xmath are multiples
of the identity and hence respect the Hodge decompositions. Hence also
@xmath acting on the whole of @xmath respects the Hodge decompositions.
∎

Stated in somewhat different language, but with the same proof up to
translation, this lemma is due to McMullen, see [ 29 , Lemma 7.4] .

###### Proposition 8.2.5.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus two, and let @xmath be
an abelian differential on it. Assume that the trace field @xmath of the
Veech group @xmath is real quadratic. Then the canonical subvariation
@xmath as well as its orthogonal complement @xmath are defined over
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Choose some @xmath whose linear part has irrational trace @xmath , hence
@xmath . Now recall that topologically the family @xmath is just a
product @xmath , and every fibre can be canonically identified with
@xmath (just with a different complex structure). Extend @xmath to a
self-homeomorphism of @xmath by setting @xmath . On every fibre @xmath ,
which is the Riemann surface underlying say @xmath , this induces again
an affine map, with the same trace and the same action on cohomology.
Hence we get an automorphism @xmath of the local system @xmath ,
symplectic with respect to the Poincaré pairing.

Set then @xmath . This is a self-adjoint map (by the same trick as
above), and it stabilizes the sub-variation of real Hodge structure
@xmath . Hence by Lemma 8.2.4 it is a morphism of integral variations of
Hodge structure. It operates on @xmath as @xmath times the identity and
on @xmath as some other number times the identity; this other number
must then necessarily be the Galois conjugate @xmath of @xmath (since
the characteristic polynomial of @xmath has integral coefficients).

Hence we can define @xmath as the kernel of the endomorphism @xmath of
@xmath , and analogously @xmath as the kernel of @xmath . These are sub-
@xmath -variations of Hodge structure whose base change to @xmath are
the canonical subvariation and its orthogonal complement. ∎

Now we can apply the usual trick to define real multiplication on @xmath
:

###### Corollary 8.2.6.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface of genus two and let @xmath be an
abelian differential on it. Assume that the trace field of Veech group
@xmath is strictly larger than @xmath , i.e. is a real quadratic number
field @xmath . Then there is a unique real multiplication structure by
@xmath on @xmath such that @xmath is an eigenform for the identity
character @xmath . This structure is preserved by the @xmath -action on
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The uniqueness is clear: if @xmath is an eigenform, its orthogonal
complement has to be the eigenspace for the other embedding @xmath . As
to the existence, let @xmath act by the identical character on @xmath
and by the other character on @xmath . ∎

###### Implications for the Period Matrix.

Let @xmath be a closed Riemann surface, now again of arbitrary genus
@xmath , with an abelian differential @xmath . Let @xmath be a totally
real number field of degree @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a real multiplication datum with @xmath as an eigenform. Hence we
have an orthogonal decomposition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the different embeddings @xmath . Without loss of
generality we may assume that @xmath .

Choose then a symplectic @xmath -basis @xmath of the subspace of @xmath
corresponding to @xmath , and a symplectic @xmath -basis @xmath of the
subspace corresponding to @xmath . This defines altogether a symplectic
@xmath -basis @xmath of @xmath . What does the associated period matrix
look like, and how does it behave under the @xmath -operation?

The basis of @xmath we need for the computation of the period matrix has
the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is an unimportant constant, @xmath is a generator of @xmath
, and the @xmath are elements of @xmath . From this we deduce: the
period matrix has the form

  ------ -- -------- --
  (35)      @xmath   
  ------ -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath diagonal matrix with nonzero entries, and
@xmath is any matrix.

###### Proposition 8.2.7.

With notation as above, the period matrix of @xmath with respect to the
basis @xmath has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath diagonal matrix with nonzero entries. If the
real multiplication structure is preserved by the @xmath -action on
@xmath , the period matrix of @xmath for any @xmath with respect to the
same basis has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Here the @xmath are holomorphic functions on @xmath with
values in @xmath , in particular they are never zero.

###### Proof.

It only remains to show that the @xmath have image in @xmath , but this
follows from the fact that period matrices always have positive definite
imaginary part. ∎

### 8.3. The Jacobians of the Wiman Curves

We are going to construct a remarkable family of real multiplication
structures on the Jacobians of the Wiman curves.

###### Decomposition of the Jacobian.

Consider the automorphism @xmath of @xmath which is given in affine
coordinates by @xmath with @xmath . This has order exactly @xmath in the
automorphism group of @xmath . It induces by functoriality an
automorphism @xmath of the Hodge structure @xmath ; this is also of
order precisely @xmath (because the Torelli group is torsion free). The
endomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath shall be of greater importance for us, since it has some nice
properties:

###### Lemma 8.3.1.

The endomorphism @xmath is self-adjoint with respect to the polarization

###### Proof.

The endomorphism @xmath is symplectic, i.e. @xmath for @xmath the
polarization of @xmath . This is true for any endomorphism of the first
cohomology of a compact orientable surface which is induced by an
orientation-preserving self-homeomorphism of that surface. Analogously
@xmath is symplectic. Hence the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

adding them, we get that @xmath is self-adjoint. ∎

We now get a nice eigenspace decomposition for @xmath acting on @xmath
as a Hodge structure ; this decomposition is defined over the field
@xmath . So let @xmath be the induced polarized @xmath -Hodge structure,
and for any integer @xmath (not necessarily prime to anything) let
@xmath be the kernel of the morphism of @xmath -Hodge structures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since Hodge structures form an abelian category, this is a sub-Hodge
structure of @xmath . The Hodge type @xmath component of @xmath consists
precisely of the holomorphic one-forms @xmath on @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple computation confirms that @xmath satisfies this equation, so
@xmath has at least rank one. Since the @xmath , as eigenspaces of a
self-adjoint endomorphism, are mutually orthogonal, we also find that
the @xmath must have rank precisely one.

###### Proposition and Definition 8.3.2.

Let @xmath be a divisor of @xmath . Then the sub-Hodge structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined over @xmath , say equal to @xmath for some sub- @xmath -Hodge
structure @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is Galois-invariant. ∎

Hence we get an orthogonal decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The endomorphism @xmath respects the direct sum decomposition, in
particular we get by restriction a self-adjoint endomorphism @xmath of
@xmath . Consider now @xmath as a @xmath -linear endomorphism of @xmath
, forgetting for the moment its compatibility with the Hodge structure.
Then by construction @xmath is diagonalizable (over a finite extension
of @xmath ), and its eigenvalues are precisely the Galois conjugates of
@xmath , where @xmath .. Hence it has the same minimal polynomial over
@xmath as @xmath , and we get a well-defined algebra homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every endomorphism in its image is a polynomial in @xmath , hence
self-adjoint. Thus the orthogonal splitting @xmath together with the
homomorphism @xmath defines a real multiplication structure on @xmath .

###### The Wiman Curves as Counterexamples.

We now relate the explicitly constructed real multiplication on @xmath
to the general theory developed before. To start with, @xmath is a Veech
surface, and the Veech group @xmath has trace field equal to @xmath ,
where again @xmath . This gives a real multiplication structure on
@xmath by @xmath . Its characterization in Theorem 8.1.7 shows that this
is the same as the structure constructed above explicitly.

###### Theorem 8.3.3.

Let @xmath be a divisor of @xmath , let @xmath be the maximal multiple
of @xmath which is @xmath , and let @xmath be such that @xmath . Then
@xmath is an eigenform for the real multiplication structure on @xmath
described above. Furthermore this real multiplication structure
satisfies the conclusions ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 Not the conditions! of Theorem 8.1.7
except for the last sentence, i.e. it is real multiplication by the
trace field of @xmath such that @xmath is the smallest sub- @xmath
-Hodge structure containing the canonical subspace, and on the canonical
subspace, the trace field operates by the identity character.

This real multiplication structure is not preserved by the @xmath
-action.

###### Proof.

We have shown before that @xmath is the trace field of @xmath . Hence we
only need to show that the real multiplication structure is not
preserved by the @xmath -action.

Let @xmath be the Teichmüller disk belonging to @xmath , and let @xmath
be the associated variation of Hodge structure on @xmath .

For every @xmath , let @xmath be a symplectic basis of the subspace of
@xmath belonging to the subspace @xmath . Then, up to renumeration,
@xmath is a symplectic basis of @xmath as in Proposition 8.2.7 . The
corresponding basis of @xmath is precisely @xmath . Denote the period
matrix of @xmath with respect to this basis by @xmath . Then by
Proposition 8.2.7 we see:

1.  @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath ;

2.  @xmath whenever at least one of @xmath and @xmath has greatest
    common divisor @xmath with @xmath .

If the real multiplication structure were preserved by the @xmath
-action, these statements would hold if @xmath were replaced by an
arbitrary @xmath . But now the Ahlfors-Rauch formula tells us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choose @xmath such that @xmath and such that at least one of @xmath ,
@xmath has greatest common divisor @xmath with @xmath . This is always
possible since one can always achieve either @xmath or @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where we have used @xmath ), contradiction. ∎

We summarize: for every @xmath with @xmath and @xmath we have a real
multiplication structure on @xmath by the trace field of @xmath , with
@xmath as eigenform for the identity character. In other words, we have
the conclusion of Theorem 8.1.7 , except for the stability under the
@xmath -action.

Now for every divisor @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , we consider the set
of those @xmath with @xmath . Then for the minimal such @xmath (this is
@xmath ) and for the maximal such @xmath , we know that @xmath is a
Veech surface and that the real multiplication structure is preserved by
the @xmath -action. For all other @xmath , the real multiplication
structure is not stable under the @xmath -operation. In particular we
also see that @xmath cannot be Veech for these @xmath .

Finally let us note that this construction gives a counterexample to an
extension of Möller’s theorem to non-Veech surfaces for every genus
@xmath : we only need to find @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are
coprime. This is always possible, take e.g. @xmath . For those @xmath
for which @xmath is a prime number, we get real multiplication on the
Jacobian of @xmath in the classical sense, again not being transported
by the @xmath -action.

This series of counterexamples is not completely new. In [ 29 ] ,
McMullen studied the special case @xmath , @xmath and sketched a proof
how to use Ahlfors’ variational formula in order to see that a given
real multiplication structure (in the classical sense) on @xmath with
@xmath as an eigenform (in our notation) is not preserved by the @xmath
-action. This is Theorem 7.5 in op.cit.

Möller in [ 35 , Remark 2.8] considered the same special case and
remarked that the trace field of @xmath contains @xmath . He also
suggested in op.cit., Remark 2.9 to study the general case @xmath as
possible counterexamples, but erroneously stated (without proof) that
for @xmath one always gets a counterexample.