##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 General on graded structures
    -    2.1 Superalgebra case
    -    2.2 Klein-Graded case
-    3 Substructures
    -    3.1 Subalgebras and Ideals
    -    3.2 Lie superalgebra
    -    3.3 Klein graded Lie algebra
        -    3.3.1 Lie algebras
        -    3.3.2 Lie superalgebras
        -    3.3.3 Module substructure
-    4 General Linear Algebra
-    5 Derivations
    -    5.1 Derivations
    -    5.2 Solvability and nilpotency
    -    5.3 Modules
-    6 The Enveloping Algebra
    -    6.1 The tensor algebra
    -    6.2 Definition for Lie superalgebras
    -    6.3 Definition for Klein graded Lie algebras
    -    6.4 The supersymmetric algebra of a graded vector space
    -    6.5 Filtration of the enveloping algebra
    -    6.6 Poincaré-Birkhoff-Witt
    -    6.7 Hopf structure
        -    6.7.1 Hopf algrebra
        -    6.7.2 The enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra as a Hopf
            algebra
        -    6.7.3 The enveloping algebra of a Lie superalgebra as a
            Hopf superalgebra
        -    6.7.4 The enveloping algebra of a Klein graded Lie algebra
            as a Klein graded Hopf algebra
-    7 Representations
    -    7.1 The connection between representation of L and U(L)
    -    7.2 Invariants
        -    7.2.1 Schur’s lemma for Lie superalgebras
        -    7.2.2 Schur’s lemma for Klein-graded Lie algebras
        -    7.2.3 Lie superalgebra: The supertrace and the killingform
        -    7.2.4 Klein-graded Lie algebra: The supertrace and the
            killingform
-    8 Induced representations
-    9 A special case
    -    9.1 Equations
    -    9.2 The Meaning
-    10 Example: The Relative Parabose Set

## 1 Introduction

This work aims to present the theory of finite dimensional Lie
superalgebras and Klein graded Lie algrebas. The theory of Lie
superalgebra has been developed as a generalization of Lie algebras to
include a @xmath grading and it is important in theoretical physics
where they are used to describe the mathematics of supersymmetry.

The theory of Lie superalgebras(or, as they are also called, @xmath
graded Lie algebras) has seen a remarkable evolution between 1974 and
2000. Lie superalgebras was firstly introduced by Corwin, Ne’eman and
Sternberg in [ CNST75 ] as it was known in 1974. The most important
result in the theory seems to be the classification by V.G. Kac of the
finite dimensional simple Lie superalgebras over an algebraically closed
field of characteristic zero in 1975(a sketch of this article has been
given in [ KAC77 ] ). In 1979, M. Scheunert [ SCH79 ] gives us a
mathematical description of this classification and several theorems
that was omitted in [ KAC77 ] are included.

In 2000 a new kind of graded Lie algebra made it’s appearance. Yand
Weimin and Jing Sicong [ YAJI01 ] introduce the Klein graded Lie
algebras in order to study symmetries and supersymmetries of
paraparticle systems. A significant work on graded Lie algebras has been
already made by many authors including V. G. Kac [ KAC68 ] , [ KAC77 ]
and M. Scheunert [ SCH79 ] , [ SCH79G ] , [ SCH83 ] as they generalize
the theory of Lie algebras a step beyond Lie superalgebras. So, a lot of
work was already done in the general case, however Klein graded Lie
algebra theory was to be studied more comprehencively due to it’s
application.

Apart from presenting the theory of Lie superalgebras,we try to develop
similar to Lie superalgebras’ results for Klein graded case. The
interest in Klein graded algebras rose by an algebra used by physicists
that seems to be a Klein graded Lie algebra as we will see in section 10
.

In section 2 we present the definition for a graded vector space and a
G-graded Lie algebra, where G a finite abelian group. We then introduce
the special cases of a Lie superalgebra and Klein graded Lie algebra. A
discussion on the color of a Klein graded Lie algebra lead us to
identify four types of color which are the only possible color functions
for such an algebra.

In section 3 , remark are made on the substructures of a Lie
superalgebra and on the substructures of a Klein graded Lie algebra. In
the following section we construct the general linear algebra which
plays the same role as the general linear algebra of Lie algebras. The
elements of general linear algebra are presented in matrix form.

Section 5 is used to state and prove some propositions made by Zhang
Qingcheng and Zhang Yongzheng in [ ZHA08 ] for the Klein grading case.
Definitions of solvability and nilpotency are refered in these section
for later use.

In section 6 we construct the enveloping algebra for a Lie superalgebra
and for Klein graded algebra respectively and we use a variety of
propositions a remarks, in the way that M. Scheunert [ SCH79 ] did, to
prove the Poincaré-Birkhoff-Witt theorem. We keep following M. Scheunert
in section 7 to prove Schur’s lemma for both Lie superalgebra and Klein
graded Lie algebra case. Ado’s theorem is described in section 8 . These
resutls are already known and proven in the general case of a (G, @xmath
)-graded Lie algebra, where @xmath an arbitrary color and G a finite
abelian group, thanks to V. G. Kac and M. Scheunert.

Finally, in the last two sections, examples of Klein graded Lie algebras
are studied. We examine the special case of a Klein graded Lie algebra
@xmath with @xmath being the @xmath part of it and we try to find some
resutls based on that fact. An example taken from mathematical physics
constitutes our last section, the relative parabose set, which was the
inspiring example for studying Klein graded Lie algrebas in the first
place.

In this work, original result like simple calculations or propositions
for Klein graded Lie algebras are introduced in the following. In
section 5, proposition 5.3 . In section 7 proposition 7.6 , lemma 7.11
and remark 7.12 . In section 9, all calculations and basics results are
original. Let @xmath is a Klein graded algebra, we set @xmath . This way
may lead someone to classify all Klein graded Lie algebras which have a
simple Lie algebra as the @xmath part. This is only a workaround, but it
looks promising.

## 2 General on graded structures

###### Remark 2.1

All vector spaces and algebras we are dealing with, they are over a
field K of characteristic zero and they are finite dimensional.

###### Definition 2.2

Let @xmath be a field, and let @xmath be a vector space over @xmath
equipped with an additional binary operation from @xmath , denoted here
by @xmath (i.e. if x and y are any two elements of @xmath is the product
of @xmath and @xmath ). Then @xmath is an algebra over @xmath if the
following identities hold for any three elements @xmath , and @xmath of
@xmath , and all elements (”scalars”) @xmath and @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call the algebra @xmath assiciative if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call the algebra @xmath unital if there is an element @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath

The associative algebras appearing in this work will always contain a
unit element.

###### Definition 2.3

Let V be a vector space over the field @xmath and G an abelian group. In
this paper the gradation group is always assumed an abelian group. A
G-gradation of the vector space V is a family @xmath of sub spaces of V
such that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

An element of V is called homogeneous of degree g, @xmath , if it is an
element of @xmath . In the case G = @xmath the elements of @xmath are
also called even, and the elements of @xmath are called odd.

Every element of @xmath has a unique decomposition of the form

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

In the above relation, only finitely many @xmath are different from
zero. The element @xmath is called the homogeneous component of x of
degree g.

A subspace of U of V is called G-graded if it contains the homogeneous
components of all its elements, i.e. if

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

###### Definition 2.4

Let W = @xmath be a second @xmath -graded vector space. A linear mapping

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

is said to be homogeneous of degree @xmath , if

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

The mapping f is called a homomorphism of the @xmath -graded vector
space @xmath into the @xmath -graded vector space @xmath if and only if
is homogeneous of degree @xmath (the identity element of @xmath ). The
mapping f is called an isomorphism if it is a bijective homomorphism.

###### Definition 2.5

Let A be an algebra over @xmath . The algebra A is said to be G-graded
if the underlying vector space is G-graded,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

and if, furthermore,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

Evidently, @xmath is a subalgrbra of @xmath . If A has a unit element
then this element Lies in @xmath .

###### Definition 2.6

A left ideal of a algebra is a linear subspace that has the property
that any element of the subspace multipLied on the left by any element
of the algebra produces an element of the subspace. In symbols, we say
that a subset @xmath of a algebra @xmath is a left ideal if for every
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath in @xmath and c in @xmath , we have the
following three statements.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A two-sided ideal is a subset that is both a left and a right ideal. The
term ideal will be used to mean a two-sided ideal.

A homomorphism of @xmath -graded algebras is by definition a
homomorphism of the underlying algebras as well as of the underlying
@xmath -graded vector spaces:

###### Definition 2.7

A homomorphism of degree g between two graded algebras A and B,over a
field @xmath ,is a map @xmath such

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

A graded subalgebra of a @xmath -graded algebra @xmath is a subalgebra
of the algebra A which is, in addition, a graded subspace of the
G-graded vector space @xmath . A graded ideal of a @xmath -graded
algebra @xmath is an ideal of the algebra @xmath which is, in addition,
a graded subspace of the @xmath -graded vector space @xmath . The
quotient algebra of a G-graded algebra modulo a (two-side) graded ideal
is again a G-graded algebra.

###### Definition 2.8

Let G be a group then a map @xmath is called a color map if

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

###### Definition 2.9

An algebra @xmath is a @xmath -Graded Lie algebra iff:

-   @xmath is an abelian group

-   @xmath such as @xmath

-   @xmath such as

    1.  @xmath for all homogeneous elements A,B @xmath

    2.  @xmath (Jacobi identity) for all homogeneous elements X,Y,Z
        @xmath

    3.  @xmath , for all @xmath

If an element A @xmath we call it homogeneous of degree a.

###### Example 2.10

A Lie algebra is a trivial graded algebra. The gradation group is the
trivial group { e } containing only the identity element and the
gradation map @xmath .

###### Example 2.11

A Lie superalgebra is a @xmath -graded Lie algebra, the map @xmath will
be described below for this case.

From now on, we will use capital letter for the elements of an algebra,
and small letter for their degree.

###### Definition 2.12

A homomorphism between two graded Lie algebras @xmath (over the same
ground field) is a linear map that is compatible with the commutators:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

for all x,y in L.

###### Remark 2.13

From now on, we shall call a homomorphism(without refering the degree) a
homomorphism of degree e.

### 2.1 Superalgebra case

First of all, a superalgebra is a @xmath -graded algebra, the physicists
use the prefix super, it comes from the theory of supersymmetry in
theoretical physics. Two colors can be defined on @xmath . Using
properties of a color map we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath = 1. We don’t have any rescrictions for @xmath . Consider
@xmath {-1,1}, then every color on @xmath can be described as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If L is a ( @xmath , @xmath )-graded Lie algebra, in the case that
@xmath = 1 we have an ordinary Lie algebra.

If L is a ( @xmath , @xmath )-graded Lie algebra, in case that @xmath =
-1 we have a Lie superalgebra.

###### Definition 2.14

Let L = @xmath be a superalgebra whose multiplication is denoted by a
pointed bracket [ , ]. This impLies in particular that for all a,b
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

We call L a Lie superalgebra if the multiplication satisfies the
following identities:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

(graded skew-symmetry)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

(graded jacobi identity)

for all A @xmath , B @xmath , C @xmath ; a,b,c @xmath .

### 2.2 Klein-Graded case

Lets recall the Klein group’s basic facts. It’s a group isomorphic to
@xmath and if we use the symbols {e,s,t,r} for it’s elements, then the
Cayley table for this group is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If a color @xmath , and @xmath is the Klein group, then we can see that
this color function takes some specific forms. By the second and third
property of the color map definition, if we set a=b=c we can get that
@xmath . Also, using the second property we can see that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, if we set a=r, b=s, we conclude that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the possible colors are the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath .
Furthermore, we can see four cases about the color:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can find a map from Klein group to @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath as a
ring) in order to describe each of these color in the following way:
@xmath . If we consider the elements of @xmath as a pair @xmath such as
e=(0,0), r=(1,0), s=(0,1), t=(1,1), then it’s easy to see that the map
for the first color is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the second it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the third it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the last one it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

Note that the previous calculations are modulo 2.

###### Definition 2.15

Let @xmath be a color map on the Klein group and let @xmath be the Klein
group, then a Klein graded Lie algebra is a ( @xmath , @xmath )-graded
Lie algebra. This impLies in particular that for all a,b @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

(graded skew-symmetry)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

(graded jacobi identity)

for all A @xmath , B @xmath , C @xmath ; a,b,c @xmath .

###### Remark 2.16

We can rewrite Jacobi identity in the following way

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This equation is known as the Leibniz rule.

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie algebra, we can obtain the following
remarks.

###### Remark 2.17

@xmath is a Lie algebra. The elements of @xmath have degree e, and
@xmath = 1. If we recall the relations that define a Klein graded Lie
algebra and consider the restriction on @xmath , we can see that they
are the same as the definition of a Lie algebra in the case of @xmath .

###### Remark 2.18

If the graded vector space L is equipped with ”inverted multiplication”

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Jacobi identity also holds due to the same fact that for the Klein
group:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we obtain again a Klein graded Lie algebra.

The same remarks imply on superalgebra case.

## 3 Substructures

### 3.1 Subalgebras and Ideals

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie Algebra.

###### Definition 3.1

A Subalgebra @xmath is a subset of elements of L which forms a vector
subspace of L that is closed with respect to the Lie product of L such
that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A subalgebra W of L such that
@xmath is called a proper subalgebra of L.

###### Definition 3.2

An ideal I of L is a subalgebra of L such that @xmath , that is @xmath .
An ideal I of L such that @xmath is called a proper ideal of L.

###### Proposition 3.3

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath . @xmath is an ideal of the Lie algebra
@xmath .

-   If @xmath is an ideal of @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.4

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath . @xmath is an ideal of the graded
algebra @xmath .

-   If @xmath is an ideal of @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    . Hence,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.5

Let @xmath two ideals of @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
ideals of @xmath . The center of @xmath : @xmath is an ideal.

-   Let z @xmath L, x @xmath I, y @xmath J.

    For the sum, due to linearity we have that

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (15)
      -- -------- -- ------

    I,J are ideals, so @xmath is in @xmath , and @xmath is in @xmath so
    @xmath is in @xmath and @xmath is an ideal.

    In the case of intersection, let @xmath J, @xmath . If we consider
    @xmath as an element of @xmath we have

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (16)
      -- -------- -- ------

    if we consider @xmath as an element of @xmath we have

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (17)
      -- -------- -- ------

    finally we get that @xmath is in the intersection ideal.

    In the case of the bracket ideal, we have that

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (18)
      -- -------- -- ------

    @xmath are ideals so we have that @xmath and @xmath are in @xmath
    and @xmath respectivly. Hence, @xmath and @xmath , consequently
    @xmath is an ideal.

    Finally, the center of L is an ideal. Let x in @xmath and z in L. We
    have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for every y in L. Hence, [z,x] is in @xmath , so @xmath is an ideal.

###### Theorem 3.6

Let a be an graded ideal of L, and let @xmath be the natural
projection.Let @xmath be another Klein graded Lie algebra and suppose
that @xmath is a homomorphism such that @xmath . Then there is a unique
homomorphism @xmath satisfying @xmath .

-   Notice that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all x in Klein group. Therefore, @xmath is a homomorphism of
    degree e. Let @xmath be given by @xmath , for all @xmath . Since
    f(a) = 0, @xmath is well-defined. It is a homomorphism since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and the degree of @xmath is e

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all x in Klein group. Finally, it is unique since the condition
    @xmath means that, for all @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Corollary 3.7

Let @xmath be a homomorphism of Klein graded Lie algebras. Then the
image f(L) is a Klein graded Lie subalgebra of @xmath , and the
resulting map @xmath is an isomorphism. Thus, if @xmath is onto, then
@xmath is an isomorphism of @xmath onto @xmath .

-   For any @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so @xmath is a subalgbra of @xmath . Put @xmath in the previous
    theorem. Then @xmath is injective since if @xmath , then @xmath , so
    @xmath , and thus x + a = a. Thus the map @xmath is an isomorphism.

###### Theorem 3.8

Let @xmath be Klein graded Lie algebras and let f : @xmath be a
surjective homomorphism.

1.   If a is a graded ideal of @xmath , then f(a) is a graded ideal of
    @xmath .

2.   If s is an graded ideal of @xmath , then @xmath is an graded ideal
    of @xmath which contains @xmath .

3.   The mappings a @xmath f(a) and s @xmath are inverse mappings
    between the set of all graded ideals of @xmath which contain @xmath
    and the set of all graded ideals of @xmath , so the two sets of
    graded ideals are in one-to-one correspondence.

4.   L/a @xmath /f(a) for all ideals a of L containing kerf.

-   @xmath

    1.  For any y @xmath and v @xmath a, we have y = f(x) for some x
        @xmath , so

          -- -------- -- ------
             @xmath      (19)
          -- -------- -- ------

        Hence [ @xmath ,f(a)] @xmath L(a), and @xmath is an ideal of
        @xmath . The gradation of @xmath comes in a natural way, we set

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    2.  Let v @xmath . Then for any x @xmath , we have

          -- -------- -- ------
             @xmath      (20)
          -- -------- -- ------

        so [x,v] @xmath . @xmath of course is in @xmath because 0 is
        in s.

    3.  We first claim that if a is an ideal of L containing kerf, then
        @xmath =a. Since clearly a @xmath , it suffices to prove that
        @xmath . But if x @xmath , then f(x) = f(v) for some v @xmath a,
        so x - v @xmath , and hence x @xmath v + @xmath a + a = a. Next,
        it is clear from the surjectivity of @xmath that if A is any
        subset of @xmath , then @xmath = A. Thus, in particular, if s is
        an ideal of @xmath , then @xmath = s.

    4.  Consider the following diagram of homomorphisms

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath and @xmath are projections. Now @xmath is a
        homomorphism of L onto @xmath whose kernel is @xmath = a. Hence,
        by the previous theorem and its corollary, there is a
        isomorphism g from L/a onto @xmath such that @xmath .

The propositions and theorems in this section are also true for a Lie
superalgebra. As you can see the bracket or the grading of the algebra
are not involved in the proof.

### 3.2 Lie superalgebra

Let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra. Then it’s clear than @xmath is a Lie
algebra. In @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all x,y,z in @xmath .

Since @xmath is a Lie algebra, and the fact that the grading of L give
us the rule @xmath , we notice that @xmath can be considered as a module
of @xmath .

### 3.3 Klein graded Lie algebra

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie algebra. This case is more complicated,
and we have more interesting substructures here.

#### 3.3.1 Lie algebras

The subspace @xmath is a Lie Algebra no matter what color we use. This
is true, @xmath is a vector space, the restriction of L-bracket on
@xmath satisfies the bilinearity, alternating and the jacobi identity
needed for a Lie Algebra. The same fact holds for the entire algebra L,
if we us the color @xmath .This color is trivial so it’s easy to see
that L with the color @xmath is a Lie algebra. Lie algebras can also be
found in case that the color we use isn’t @xmath , i.e. the subalgebras
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath are Lie algebras if we use @xmath (L isn’t a
Lie algebra this time). In case of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is a Lie
algebra.

#### 3.3.2 Lie superalgebras

We can find Lie superalgebra structure on certain subalgebras of a
@xmath -Graded Lie Algebra. In more details, we have the following
superalgebras depending on the color we choose:
Case of @xmath color: The subalgebras @xmath , @xmath , are
superalgebras.
Case of @xmath color: The subalgebras @xmath , @xmath , are
superalgebras.
On both cases, they are superalgebras because the respective colors are
the same as a @xmath -Graded Lie algebra requires.

#### 3.3.3 Module substructure

Since @xmath is a Lie algebra, and the fact that the grading of L give
us the rules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we notice that @xmath can be considered as a module of @xmath . More
genericl, every subset of L that does not contain elements of @xmath is
a @xmath -module.

Except @xmath modules, we can see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath is an @xmath -module. @xmath was randomly selected, we also
have @xmath and @xmath modules in the same way.

## 4 General Linear Algebra

If @xmath be a Klein graded vector space then @xmath is a K-Graded Lie
Algebra. That’s it:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can define a grading on @xmath as the following one:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all a in @xmath .

There is a natural way of defining a bracket [ , ] in the algebra @xmath
by the equality:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

For an associative algebra( @xmath is one of that kind) we have the
following important identity:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

-   -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (25)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In case that we have a @xmath -graded vector space, then @xmath is a Lie
superalgebra and the relations ( 22 ) , ( 23 ), ( 24 ) switch to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectivly.

It’s easy but usefull to see the elements of this algebra. The @xmath in
each case, are matrices of same dimensions as the dimensions of the
respective vector spaces i.e. if we number e,r,s,t @xmath 1,2,3,4 we can
say that @xmath is a @xmath matrix. In case of Klein grading we have
that elements of @xmath have the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

elements of @xmath have the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

elements of @xmath have the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and elements of @xmath have the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In case of @xmath -grading we have that elements of @xmath have the
following form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the elements of @xmath have the following form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The graded algebra constructed this way will be denoted by @xmath and
will be called general linear Lie Klein graded algebra or (general
linear Lie superalgebra) of V. It plays the same role as the Lie algebra
gl(V) does in the theory of Lie algebras. Now we can define

###### Definition 4.1

A graded representation of a Klein graded Lie algebra(resp. Lie
superalgebra) L in a Klein graded(resp. @xmath -graded) vector space V
is an homomorphism of L into pl(V).

## 5 Derivations

### 5.1 Derivations

Denote with @xmath the Klein group, then a derivation of degree s, s
@xmath , of a Klein Graded algebra L is an endomorphism @xmath with a
property known as the Leibniz rule:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

We denote by @xmath the space of all derivations of degree s, and we set
@xmath . The space @xmath is seen to be closed under the bracket:

-   Consider two derivations of degree s and t @xmath , we will show
    that the product @xmath is a derivation too.

    @xmath = @xmath .

    so, it is a derivation of degree st.

In other words it is a subalgebra of @xmath ; it is called the algebra
of derivations of L. Every element of derL is called derivation of L.

###### Example 5.1

Let L be a Klein graded Lie Algebra. It follows from the jacobi identity
that @xmath is a derivation of L. These derivations are called inner;
they form an ideal of derL, because @xmath for all D @xmath .

-    We will show that ad is a derivation using the jacobi identity.

    @xmath
    @xmath
    @xmath
    @xmath

    It is enough now to show that @xmath . This is true:

    @xmath , and the element @xmath We recall that @xmath

    The same holds for a Lie superalgebra and the proof is pretty much
    the same.

###### Remark 5.2

The adjoint representation ad of a Lie superalgebra @xmath induces a
representation of the Lie algebra @xmath in the odd subspace @xmath .
This representation is called the adjoint representation of @xmath in
@xmath . Using this representation we can give a new description of Lie
superalgebras, as follows.

Let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra. For convenience we shall write for the
moment @xmath instead of adQ, Q @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Lie superalgebra L is uniquely fixed if we are given the Lie algebra
@xmath , the representation @xmath of @xmath in @xmath and the symmetric
bilinear product mapping

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

The graded jacobi identity impLies that P is @xmath invariant, i.e. that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all Q @xmath , U,V @xmath ,

and that, furthermore,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all W, U, V @xmath .

Conversely, let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra and let @xmath be a
representation of @xmath in some vector space @xmath . Suppose we are
given a summetric bilinear mapping P of @xmath to @xmath . We define a
multiplication [ , ] on the @xmath -graded vector space @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this multiplication @xmath is a Lie superalgebra if and only if P
is @xmath -invariant and if ( 33 ) is fulfilled. In a sense, therefore,
a Lie superalgebra @xmath is some ”superstructure” to be built over the
Lie algebra @xmath .

One will wonder if we can say the same for a Klein graded Lie algebra,
and we will show that it is more complicated but possible.

###### Proposition 5.3

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie algebra. We will denote @xmath the
representation of @xmath in @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Klein graded Lie algebra L is uniquely fixed if we are given the Lie
algebra @xmath , the representations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath of @xmath
in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath respectively and the symmetric bilinear
product mappings

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

The graded Jacobi identity impLies that these mappings are @xmath
-invariant, i.e. that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all Q @xmath , I @xmath , J @xmath , i,j @xmath { r,s,t }

or

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all A @xmath , B @xmath , C @xmath , a,b,c @xmath .

Conversely, let @xmath be a Lie algebra and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
be three representations of @xmath in some vector spaces @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath respectively. Suppose we are given 6 symmetric bilinear
mappings @xmath of @xmath into @xmath and a color @xmath defined on the
Klein group @xmath . We define multiplication [ , ] on the Klein-graded
vector space @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this multiplication @xmath is a Klein graded Lie algebra if and
only if @xmath are @xmath -invariant and if ( 40 ) is fulfilled.

### 5.2 Solvability and nilpotency

Regarding the solvability and nilpotency definitions, they are the same
as for a Lie algebra. Engel’s theorem and its direct consequences remain
valid, and the proof is the same as for Lie algebra [ HUM73 ] .

###### Definition 5.4

A Lie superalgebra(resp. a Klein graded Lie algebra) L is nilpotent if
there exists a positive integer k such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

###### Proposition 5.5

Let @xmath be a @xmath graded vector space(resp. a Klein graded vector
space) and let @xmath be a graded subalgebra @xmath such every
homogeneous element of @xmath is nilpotent. Then there exists a non-zero
element @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Corollary 5.6

A Lie superalgebra(resp. a Klein graded Lie algebra) @xmath is nilpotent
if and only if @xmath is nilpotent for every homogeneous element @xmath
of @xmath .

A proof for the proposition 5.5 and the corollary can be constructed by
using the proof for the same results in [ ZHA08 ] for the case of @xmath
being a Lie color algebra.

###### Corollary 5.7

The Lie superalgebra(resp. a Klein graded Lie algebra) @xmath in
proposition 5.5 is nilpotent.

###### Definition 5.8

A Lie superalgebra(resp. a Klein graded Lie algebra) L is solvable if
there exists a positive integer k such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, Lie’s theorem does not necessarily hold for a
solvable Lie superalgeba. Moreover, Zhang in [ ZHA08 ] shown that it
hold for a special case of Lie color algebras (for those which the group
of the gradation is torsion free) and an example is given to show that
it fails on the case of a color Lie algebra with a torsion group. Kac [
KAC77 ] has investigated the finite-dimensional irreducible graded
representations of solvable Lie superalgebras and the following are some
of his results.

###### Proposition 5.9

A Lie superalgebra @xmath is solvable if and only if its Lie @xmath is
solvable.

###### Proposition 5.10

Suppose that the field @xmath is algebraically closed. All the
finite-dimensional irreducible graded representations of a solvable Lie
superalgebra @xmath are one-dimensional if and only if @xmath .

### 5.3 Modules

Let L be a Klein graded Lie algebra. A L-module M is a Klein graded
vector space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where K is the Klein group, such that @xmath for every g, h @xmath K and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . Note that a homomorphism @xmath End(M) of Klein
graded Lie algebras defines a L-module structure on M and vice vera.
Let V and W be L-modules, and f @xmath such that f(xm) = @xmath , for
every @xmath , then f is called a color homomorphism of L-modules. If
@xmath , then f is called a homomorphism of L-modules. Now we can give a
more abstract definition for derivations, and we will prove some
propositions introduced in [ ZHA08 ] .

###### Definition 5.11

Let V be a L-module. A linear mapping f: L @xmath V is called a
derivation if

f([x,y]) = @xmath ,

for every x,y @xmath L. The derivations of the form @xmath are called
inner(as expected). We say that a derivation f has degree k @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all h @xmath .

This is compatible with the previous definition of derivation. This is
true due to the fact that @xmath .
We denote with Der(L,V) and Inn(L,V) the spaces of derivations and inner
derivations respectively, and we write @xmath . Note that @xmath is the
first cohomology group of L with coefficients in V.

###### Proposition 5.12

Let V be a L-module. Then Der(L,V) = @xmath .

-   For each element k in klein group, let @xmath and @xmath denote the
    canonical projections. According to our general assumption there is
    a finite subset S @xmath L generating L. Let @xmath be a derivation.
    Then there are finite sets Q,R @xmath K such that

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (44)
      -- -------- -- ------

    and

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (45)
      -- -------- -- ------

    For @xmath , we set @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , then we have:

    @xmath ,

    it shows that @xmath is contained in @xmath
    Let T={g-h : g @xmath R, h @xmath Q}. Then T is finite and we
    obtain(keep in mind (4) and (5)), for y @xmath S

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    This shows that the derivation f and @xmath coincide on S. As S
    generates L, we obtain f = @xmath . This proves the assertion.

###### Proposition 5.13

Let V be a L-module such that

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

Then Der(L,V) = @xmath + Inn(L,V).

-   Let @xmath be a color derivation. According to proposition 5.12 , we
    can decompose f into its homogeneous components: f = @xmath .
    Suppose that g @xmath 0. Then @xmath is a color derivation from
    @xmath into the @xmath . Using (a) @xmath is inner, i.e., there is
    @xmath such that @xmath , for all @xmath . Consider @xmath . Then
    @xmath is a color derivation of degree g, which vanishes on @xmath .
    Hence, for every @xmath ,

    @xmath

    Thus, @xmath is a color homomorphism of @xmath -modules and
    condition (b) entails the vanishing of @xmath on @xmath for every
    @xmath . Consequently, @xmath , proving the desired.

###### Remark 5.14

Let L be a Klein graded Lie algebra and V a L-module. Supose that @xmath
is a color homomorphism of L-modules of degree r, i.e., @xmath , for all
g @xmath . If @xmath is Z-linear, then the linear mapping @xmath given
by @xmath , for every @xmath is a derivation of degree r.

-   For every @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    This is the desired result.

Let @xmath be an ideal, V be a L-module and consider the L-submodule
@xmath of V.

###### Remark 5.15

Let A @xmath L be a Klein graded subalgebra, J @xmath L a Klein graded
ideal. If @xmath , then every derivation f @xmath can be extended to a
derivation @xmath be setting @xmath .

-   Let @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath . But

    @xmath .

    Sinse f(a) @xmath , then x.f(a) =0, i.e., @xmath . Hence @xmath is a
    color derivation and @xmath .

## 6 The Enveloping Algebra

In this paragraph we shall introduce the enveloping algebra of a Lie
superalgebra and the envoping algebra of a Klein graded Lie algebra. As
to be expected from the Lie algebra case the enveloping algebra turns
out to be a very useful tool for the theory of Lie superalgebras(or a
Klein graded Lie algebra) and their representations.

### 6.1 The tensor algebra

Let @xmath be a vector space over a field @xmath . For any nonnegative
integer @xmath , we define the kth tensor power of @xmath to be the
tensor product of V with itself @xmath times:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath consists of all tensors on @xmath of rank @xmath . By
convention @xmath is the ground field @xmath (as a one-dimensional
vector space over itself). We construct @xmath as the direct sum of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The multiplication in @xmath is determined by the canonical isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by the tensor product, which is then extended by linearity to all
of @xmath . This multiplication rule implies that the tensor algebra
@xmath is naturally a graded algebra with @xmath serving as the grade-k
subspace. This grading can be extended to a Z grading by appending
subspaces @xmath for negative integers k.

### 6.2 Definition for Lie superalgebras

Let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra and let T(L) be the tensor algrbra of
the vector space L. The @xmath gradation of L induces a @xmath gradation
T(L) such that the canonical injection @xmath is an even linear mapping
and that T(L) is an associative superalgebra. The equations below give
us a way to construct the @xmath gradation of T(L) in terms of L

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the two-sided ideal J of T(L) which is generated by the
elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with A @xmath , B @xmath ; a,b @xmath

Evidently these elements are homogeneous (of degree a+b), hence J is a
graded ideal. Therefore, if we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follws that U(L) is an assosiative superalgebra; this algebra is
called enveloping algebra of L. By composing the canonical injection
@xmath with the canonical mapping @xmath we obtain the canonical even
linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfies the following condition:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every element of @xmath is a linear combination of products of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(for @xmath we define this product to be equal to 1) ; this product is a
homogeneous element of @xmath of degree @xmath . The pair @xmath is
characterized by 46 and by the following universal property:

###### Proposition 6.1

Let S be an associative algebra with unit element and let g be a linear
mapping of @xmath into @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there exists a unique homomorphism @xmath of the algebra @xmath
into the algebra @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

-   Let us use a diagram to make more clear

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    Now recall that every element of @xmath is a linear combination of
    products of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We define @xmath as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    set @xmath and linear extend to all elements of @xmath . @xmath is a
    homomorphism of associative algebras:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence, @xmath is a homomorphism of these associative algebras and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Suppose that there exists another homomorphism @xmath with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then on every element of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence, @xmath .

### 6.3 Definition for Klein graded Lie algebras

Now let L be a Klein graded Lie algebra and let T(L) be the tensor
algebra of the vector space L. Again, the @xmath -gradation of L induces
a @xmath -gradation on T(L). The equations below give us a way to
construct the Klein gradation of T(L) in terms of L

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the two-sided ideal J of T(L) which is generated by the
elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with A @xmath , B @xmath ; a,b @xmath

Evidently these elemens are homogeneous (of degree ab), hence J is a
graded ideal. Therefore, if we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follws that U(L) is an assosiative Klein graded algebra; this algebra
is called enveloping algebra of L. By composing the canonical injection
@xmath with the canonical mapping @xmath we obtain the canonical even
linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfies the following condition:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every element of @xmath is a linear combination of products of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(for @xmath we define this product to be equal to 1) ; this product is a
homogeneous element of @xmath of degree @xmath . The pair @xmath is
characterized by 46 and by the following universal property:

###### Proposition 6.2

Let S be an associative algebra with unit element and let g be a linear
mapping of @xmath into @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there exists a unique homomorphism @xmath of the algebra @xmath
into the algebra @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.4 The supersymmetric algebra of a graded vector space

Let @xmath be a @xmath graded vector space and let @xmath be the tensor
algebra of @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath graded algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath if @xmath and where @xmath is the vector space of tensors
of order @xmath if @xmath . If @xmath is equipped with the @xmath
gradation of inherited @xmath then all the @xmath are @xmath graded
subspaces of @xmath ; hence @xmath is an associative @xmath graded
superalgebra. Now let @xmath be the two-sided ideal of @xmath which is
generated by the tensors of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These tensors are homogeneous both with respect to the @xmath gradation
and with respect to the @xmath gradation of @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an associative @xmath graded superalgebra which is called the
supersymmetric algebra of the @xmath graded vector space @xmath . If we
define @xmath the images of @xmath under the cannonical mapping, then we
can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 6.3

Notice that if V is equiped with the trivial bracket

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is an (abelian) Lie superalgebra and @xmath is nothing else
but the enveloping algebra of this Lie superalgebra. Recall that the
universal algebra is defined as @xmath , where J is the two-sided ideal
J of T(L) which is generated by the elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with A @xmath , B @xmath ; a,b @xmath

Hence, @xmath .

It is easy now to define the Klein symmetric algebra of a Klein graded
vector space. We set @xmath the two-sided ideal of the Tensor algebra
which is generated by the tensors of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 6.4

If V is equiped with the trivial bracket

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is an (abelian) Klein graded Lie algebra and @xmath is
nothing else but the enveloping algebra of this Klein graded Lie
algebra.

### 6.5 Filtration of the enveloping algebra

The following definitions and propositions are the same for both a Lie
superalgebra and a Klein graded Lie algebra. Let @xmath be a Lie
superalgebra(respectively a Klein graded Lie algebra) and let @xmath the
tensor algebra of the vector space @xmath . In the preceding section we
have seen that @xmath has a natural structure of a @xmath graded
superalgebra(resp. @xmath graded Klein algebra)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the @xmath are @xmath graded(resp. Klein graded) subspaces of @xmath .

###### Remark 6.5

Here we have to note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is true due to the multiplication of @xmath and the definition of
@xmath .

Now let @xmath be the enveloping algebra of @xmath and let @xmath be the
canonical mapping. Let @xmath be the image of @xmath under the canonical
mapping @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.6

It is easy to verify the following statements

1.   If @xmath the subspace @xmath of @xmath is generated by the
    products of the form @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

2.   The @xmath are @xmath (resp. Klein) graded subspaces of @xmath .

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

7.  @xmath

-   1.  @xmath contains tensors with degree up to @xmath . We can prove
        this statement by induction to n. For @xmath the statement is
        obvious because @xmath is the ground field @xmath and the
        product is equal to 1 as it was defined in a previous section.
        Assume that it holds for @xmath and we will prove it for @xmath
        . Note that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where J the ideal of @xmath as defined in the definition of the
        universal algebra. Then @xmath is generated by products of the
        form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and @xmath is generated by products of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Hence, @xmath is generated by products of the form

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    2.  As we described in sections 6.2 , 6.3 all @xmath have a @xmath
        (resp. Klein) gradation which is inherited to @xmath .

    3.  If @xmath then

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        Hence, @xmath too.

    4.  @xmath for @xmath by definition, hence @xmath for @xmath too.

    5.  @xmath .

    6.  We have that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        by definition. So through the cannonical mapping @xmath we get
        the desired result.

    7.  We know that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        by the definition of the multiplication on @xmath . Hence

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        and through the cannonical mapping @xmath we get the desired
        result.

The family @xmath is called the canonical filtration of the enveloping
algebra @xmath . Now let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the multiplication in @xmath define a bilinear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it can be extended to a bilinear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which makes @xmath a @xmath graded associative algebra with unity.
@xmath has a natural @xmath (resp. Klein) gradation inherited from
@xmath too. Therefore, G(L) is a @xmath graded assiciative superalgebra
(resp. Klein graded algebra).

Denote the composition of the canonical mapping @xmath by @xmath and let
@xmath be the linear mapping defined by the family @xmath . Then @xmath
is surjective homomorphism of @xmath graded superalgebras (resp. Klein
graded algebras) which vanishes on all tensors of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Respectively

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, @xmath defines a homomorphism @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.7

@xmath is an algebra homomorphism. Moreover, @xmath ( where @xmath the
ideal of @xmath that form the symmetric algebra), so @xmath induces a
homomorphism @xmath of @xmath into @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be homogeneous tensors. By definition of the product in
    @xmath , @xmath , so it follows that @xmath is multiplicative on
    @xmath . Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    (respectively for the Klein version)

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    be a typical generator of @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    by definition. On the other hand we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    therefore,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It follows that @xmath .

### 6.6 Poincaré-Birkhoff-Witt

In order to prove this theorem, we need two more definitions and a
lemma.

###### Definition 6.8

Let L be a Lie superalgebra and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a basis of L. Then the products

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

form a basis of @xmath . We can define a total order on elements @xmath
by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A nondecreasing sequence of elements of B is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 6.9

For an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where # we denote the number of elements of this set. For an element of
the tensor algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The number @xmath is called the disorder of @xmath .

Suppose we are given a basis @xmath of L such that all elements @xmath
are homogeneous and such that the index set @xmath is totally ordered.
For every integer @xmath let @xmath be the set of all finite sequences
@xmath in @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof of the following lemmas can be found in [ SCH79 ] .

###### Lemma 6.10

Define for every @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, furthermore, for every @xmath and every element @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(by convention, @xmath ). If @xmath runs through all sequences from
@xmath the elements @xmath form a basis of @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.11

There exists a graded representation @xmath of the Lie superalgebra L in
the vector space S(L) such that for every @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 6.12 (Poincaré-Birkhoff-Witt)

Let @xmath be a Lie superalgebra with a basis @xmath . The monomials
formed by finite nondecreasing sequences of elements in @xmath
constitute basis of the universal enveloping algebra @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be the canonical morphism, M the submodule generated be
    the monomials described in the formulation of the theorem. We thave
    to prove that @xmath . Note that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    If p=1, then @xmath ; it follow that @xmath . Suppose that @xmath .
    It suffices to prove that @xmath .

    Define @xmath as the submodule of @xmath generated by elements with
    disorder @xmath u, and proceed by a second induction on the
    disorder. We have @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , where @xmath , and
    @xmath monomials formed by the basic elements in B. Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    but

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    by first induction hypothesis. Hence, @xmath and it follows that
    @xmath .

    It remains to prove linear independence. For a given sequence @xmath
    of nondecreasing elements of B; define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Suppose

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a sequence nondecreasing, and @xmath . Using 6.11

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and because of the linear independence of the @xmath , it follows
    that @xmath .

###### Remark 6.13

A lemma similar to lemma 6.11 for the case of a Klein graded lie algebra
can be found in [ BAUT98 ] and one can prove the previous theorem for
the Klein graded case using this lemma for the step of the linear
independence.

### 6.7 Hopf structure

#### 6.7.1 Hopf algrebra

A Hopf algebra, is a structure that is simultaneously an (unital
associative) algebra and a (counital coassociative) coalgebra, with
these structures’ compatibility making it a bialgebra, and that moreover
is equipped with an antiautomorphism satisfying a certain property. The
representation theory of a Hopf algebra is particularly nice, since the
existence of compatible comultiplication, counit, and antipode allows
for the construction of tensor products of representations, trivial
representations, and dual representations. Here we will give only the
definition of a Hopf algebra in order to identify the hopf structure in
the enveloping algebra of some graded Lie algebras.

###### Definition 6.14

An associative algebra A (with product p and unit 1) is a bialgebra over
the ground field @xmath if there are maps

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the following diagrams commute

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the linear map defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we can give the definition for a Hopf algebra.

###### Definition 6.15

A Hopf algebra is a bialgebra @xmath over a field @xmath together with a
linear map @xmath (called the antipode) such that the following diagram
commutes:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

#### 6.7.2 The enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra as a Hopf algebra

Given the definition of a Hopf algebra, we proceed by identifying the
Hopf structure on the enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra. We will see
that the enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra become a Hopf algebra if we
define properly the coproduct, the counit and the antipode maps. Now,
given a Lie algebra @xmath , it is known that the enveloping algebra
@xmath is an associative algebra. We define the comultiplication as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every x in L. It is compatible with the commutator and can therefore
be uniquely extended to all U(L). Next we define the counit as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all x in L. And finally, we define the antipode as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 6.7.3 The enveloping algebra of a Lie superalgebra as a Hopf
superalgebra

Initialy we have to take a look on the graded tensor product. Let @xmath
and @xmath be two associative superalgebras, then the vector space
@xmath has a @xmath gradation too

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, on @xmath we define a multiplication by the requirement that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It’s easy to see that with this multiplication @xmath is an associative
superalgebra. It will be called the graded tensor product and we denote
this algebra by @xmath .

Let L be a Lie superalgebra, and let @xmath be the canonical mapping.
Evidently, the diagonal mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a homomorphism of Lie superalgebras. Hence, due to the proposition
6.1 there exists a unique homomorphism of superalgebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the homomorphism c is called the coproduct of the enveloping algebra
U(L).

###### Remark 6.16

c is associative. This is to say that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

both sides being algebra-homomorphisms of U(L) into @xmath . (Recall
that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are canonically isomorphic.)

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

###### Remark 6.17

Consider K (the ground field) as an associative superalgebra (the odd
subspace of K being equal to { 0 } ). There exists a unique homomorphism
of superalgebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Identifying U(L) @xmath K and K @xmath U(L) with U(L) canonically we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the homomorphism @xmath is called the counit of U(L).

###### Remark 6.18

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the linear mapping defined by the multiplication in @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, define the linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and from these properties we deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A linear mapping @xmath with this property is called an antipode.

In view of these remarks the superalgebra U(L), equipped with the
coproduct c, is what is called a Hopf superalgebra.

#### 6.7.4 The enveloping algebra of a Klein graded Lie algebra as a
Klein graded Hopf algebra

Having the work done for a Lie superalgebra makes it easy to see what
happen to a Klein graded Lie algebra by using the same steps with
respect to the gradation. Let @xmath and @xmath be two Klein graded
associative algebras, then the vector space @xmath has a @xmath
gradation too

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, on @xmath we define a multiplication by the requirement that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It’s easy to see that with this multiplication @xmath is an Klein graded
associative algebra. It will be called the graded tensor product and we
denote this algebra by @xmath .

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie algebra, and let @xmath be the
canonical mapping. Evidently, the diagonal mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a homomorphism of Klein graded Lie algebras. Hence, due to the
proposition 6.1 there exists a unique homomorphism of Klein graded
algebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the homomorphism c is called the coproduct of the enveloping algebra
U(L).

###### Remark 6.19

c is associative. This is to say that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

both sides being algebra-homomorphisms of U(L) into @xmath . (Recall
that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are canonically isomorphic.)

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

###### Remark 6.20

Consider K (the ground field) as a Klein graded associative algebra (the
subspaces @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of K being equal to { 0 } ). There
exists a unique homomorphism of Klein graded algebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Identifying U(L) @xmath K and K @xmath U(L) with U(L) canonically we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the homomorphism @xmath is called the counit of U(L).

###### Remark 6.21

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the linear mapping defined by the multiplication in @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, define the linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and from these properties we deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A linear mapping @xmath with this property is called an antipode.

In view of these remarks the Klein graded algebra U(L), equipped with
the coproduct c, is what is called a Klein graded Hopf algebra.

## 7 Representations

### 7.1 The connection between representation of L and U(L)

###### Definition 7.1

Let L be a Lie superalgebra and let V be a @xmath -graded vector space.
Recall that @xmath has a natural @xmath -gradation which converts it
into an assiciative superalgebra. A graded representation r of L in V is
an even linear mapping

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all @xmath

A @xmath -graded vector space equipped with a graded representation of L
is called a (left) graded L-module.

###### Remark 7.2

The definition makes sense even if the vector space V is not graded
provided we drop the requirement that r should be even. In this work we
shall have no occasion to discuss these ”non-graded” representations.

Let U(L) be the enveloping algebra of L and let @xmath be the canonical
mapping. From now on we shall identify L with a graded subspace of U(L)
by means of s. Under this identification s is just the injection of L
into U(L).

Let r be a graded representation of L in some graded vector space V. Due
to the universal property of U(L) there exists a unique homomorphism of
associative superalgebras

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

which extends r, i.e. such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In particular, we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

Hence @xmath is a graded representation of the associative superalgebra
U(L) in the graded vector space V or, using the modules language, V is a
@xmath -graded left U(L)-module. Conversely, suppose we are given a
@xmath -graded left U(L)-module V; let

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

be the corresponding homomorphism of associative superalgebras. Then the
restriction r of @xmath to L is a graded representation of L in V and
@xmath .

Respectivly, we should give the definition of graded representation of a
Klein graded Lie algebra on a Klein graded vector space.

###### Definition 7.3

Let L be a Klein graded Lie algebra and let V be a Klein graded vector
space. Recall that @xmath has a natural Klein gradation which converts
it into an assiciative Klein graded algebra. A graded representation r
of L in V is an linear mapping of degree e

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all @xmath

In view of this discussion the concepts of a ”graded representation of
L”, a ”graded L-module” and a ”left graded U(L)-module” are completely
equivalent for both Lie superalgebras and Klein graded Lie algebras. It
depends on the circumstances which language is preffered.

###### Definition 7.4

A simple graded module(or equivalently a simple graded representation)
is a module that does not contains any non-trivial submodules.

###### Proposition 7.5

Let @xmath be a @xmath -graded vector space and let @xmath be the @xmath
-graded vector space whose underlying vector space is equal to that of V
but whose gradation is definded by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath .

-   Let f @xmath of degree @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and thus, f @xmath of degree @xmath . We can repeat the same
    proccess backwards and the proof is complete.

###### Proposition 7.6

Let @xmath be a Klein-graded vector space and let @xmath be the
Klein-graded vector space whose underlying vector space is equal to that
of V but whose gradation is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is a permutation of the Klein group that satisfies the
condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath . Furthermore, a homomorphism of degree d in @xmath is a
homomorphism of degree @xmath in @xmath .

-   Let f @xmath Hom(V) of degree @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then there is a k such that @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So, f is in Hom(V’) and it’s degree is k = @xmath .

Consequently,on both @xmath -graded and Klein graded case, a graded
representation of L in V is also a graded representation of L in @xmath
and vice versa. Nevertheless, these two representations are not
necessarily isomorphic.

### 7.2 Invariants

###### Definition 7.7

Let L be a graded Lie algebra and let V be a graded L-module. An element
x of V is called invariant with respect to the given representantion of
L in V (or simply L-invariant) if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of all L-invariant elements of V is denoted by @xmath . An
element of V is L-invariant if and only if its homogeneous components
are L-invariant. Hence @xmath is a graded subspace of V.

###### Example 7.8

Let L be a Lie superalgebra and let V be a graded L-module. If x is a
homogeneous element of V then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a graded subalgebra of L and x is C(x)-invariant. We call C(x) the
graded subalgebra of L consisting of those elements of L which leave x
invariant.

#### 7.2.1 Schur’s lemma for Lie superalgebras

###### Lemma 7.9

Suppose that the field K is algebraically closed. Let L be a Lie
superalgebra and let V be a finite-dimensional simple graded L-module.
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where either u=0 or else @xmath =Id.

Before we write the proof, we have to remember the schur lemma for an
associative algebra with unit element which states that:

###### Lemma 7.10

Let V be a finite dimensional irreducible representation of an
associative algebra A with unit element over an algebraically closed
field k, and @xmath is a homorphism such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath for some c in K.

Details and a proof on this lemma can be found on [ EGH11 ] . Now we can
prove the shcur’s lemma for a Lie superalgebra case:

-   First we have to prove that both homogeneous compoments @xmath and
    @xmath are simple @xmath -modules. Suppose that @xmath isn’t simple
    @xmath -module, then we can find a subspace @xmath of @xmath such
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    now set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    it is not equal to zero due to the selection and we get that

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (56)
      -- -------- -- ------

    Hence, we have that W is a L-submodule of V which is a
    contradiction. The same holds for @xmath @xmath -module, so both of
    them are simple @xmath -modules.

    Now, let f in @xmath . Since @xmath is an unitary assosiative
    algebra, the restriction of f on @xmath (resp. on @xmath ) is some
    constant @xmath (resp. @xmath ). Since V is simple, schur’s lemma
    for associative algebras appLies again and we have @xmath and so
    @xmath

    Now, let f in @xmath . Then @xmath is in @xmath and so @xmath for
    some @xmath . If c=0 then @xmath (remember that kernel is a
    L-submodule of V) and so f=0. Otherwise, set @xmath . Let w be
    another odd endomorphism such that @xmath . Then (w + g), (w-g) are
    also odd endomorphisms. Therefore (w-g) (resp. (w+g)) is either
    isomorphism or zero. Since (w-g)(w+g) = 0, it impLies that w = g or
    w=-g, on any case @xmath .

#### 7.2.2 Schur’s lemma for Klein-graded Lie algebras

###### Lemma 7.11

Suppose that the field K is algebraically closed. Let L be a
Klein-graded Lie algebra and let V be a finite-dimensional simple graded
L-module. Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where either @xmath or else @xmath =Id for all k @xmath

-   First we have to prove that all homogeneous compoments @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are simple @xmath -modules. Suppose that
    @xmath isn’t simple @xmath -module, then we can find a subspace
    @xmath of @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    now set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    it is not equal to zero due to the selection and we get that

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (57)
      -- -------- -- ------

    Hence, we have that W is a L-submodule of V which is a
    contradiction. The same holds for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath
    -module, so all of them are simple @xmath -modules.

    Now, let f in @xmath . Since @xmath is an unitary assosiative
    algebra, the restriction of f on @xmath (resp. on @xmath ) is some
    constant @xmath (resp. @xmath ). Since V is simple, schur’s lemma
    for associative algebras appLies again and we have @xmath and so
    @xmath

    Now, let f in @xmath for some k in {r,s,t}. Then @xmath is in @xmath
    and so @xmath for some @xmath . If c=0 then @xmath (remember that
    kernel is a L-submodule of V) and so f=0. Otherwise, set @xmath .
    Let w be another odd endomorphism such that @xmath . Then (w + g),
    (w-g) are also odd endomorphisms. Therefore (w-g) (resp. (w+g)) is
    either isomorphism or zero. Since (w-g)(w+g) = 0, it implies that w
    = g or w=-g, on any case @xmath .

###### Remark 7.12

We know that if a homomorphism f is in @xmath and g is in @xmath then fg
is in @xmath . This applied to the previous homomorphisms lead us to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a,b in { r,s,t } .

#### 7.2.3 Lie superalgebra: The supertrace and the killingform

Suppose we are given a Lie superalgebra L and three graded L-modules V,W
and U. A billinear mapping @xmath which is homogeneous of degree b is
L-invariant if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath

For every bilinear mapping @xmath we define a bilinear mapping @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

The mapping @xmath of B(V,W;U) into B(W,V;U) is an isomorphim of graded
L-modules, hence g is L-invariant if and only if sg is L-invariant. This
leads to the following definition.

###### Definition 7.13

Let U and V be two @xmath -graded vector spaces. A bilinear mapping of
@xmath into U is called supersymmetric / skew-supersymmetric if @xmath ,
i.e. if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Example 7.14

Recall that the product mapping in a Lie superalgebra is
skew-supersymmetric.

Let V be a finite-dimensional @xmath -graded vector space and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the linear mapping which satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define a linear form str on the general linear Lie superalgebra pl(V)
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and call str the supertrace. The linear form str is even and
pl(V)-invariant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, equivalently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath .

###### Definition 7.15

Let L be a Lie superalgebra and let V be a finite-dimensional graded
L-module. The n-linear form on L which is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath ,

is even and L-invariant (with respect to the adjoint representation of
L).

The n-linear form defined above called the n-linear form associated with
the graded L-module V. The most important case is obtained if we choose
V=L and n=2. This special case is described below, and it is known as
killing form.

###### Definition 7.16

Let L be a finite-dimensional Lie superalgebra and let @xmath be the
automorphism of L such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bilinear form @xmath which is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all A,B @xmath . @xmath is called the killing form of L ; it is
even, invariant and supersymmetric.

###### Proposition 7.17

Let L be a Lie superalgebra and let H be a finite-dimensional graded
ideal of L. Supose we are given a non-degenerate homogeneous bilinear
form b on H of degree @xmath and a homogeneous n-linear form h of H of
degree @xmath . We assume that b and h are L-invariant if the ideal H
considered as a graded submodule of L.

Let @xmath be a basis of H consisting of homogeneous elements and let
@xmath be the degree of @xmath . We introduce a second basis @xmath of H
by the condition that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath .

Then X is a homogeneous L-invariant element of U(L) of degree @xmath ,
hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The element X does not depend on the choice of the basis @xmath .

A proof can be found on [ SCH79 ] . The element X is called generalized
Casimir element of U(L), it supercommutes with every element of U(L).

#### 7.2.4 Klein-graded Lie algebra: The supertrace and the killingform

Let L be a Klein-graded Lie algebra and three graded L-modules V,W and
U. A billinear mapping @xmath which is homogeneous of degree b is
L-invariant if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath

For every bilinear mapping @xmath we define a bilinear mapping @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

The mapping @xmath of B(V,W;U) into B(W,V;U) is an isomorphim of graded
L-modules, hence g is L-invariant if and only if sg is L-invariant. This
leads to the following definition.

###### Definition 7.18

Let U and V be two Klein graded vector spaces. A bilinear mapping of
@xmath into U is called supersymmetric / skew-supersymmetric if @xmath ,
i.e. if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Example 7.19

Recall that the product mapping in a Lie superalgebra is
skew-supersymmetric.

Let V be a finite-dimensional Klein graded vector space and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the linear mapping which satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define a linear form str on the general linear Lie superalgebra pl(V)
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and call str the supertrace. The linear form str is even(degree e) and
pl(V)-invariant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, equivalently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath .

###### Definition 7.20

Let L be a Klein graded Lie algebra and let V be a finite-dimensional
graded L-module. The n-linear form on L which is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath ,

is even and L-invariant (with respect to the adjoint representation of
L).

The n-linear form defined above called the n-linear form associated with
the graded L-module V. The most important case is obtained if we choose
V=L and n=2. This special case is described below, and it is known as
killing form.

###### Definition 7.21

Let L be a finite-dimensional Lie superalgebra and let @xmath be the
automorphism of L such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bilinear form @xmath which is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all A,B @xmath . We call @xmath the killing form of the Klein graded
Lie algebra L. @xmath has degree e,it is invariant and ”kleinsymmetric”.

## 8 Induced representations

In this section if not specified, L is a Lie superalgebra or a
Klein-graded Lie algebra. When it is necessary we will seperate the
cases.

###### Proposition 8.1

Let L be a graded Lie algebra( @xmath or @xmath -grading) and L’ a
subalgebra of L. Also, let @xmath be a family of homogeneous elements of
L such that the images of the elements @xmath under the canonical
mapping @xmath form a basis of the vector space @xmath . We assume that
the index set J is totally ordered.

Let H be the set of all finite sequences @xmath in J such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a sequence of this type we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(by convention @xmath = 1).

Then the family @xmath is a basis of the left as well as of the right
@xmath -module U(L).

Let V be a left U(L’)-module. Regarding U(L) as a right graded
U(L’)-module we can construct the tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has a natural structure of a @xmath -graded vector space(resp.
Klein graded vector space). The subspace @xmath (resp. x in Klein group)
being spanned by the tensors of the form @xmath with X @xmath y @xmath ;
@xmath , a+b = x (resp. a,b @xmath , ab=x). Now it is obvious that
@xmath has a structure of a left graded U(L)-module with satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This graded U(L)-module @xmath is called the graded U(L)-module induced
from the graded @xmath -module V.

One can define the even(resp. of degree e) linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The linear mapping a is @xmath -invariant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 8.2

For every sequence @xmath the linear mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is injective; in particular, a itself is injective. The vector space
@xmath is the direct sum of its subspaces @xmath , @xmath .

This lemma may now be applied to give us a proof of the Ado theorem for
both Lie superalgebras and Klein graded Lie algebras. In fact, let
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) and let V be any @xmath -module (resp. @xmath
-module). We introduce a trivial @xmath -gradation (resp.
Klein-gradation) in V by defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then the induced L-module @xmath is well-defined and lemma impLies:

a) If the @xmath -module(resp. @xmath -module) V is faithful, then the
L-module @xmath is faithfull too, provided that @xmath .

b) If the vector spaces @xmath (resp. some of @xmath ) and V are
finite-dimensional, then the same holds true for @xmath .

Now, using these remarks and the Ado theorem for Lie algebras we
conclude that:

###### Theorem 8.3

Every finite-dimenstional Lie superalgebra(resp. Klein-graded Lie
algebra) has a faithful finite-dimensional graded representation.

## 9 A special case

In this section we will examine a graded Lie algebra which has even part
equal to a known Lie algebra, more specific we will examine the case of
sl(2,C). On the first part we will find some equations which come easily
by composing the relations of a base of sl(2,C) and the known relations
for an irreducible representation. We will use some tools from the
theory of Lie algebras to find results for a grades Lie algebra. On the
second part, we will examine the meaning of these equations and we will
write some remarks for this algebra.

### 9.1 Equations

Let @xmath be a Klein graded Lie Algebra. We set @xmath to be the simple
Lie algebra sl(2,C). @xmath is a @xmath -module and as it follows from
Weyl theorem, @xmath is direct sum of irreducible representations of
sl(2,C). Lets say @xmath is irreducible representation. We select a
@xmath and we choose a base for this vector space, lets say { @xmath }.
The base {h,x,y} of sl(2,C) comes with the the following rules:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bracket product for two elements of @xmath is in @xmath , so we
have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now using the Jacobi identity for Klein-graded Lie algebras we have
that:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will work these equations to take some results. Due to equation ( 58
) and the rules for an irreducible representation of sl(2,C) we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and we obtain the equations 1-3 from the next part. Now we are going to
use the equation ( 59 ) and we will get equations 4-6:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Finally, we use equation ( 60 ) and we get equations 7-9:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

So after these calculations we have:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

7.  @xmath

8.  @xmath

9.  @xmath

Now we will take a closer look to these relations and make some
observations on the structure of @xmath . From the first 3 relations we
will gain some information on the form of the matrices a,b,c and the
rest relations will lead us to a relation between matrices a,b and c. In
more details, the first relation @xmath shows that the elements @xmath
can be non-zero only in the case that @xmath and they are zero
otherwise. The matrix a is anti-diagonal, it has the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second relation @xmath shows that the elements @xmath can be
non-zero only in the case that @xmath and they are zero otherwise. So
the matrix b has the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the third relation @xmath shows that the elements @xmath can be
non-zero only in the case that @xmath and they are zero otherwise. So
the matrix c has the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we know the form of the matrices. We will use the rest relations
(4-9) to express @xmath as products of @xmath . Before we do that, we
have to express @xmath in terms of a. Relation 8 by setting i = i-1 and
j = j-1 we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using this on relation 5 and we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we set now j = j+1:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

Relation 6:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using this on relation 9 and we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we set i=i-1:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now we can use the last 2 relations to find a formula for @xmath . We
use relation 4(or relation 7, it is the same result):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We set j = n-i+1:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

The last one for i=1:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last one for i=2:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last one for i=3:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last one for i=4:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

if we continue these calculations, we can notice that the formula is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the last one and by setting j = n-i-1 in ( 61 ), we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now using ( 64 ) and by setting j = n-i+1 in ( 62 ), we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

### 9.2 The Meaning

The calculations are done. Now we may examine what results we can
extract out of these equations. Consider these two products

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the bracket properties, we have that @xmath . So, if @xmath then
@xmath is a Lie algebra and we have that @xmath . Equation ( 64 ) says
that @xmath and now we see that if @xmath is a Lie algebra, then n has
to be even. Consequently @xmath has to be odd. On the other hand, if
@xmath then @xmath is a Lie superalgebra. In that case n has to be odd
so @xmath is even.

###### Remark 9.1

If @xmath then @xmath is odd, otherwise @xmath is even.

###### Remark 9.2

We can see that if one of @xmath , @xmath or @xmath is zero, then all of
them are zero, so the matrices a,b,c are zero. Hence @xmath .

###### Remark 9.3

If the dimension of @xmath is odd, then n is even. In that case, in
equation ( 64 ) there is an integet i such that n-2i=0, so @xmath and
due to previous remark we have that @xmath .

###### Remark 9.4

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra, we know that @xmath and recall that on Lie
algebra case n is even. Due to remark, @xmath .

###### Proposition 9.5

Consider 2 different irreducible representation of @xmath , @xmath with
@xmath , then @xmath .

-   First we show that @xmath is an ideal of @xmath . Let @xmath then we
    have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we see that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath is an ideal of @xmath . Now, assume that @xmath ; we have
    2 cases( @xmath is also an ideal),

    Case 1: If one assume that @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    on the other hand, using jacobi identity,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which is a contradiction.

    Case 2: If one assume that @xmath then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    on the other hand, using jacobi identity,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which is a contradiction.

    On both cases it is a condradiction, so our first assumption that
    @xmath was wrong and we have that @xmath .

###### Proposition 9.6

Consider an irreducible representation of @xmath , @xmath and assume
that @xmath then @xmath .

-   If there is @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    on the other hand, using jacobi identity,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which is a contradiction.

Using these remarks and propositions we are ready to classify some
cases.
Case 1 : L = @xmath is a Lie superalgebra.

Subcase 1 : L = @xmath , [M,M] = @xmath

Subcase 2 : L = @xmath , @xmath
On subcase 2 we have to notice that @xmath is a Grassman algebra.
Case 2 : L = @xmath is a Lie algebra. We can write L = @xmath and based
on the remark, on this case we have that @xmath .

###### Remark 9.7

On case 2, the ideal W = @xmath is solvable(because it’s abelian)
moreover, W is the the maximal solvable ideal of L i.e. W is the radical
of the Lie algebra L. We can also write @xmath .

-   Let denote with R the radical of L. Assume that @xmath , then N is a
    solvable ideal and it is a subset of @xmath . Consequently,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so N is @xmath -module. Hence, N = {0} or N = @xmath . If N={0} then
    the remark is proven, otherwise N = @xmath and L is a solvable. But
    if L is solvable, then the even part ( @xmath in our case ) is
    solvable, with is a contradiction.

## 10 Example: The Relative Parabose Set

As an example we examine The Relative Parabose Set as described in [
KAN12 ] , [ GREEN65 ] . @xmath is generated, as an associative algebra,
by the generators @xmath , for all values @xmath and @xmath . The
relations satisfied by the above generators are:

The usual trilinear relations of the parabosonic and the parafermionic
algebras which can be compactly summarized as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all values @xmath and @xmath together with the mixed trilinear
relations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

for all values @xmath and @xmath , which represent a kind of
algebraically established interaction between parabosonic and
parafermionic elements and characterize the relative parabose set.

We use @xmath as symbols, there is no connection with the multiplicative
inverse. One can easily observe that the relations 67 , 68 involve only
the parabosonic and the parafermionic degrees of freedom separately
while the interaction relations 69 , 70 mix the parabosonic with the
parafermionic degrees of freedom.

In all the above and in what follows, we use the notation @xmath (i.e.:
the ”commutator”) to imply the expression @xmath and the notation @xmath
(i.e.: the ”anticommutator”) to imply the expression @xmath , for x and
y any elements of the algebra @xmath .

Let @xmath and define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, if we keep in mind 67 - 70 , L is a Klein graded Lie algebra.
Finally, if we recall that a Klein graded Lie algebra’s color is one of
the @xmath we discussed in section 2.2 . In this construction we can see
that the color function is the @xmath of section 2.2 .