mathematical content of any such box, not necessarily related to the
correlation function ( 1.18 ), is a conditional probability function
@xmath that fulfills so-called non-signalling conditions that guarantee
the impossibility of supraluminal communication, cf. [ BLMPPR05 ] .
Generalizations to a multipartite scenario are immediate.

Notably, mod2NLB was postulated as a unit of nonlocality [ BP05 ] ,
somewhat similar to the role played by the Bell singlet @xmath in
entanglement theory. However, it was immediately realized [ BP05 ] that
not all multipartite boxes can be simulated using a number of copies of
mod2NLB. Moreover, in [ DGHMP07 ] the authors showed that in the
bipartite scenario, there does not exist a finite set of nonlocal boxes
that could be used to simulate all bipartite nonlocal boxes.
Interestingly, in the proof presented in [ DGHMP07 ] the Hilbert basis
theorem was used, which also appears in Section 4.2 of this thesis as
Theorem 4.18 .

As intellectually appealing as they are, general nonlocal boxes do not
seem to have a counterpart in the real world. Still, most of the
discussion by the quantum information community does stay within the
framework of quantum mechanics, but not necessarily concentrates on
entanglement. In particular, it was quickly recognized that there exist
nonlocal phenomena in quantum mechanics which cannot be explained by the
presence of entanglement. In the well-known paper [ BVFMRSSW99 ] , the
authors show an example of a family of nine mutually orthogonal
bipartite product states that cannot be distinguished using local
measurements and classical communication by the two parties. They call
this phenomenon “nonlocality without entanglement”, hence pointing out
to the difference between the two notions that tended to be taken as
equivalent. However, it should be kept in mind that nonlocality in terms
of the violation of Bell inequalities is very closely related, if not
equivalent, to the property of being entangled. We briefly explained
this in Section 1.1 , where we referred to a paper by L. Masanes, Y.-C.
Liang and A. C. Doherty [ Mas08b ] . Therefore, the notion of
nonlocality in [ BVFMRSSW99 ] and in the research we describe in the
rest of this section, significantly differs from what was traditionally
perceived as the equivalent of being nonlocal, i.e. the violation of
Bell inequalities and the lack of a local realistic description.

In more recent days, the study of nonlocality largely revolves around
its two quantitative measures, which are the quantum discord ,
introduced by Żurek and Ollivier in [ OZ01 ] , and the quantum deficit ,
studied by Oppenheim and the Horodecki family [ OHHH02 ] . For a recent
review article on the subject, consult [ MBCPV11 ] . The basic idea
behind the quantum discord is that two expressions for so-called mutual
information that are equivalent in the case of classical probability
distributions, do not necessarily give the same answer when generalized
to the quantum scenario. Indeed, let us define the entropy of a
classical random variable @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the conditional entropy of @xmath with respect to another classical
variable @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the entropy of the variable @xmath conditioned on a
particular value @xmath of the variable @xmath . We define the mutual
information of the variables @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

A little inspection shows that in the case of classical probability
distributions, the above expression is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stays for the entropy of the collective variable @xmath .
Thus we have @xmath for arbitrary classical variables @xmath and @xmath
. However, as pointed out in [ OZ01 ] , the equality between the two
expressions for mutual information does not generally hold in a quantum
world.

To show this, let us consider a bipartite quantum system described by a
density matrix @xmath . The states of the subsystems are given by the
partial traces of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We immediately see that a
quantum analogue of ( 1.23 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . However, it is not obvious how to generalize @xmath to
the quantum case. The reason behind this is that the quantum subsystem
@xmath can be measured in various bases, and one of them has to be
selected before a sum similar to the @xmath in formula ( 1.21 ) is
calculated. Thus we have a whole family of conditional entropies @xmath
, where @xmath is an arbitrary complete set of one-dimensional
projections on the subsystem @xmath , satisfying @xmath . Explicitly,
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the probability to obtain a result @xmath in a
measurement corresponding to @xmath . Simply because the @xmath are not
all equal, there is no single quantum analogue of @xmath . Instead, we
have a family of mutual information analogues, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The supremum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be considered as a measure of classical correlations [ OZ01 , HV01 ]
. Note that there also exists a related quantity @xmath where the roles
of @xmath and @xmath have been interchanged. The quantum discord is now
defined as the difference between @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively, the name “discord” may refer to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

although the two quantities @xmath and @xmath do not generally coincide.

Due to the equality @xmath valid in the classical world, the
non-vanishing of the discord for @xmath is a sign of quantumness of the
state. Unlike separability, the vanishing of the discord only occurs for
a measure zero subset of the set of all states [ FACCA10 ] . In
particular, @xmath and @xmath vanish simultaneously if and only if
@xmath has an eigenbasis consisting of product vectors, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath constitute bases for the first
and the second subsystem, respectively. Such states are called
classically correlated [ HHHOSSSR05 ] . They also play an important role
in the alternative framework for correlation studies, developed by
Oppenheim and the Horodecki family [ OHHH02 , HHHOSSSR05 ] .

It is in general not easy to evaluate the quantum discord, but some
results have been obtained e.g. for @xmath systems [ L08 , ARA10 ] .
Several conditions for zero and non-zero quantum discord are known as
well [ FACCA10 , BC10 , DVB10 ] , and a missing operational
interpretation of the quantity has been provided in [ CABMPW11 ] in
terms of a quantum state merging protocol.

Quantum deficit, on the other hand, has had a relatively clear physical
interpretation from the very beginning when it was introduced in [
OHHH02 ] . The quantity is believed to be equal to the amount of work
which can be extracted from a multipartite quantum state @xmath
globally, minus the amount of work the parties can draw locally,
possibly after transforming the state by an allowed family of
transformations. This description may seem a little vague, but on the
mathematical side, the discussion can easily be made more rigorous. For
a quantum state @xmath in a @xmath -dimensional space, we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the information contained in @xmath . For the allowed family of
transformations, we take so-called closed local operations and classical
communication family, CLOCC for short [ HHHOSSSR05 ] . They can be
decomposed into two basic types of operations

1.  Local unitary transformations

2.  Sending subsystems down a completely dephasing channel (i.e. a
    channel that destroys all non-diagonal elements of the transformed
    density matrix in some basis)

Let us denote this family by @xmath . In the bipartite scenario, the
quantum deficit of a quantum state @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Generalizations to multipartite cases are immediate. Similarly to the
discord, the deficit vanishes for classically correlated states, i.e.
states of the form ( 1.30 ). Moreover, as explained in [ HHHOSSSR05 ] ,
reversible CLOCC transforms of classically correlated states play an
important role in evaluation of @xmath for a given state @xmath .

On the physics side, the theoretical possibility to draw a maximal
amount @xmath of work from a heat bath in temperature @xmath using a
state @xmath is a widely believed conjecture. It has been partly
confirmed by papers like [ AHHH04 ] and [ LT11 ] . Hence, it seems
plausible that the quantum deficit really has the physical
interpretation we mentioned earlier, but one should remain cautions. The
mathematical structure of the quantity, however, remains intact in
either case.

Before we close this chapter, we should definitely mention that the
principle of non-signalling, which appeared in the discussion by Popescu
and Rohrlich, can be replaced by so-called information causality
principle, which is stronger than no-signalling and precludes
correlations that are not allowed by quantum mechanics [ PPKSWZ09 ] .
Hence, information causality may possibly be considered as an axiom for
quantum theory [ PPKSWZ09 , ABPS09 ] , unlike the non-signalling
principle [ PR94 ] . However, this topic goes beyond the scope of this
thesis.
