The technique of cooperative communications is finding its way in the
next generations of many wireless communication applications. Due to the
distributed nature of cooperative networks, acquiring fading channels
information for coherent detection is more challenging than in the
traditional point-to-point communications. To bypass the requirement of
channel information, differential modulation together with non-coherent
detection can be deployed. This thesis is concerned with various issues
related to differential modulation and non-coherent detection in
cooperative networks. Specifically, the thesis examines the behaviour
and robustness of non-coherent detection in mobile environments (i.e.,
time-varying channels). The amount of channel variation is related to
the normalized Doppler shift which is a function of userâ€™s mobility. The
Doppler shift is used to distinguish between slow time-varying
(slow-fading) and rapid time-varying (fast-fading) channels. The
performance of several important relay topologies, including
single-branch and multi-branch dual-hop relaying with/without a direct
link that employ amplify-and-forward relaying and two-symbol
non-coherent detection, is analyzed. For this purpose, a time-series
model is developed for characterizing the time-varying nature of the
cascaded channel encountered in amplify-and-forward relaying. Also, for
single-branch and multi-branch dual-hop relaying without a direct link,
multiple-symbol differential detection is developed.

First, for a single-branch dual-hop relaying without a direct link, the
performance of two-symbol differential detection in time-varying
Rayleigh fading channels is evaluated. It is seen that the performance
degrades in rapid time-varying channels. Then, a multiple-symbol
differential detection is developed and analyzed to improve the system
performance in fast-fading channels. Next, a multi-branch dual-hop
relaying with a direct link is considered. The performance of this relay
topology using a linear combining method and two-symbol differential
detection is examined in time-varying Rayleigh fading channels. New
combining weights are proposed and shown to improve the system
performance in fast-fading channels. The performance of the simpler
selection combining at the destination is also investigated in general
time-varying channels. It is illustrated that the selection combining
method performs very close to that of the linear combining method.
Finally, differential distributed space-time coding is studied for a
multi-branch dual-hop relaying network without a direct link. The
performance of this network using two-symbol differential detection in
terms of diversity over time-varying channels is evaluated. It is seen
that the achieved diversity is severely affected by the channel
variation. Moreover, a multiple-symbol differential detection is
designed to improve the performance of the differential distributed
space-time coding in fast-fading channels.
