##### Contents

-    Abstract
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Renormalization group calculation of angle-dependent scattering
    rates in the two-dimensional Hubbard model
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 Renormalization group setup
    -    2.3 Results
    -    2.4 Conclusions
-    3 Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting fermions
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 The pseudogap phase of the cuprates and the saddle point
        regime of the Hubbard model
    -    3.3 Phase space localized basis functions
    -    3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters
-    4 Wilson-Wannier basis for a finite lattice
    -    4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension
        -    4.1.1 Construction of the basis functions
        -    4.1.2 Relation to real space and momentum states
        -    4.1.3 Analytical window functions
    -    4.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice
-    5 Wilson-Wannier representation of operators
    -    5.1 General transformation formula in one dimension
    -    5.2 Wilson-Wannier basis and wave packet transformation
    -    5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction operators
        -    5.3.1 Hopping
        -    5.3.2 Interaction
    -    5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice
        -    5.4.1 General transformation formula, wave packet
            transform, and local approximation
        -    5.4.2 Hopping
        -    5.4.3 Interaction
-    6 Wave packets and fermion pairing
    -    6.1 One dimension
        -    6.1.1 Superconductivity
        -    6.1.2 Antiferromagnetism
    -    6.2 Two dimensions: Effect of anisotropy
        -    6.2.1 Antiferromagnetism
        -    6.2.2 @xmath -wave superconductivity
    -    6.3 Conclusions
-    7 Wave packets and the renormalization group
    -    7.1 Scaling dimensions
    -    7.2 One-loop RG via continuous unitary transformations
    -    7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone
-    8 Wave packets and effective Hamiltonians in one dimension
    -    8.1 Introduction
    -    8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for chains
    -    8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-filling
    -    8.4 Chain with attractive interactions
    -    8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-filling
    -    8.6 Conclusions
-    9 Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model
    -    9.1 Introduction
    -    9.2 The microscopic model and its renormalization group
        treatment
    -    9.3 Effective Hamiltonian for the saddle points
    -    9.4 The local problem
    -    9.5 Diagonalization of small clusters
    -    9.6 Effective quantum rotor model
    -    9.7 Conclusions
-    10 Conclusions and outlook
    -    10.1 Summary
    -    10.2 Outlook
-    A Construction of the window function
    -    A.1 Conditions on the window function
    -    A.2 Zak transformation
    -    A.3 Conditions for band limited window functions
-    B Window function gymnastics
-    C One loop RG equations from Wegnerâ€™s flow equation
-    D Contractor renormalization

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Despite many efforts, the phenomenology of the cuprate superconductors
still offers challenging problems [ 24 , 18 ] . Their schematic phase
diagram is shown in Fig. 1.1 . At half-filling, they are
antiferromagnetic Mott insulators. Upon doping, the antiferromagnetic
order is destroyed rapidly, and the materials enter a phase known as the
pseudogap phase that has a variety of exotic properties [ 18 ] . Among
them is a gap for electronic excitations around the so-called anti-nodal
directions @xmath and @xmath that coexists with a truncated Fermi
surface around the nodal directions. At even larger doping, they
eventually become superconducting with a @xmath -wave order parameter.
The pseudogap gradually decreases with doping, until it merges with the
superconducting gap around the optimal doping, where @xmath is maximal.
As the doping is increased even more (overdoped region in Fig. 1.1 ),
@xmath decreases, and the system behaves like a conventional Fermi
liquid.

There are different routes that can be followed in order to increase our
understanding of these complex materials theoretically. Either one
starts from the Mott insulator and investigates the effect of doping, or
one starts at the overdoped side and tries to understand the transition
from a Fermi liquid to the unconventional pseudogap state around optimal
doping. We follow the latter path and focus on the transition from a
normal Fermi liquid phase to the pseudogap phase. Since the cuprates are
Fermi liquids in the overdoped regime, we base our investigation on a
weak to moderate coupling approach, the functional renormalization group
[ 10 ] .

This method has been successfully used in the past in order to arrive at
a phase diagram of the Hubbard model at moderate coupling [ 58 , 2 , 3 ,
4 , 7 ] . Similar to the phase diagram of the cuprates,
antiferromagnetic and superconducting phases are obtained at
half-filling and moderate doping, respectively. In between, one finds
the so-called saddle point regime, which is characterized by a crossover
between the two phases, with a strongly anisotropic scattering vertex
and dominant correlations around the saddle points.

It has been conjectured that the latter regime is the weak coupling
analogue of the Fermi surface truncation that is observed in cuprates [
66 , 12 , 20 ] . This conjecture is based on similarities of the flow to
strong coupling in the saddle point regime and quasi-one dimensional
ladder systems [ 33 , 53 ] . The latter systems can be solved exactly,
and exhibit the so-called @xmath -Mott phase at half-filling, with gaps
for all excitations and strong singlet correlations, similar to the RVB
states proposed by Anderson [ 17 , 20 ] . This analogy has been
fruitfully used as a starting point for a phenomenological theory of the
underdoped cuprates recently [ 13 ] .

In this thesis, we try to add some new aspects to these earlier works.
It consists of two parts: The first part is very short, consisting only
of Ch. 2 . In this part, we apply the renormalization group to study
recent transport measurements on overdoped cuprates [ 1 ] . In the
experiment, superconductivity was suppressed using a magnetic field, and
the transport scattering rate was determined from interlayer
angle-dependent magnetoresistance (ADMR) measurements. Interestingly, it
was found that the onset of superconductivity is accompanied by a strong
anisotropic scattering rate with maxima in the anti-nodal directions.
Moreover, the anisotropic part of the scattering rate shows a linear
temperature dependence, whereas the isotropic part retained the usual
quadratic temperature dependence. From the point of view of the saddle
point regime found within the RG, the pronounced anisotropy is very
natural since the scattering vertex itself is highly anisotropic, with
the strongest scattering occurring at the saddle points. Hence we
investigate the quasi-particle scattering rates using a band structure
from [ 1 ] in order to see whether the anisotropy and temperature
dependence of the renormalized vertex can explain the observed
phenomena. We find good qualitative agreement with the experimental
results, including the approximately linear temperature dependence of
the scattering rate.

The bulk of this work is contained in the second part, where we seek to
establish a new approach for the approximate solution of the strong
coupling fixed point found in the RG. Since the two parts are
independent of each other, we present a separate introduction to this
part in Ch. 3 .

## Chapter 2 Renormalization group calculation of angle-dependent
scattering rates in the two-dimensional Hubbard model

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter we apply the functional renormalization group (RG) in
order to compute quasi-particle life-times in the two-dimensional
Hubbard model. The motivation for this study is provided by transport
experiments by Abdel-Jawad et al. [ 1 ] . In their experiment they found
that the close to onset of superconductivity in overdoped cuprate
superconductors, the quasi-particle scattering rate can be decomposed
into two term: The first term is isotropic, does not depend strongly on
doping and shows the usual @xmath dependence on temperature
characteristic of Fermi liquids. The second term is anisotropic, with
the maxima at the anti-nodal points @xmath and @xmath . This term
increases strongly at the onset of superconductivity as the
superconducting dome is approached from the overdoped side. Strikingly,
it shows linear temperature dependence. Since the cuprates appear to be
ordinary Fermi liquids in the highly overdoped regime, the linear
temperature dependence is a puzzling result. In the following, we use
the functional renormalization group (FRG) investigate the problem.
Since we are dealing with the overdoped regime, effects due to strong
onsite interactions are not expected to be very important, so that it
makes sense to employ the (weak coupling) renormalization group in the
following.

We note that within the RG framework, it is natural to expect anisotropy
along the Fermi surface due to an interplay of anisotropy of the Fermi
velocity and the imperfect nesting of the Fermi surface in the regime
under study. In fact, earlier investigations of the two-dimensional
Hubbard model on a square lattice using the renormalization group found
that @xmath -wave pairing in the overdoped region of the phase diagram
was driven by the appearance of a strongly anisotropic scattering vertex
in the particle-particle and particle-hole channels at low energies and
temperatures [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ] . Relatedly, it was shown that the
self-energy is also anisotropic [ 6 , 8 , 7 , 9 ] .

In the following section, we describe the RG setup used, in particular
the calculation of the self-energy, and the introduction of an
(artificial) decoherence rate for the fermions, that we use to suppress
the superconducting instability in our calculation.

We then show how the anisotropic scattering vertex leads to the
anisotropy of the quasi-particle scattering rate. Surprisingly, the
renormalization of the vertex gives rise to a linear temperature
dependence of the scattering rate due to the scale dependence of the
vertex when the pairing divergence is suppressed, in good qualitative
agreement with the experiments.

### 2.2 Renormalization group setup

Our approach relies on the functional RG equation for the one-particle
irreducible (1PI) generating functional @xmath , which is derived in [
10 , 4 ] , and which leads to a hierarchy of coupled flow equations for
the 1PI vertices after a suitable expansion of the functional. We use a
Wilsonian flow scheme with a sharp momentum cutoff. This cutoff
underestimates effects of small wavelength scattering [ 25 ] , but these
processes are important only if the FS is very close to a van Hove
singularity. This is not the case in the doping regime studied here. To
solve the flow equations, the hierarchy has to be truncated, and in the
following we will use the standard truncation of neglecting all vertices
with more than four legs. In this approximation, the only quantities
appearing in the calculation are the self-energy @xmath and the
four-point vertices @xmath . The @xmath also contain the frequency,
@xmath . All propagators contain a sharp infrared cutoff @xmath in
momentum space, where the flow parameter @xmath flows from @xmath to
@xmath with the initial condition @xmath . We neglect the frequency
dependence of all vertices and discretize their momentum dependence. The
latter is done by dividing the Brillouin zone into elongated patches,
cf. Fig. 2.1 . The vertices are taken to be constant in each patch.
Their values are calculated at a reference point in each patch, which we
choose to lie where the FS crosses the center of the patch.

Typically, the truncated flows diverge at some energy scale @xmath . The
leading divergence can be interpreted as the dominant instability. The
scale at which the divergence occurs gives an estimate of the
corresponding @xmath [ 4 ] . In the regime of interest here, @xmath
-wave pairing is the leading instability, and in our approximation
@xmath takes the values @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and
@xmath for @xmath . These @xmath s are way too high, mainly because we
neglect self-energy corrections in the flow of the scattering vertex.
Nevertheless, @xmath grows with decreasing hole doping reproducing
qualitatively the experimental results [ 1 ] .

The experiments by Abdel-Jawad et al. [ 1 ] were carried out on well
characterized Tl @xmath Ba @xmath CuO @xmath samples. The interlayer
angle-dependent magnetoresistance (ADMR) provided detailed Fermi surface
(FS) information which we use to fix the band parameters as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

with @xmath .

We use a moderate starting value of the onsite repulsion, @xmath . Our
goal is a qualitative rather than a quantitative description which would
require a larger value of @xmath and multi-loop corrections to the RG
flow equations. The experiments were carried out in a high magnetic
field to suppress superconductivity and allow to access the normal state
down to low @xmath . However, including a magnetic field into our RG
calculation is difficult, so that we choose to suppress
superconductivity by introducing an isotropic scattering rate @xmath
into the action. This smears out the Fermi distribution at the FS, which
in turn regularizes the loop integrals and subsequently the flow of the
four-point vertices. This scattering rate is included in the flow
equation of the four-point vertex only, whereas the flow equation for
the self-energy is left unaltered. We found that for our choice of
@xmath and the range of temperatures ( @xmath ) and dopings ( @xmath ),
a scattering rate of @xmath is sufficient to suppress the divergences
associated with superconductivity, while leaving the one-loop integrals
corresponding to other channels, e.g. the @xmath -particle-hole diagram,
basically unchanged. On average the vertices remain comparable to the
bandwidth and the largest vertices do not grow larger than @xmath
bandwidth (Fig. 2.2 ). The renormalized vertex is used as an input into
a standard lowest order calculation of the quasi-particle decay rate.

In Fig. 2.2 we display a typical result of our calculations for the
four-point vertex @xmath at energy scale @xmath for fixed outgoing
wavevector @xmath close to @xmath as a function of the two incoming
wavevectors @xmath . The remaining outgoing wavevector is determined by
momentum conservation allowing for umklapp processes. The strongest
scattering processes occur for a momentum change of @xmath and the
@xmath near @xmath and @xmath .

As we are only interested in the scattering rates at the FS, which are
given by @xmath , we will restrict the calculation of the self-energy to
this quantity in the following. Obviously, the frequency-dependence of
@xmath cannot be neglected in the calculation. On the other hand, if we
neglect the frequency-dependence of the four-point vertices, it is clear
from the structure of the flow equations that @xmath will also be
frequency-independent, as only Hartree and Fock diagrams are included.
This difficulty can be overcome by replacing the four-point vertex
appearing in the self-energy flow equation by the integrated flow
equation of the vertex [ 7 ] , schematically,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in our approximation the single-scale propagator @xmath [ 4 , 10 ]
and the full propagator @xmath are related to the free propagator @xmath
by @xmath respectively. The RHS of eq. ( 2.2 ) depends on @xmath only
through the cutoff @xmath . After a partial integration with respect to
@xmath and after explicitly inserting a sharp cutoff @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where summation and integration over internal momenta and Matsubara
frequencies is implied. Inspection of ( 2.3 ) shows that it amounts to
evaluting the two-loop contribution to the self-energy, but with the
flowing vertex @xmath instead of the initial interaction @xmath .

The diagrams corresponding to ( 2.3 ) are shown in Fig. 2.1 . As we are
interested in the scattering rates at the FS, we need only consider
diagrams a) and b), because the contribution of diagram c) is real for
external frequencies @xmath . For a) and b), for external frequency
@xmath , we obtain an imaginary part @xmath , reflecting energy
conservation.

Neglecting the flow of the four-point vertices, i.e. setting @xmath in
eq. ( 2.2 ), is equivalent to a second order perturbative calculation of
the scattering rate, which gives a @xmath behavior away from van Hove
singularities. All deviations from the Landau theory scaling form may be
attributed to the renormalization of the four-point vertices.

### 2.3 Results

Based on eq.â€‰( 2.3 ) we calculate both the temperature and the doping
dependence of the angle-resolved quasi-particle scattering rates at the
Fermi surface. We find that the scattering rates are anisotropic for all
choices of parameters. The precise shape of the angular dependence
changes with doping, but does not change very much with temperature, as
shown in Fig. 2.3 .

In general, we find that in the nodal direction ( @xmath ) the
scattering rates have a minimum, and increase towards the anti-nodal
direction ( @xmath ). The size of the anisotropy grows as doping is
decreased. This parallels the increase of @xmath with lower doping in a
calculation without the regularizing scattering rate. This is in accord
with the results of Ref. [ 1 ] , where with decreasing doping both
@xmath and the anisotropic part of the scattering rates increase,
whereas the uniform component remains constant.

Separating the scattering rates into an isotropic and an anisotropic
part, we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath so that @xmath . We characterize the @xmath -dependence of
the anisotropic part by its average over the angle, @xmath . This makes
sense as the angular dependence of @xmath is approximately @xmath
-independent (Fig. 2.3 ).

Using these definitions, we find that the @xmath -dependence of @xmath
and @xmath can be fitted very well by a quadratic polynomial, as shown
in Fig. 2.4 . In the same figure, one sees that for @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is linear in @xmath with a coefficient which increases with
decreasing hole doping. In contrast with this, the isotropic part @xmath
has always a predominantly quadratic @xmath -dependence and does not
change much with doping. Thus our calculations reproduce the main
features of the striking correlation between charge transport and
superconductivity reported in Ref. [ 1 ] .

Note that in our theory, the linear relationship between @xmath at fixed
@xmath and @xmath from Ref. [ 1 ] is replaced by a slightly superlinear
behavior that is consistent with @xmath for @xmath . However, as
mentioned earlier, our theoretical @xmath â€™s are not reliable, and the
experimental @xmath s might be affected by additional effects like
sample quality. In our view, the essential physical point of Ref. [ 1 ]
which is well reproduced by our theory is that @xmath and @xmath grow
together, as they are both caused by the same interactions with
wavevector transfer near @xmath .

### 2.4 Conclusions

The results signal presented above point towards a clear breakdown of
Landau-Fermi liquid behavior. The linear temperature dependence is not
due to a proximity to the van Hove singularity at the saddle points of
the band structure, as these points lie well below the Fermi surface at
energies @xmath . Further, the increase in the linear term in @xmath
with decreasing hole dopings occurs as the energy of the van Hove
singularity moves further away from the Fermi energy. Recalling Eq. (
2.3 ), it is clear that deviations from the ordinary Fermi liquid
behavior result from the scale-dependence of the scattering vertex,
since this is the only quantity that differs from the perturbative
calculation that leads to Fermi liquid behavior. Hence anomalous @xmath
-dependence of @xmath arises from the increase in the four-point vertex
with decreasing temperature or energy scale. This increase is not
restricted to the @xmath -wave pairing Cooper channel since the
divergence in this channel is suppressed in our calculations.
Examination of the RG flows shows that several channels in the
four-point vertex grow simultaneously, e.g. particle-hole and
particle-particle umklapp processes, both with wavevector transfer near
@xmath and with initial and final states in the anti-nodal regions. This
phenomenon is not simply a precursor of @xmath -wave superconductivity
but rather signals that a crossover to strong coupling in several
channels of the four-point vertex is responsible for the breakdown of
the Landau-Fermi liquid. It will be challenging to find out more about
the relation of this breakdown to the opening of the pseudogap at
smaller doping levels. The simultaneous enhancement of several channels
through mutual reinforcement was earlier identified as a key feature of
the anomalous Fermi liquid in the cuprates and associated with the onset
of resonant valence bond (RVB) behavior [ 4 , 12 ] .

In conclusion, our RG calculations suggest that the anomalous behavior
of the inplane quasi-particle scattering rate revealed by the ADMR
experiments [ 1 ] on overdoped cuprates can be understood as an
intrinsic feature of the doped Hubbard model that is already present at
weaker interaction strengths. The positive correlation between @xmath
and the anisotropic scattering rate shows up in the calculation as a
general increase of correlations in the anti-nodal direction that is not
restricted to the @xmath -wave pairing channel. Our calculations are in
agreement with earlier RG studies using different hopping parameters [ 2
, 3 , 4 , 7 ] as far as the structure of the scattering vertex is
concerned, so that we expect that our results hold in more general
settings as well.

## Chapter 3 Introduction to the wave packet approach to interacting
fermions

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we give a general overview of the wave packet approach
to interacting fermions that has been newly developed in this work. It
is based on a description of electrons in terms of a complete orthogonal
basis of phase space localized states - the wave packets. These states
are intermediate between real and momentum space states in the sense
that they have a finite extension in both spaces, similar to a Gaussian.
As a consequence, a length scale @xmath is introduced into the problem
from the beginning. Intuitively, this makes sense only when a physical
length scale is present in the system under investigation. The typical
example of the introduction of such a length scale is provided by
systems with a gap for single particle excitations. Because of the gap,
single particle correlations decay exponentially in space, @xmath , and
in this case @xmath yields a natural length scale.

The two limiting case @xmath and @xmath (where @xmath is the lattice
constant) are relatively well understood: The most celebrated example of
the former is given by conventional, weakly coupled superconductors.
These systems are known to be very well described by a mean-field
approach, the BCS theory of superconductivity [ 14 ] . In a
superconductor, electrons are bound into pairs, and @xmath may be
thought of as the pair size. The success of the BCS theory relies on the
fact that the pairs are so large that many of them overlap, effectively
eliminating quantum fluctuations [ 23 ] . Corresponding to the large
pair size in real space, the pairs are very localized in momentum space,
and only a thin shell around the Fermi surface is correlated. The
opposite limit of @xmath is exemplified by the strong coupling limit of
a Mott insulator, where each lattice site is occupied by one electron
and only local spin degrees of freedom remain, which are well separated
from the charge sector. Alternatively, one may think of this state as a
paired state as well, where each electron is bound to a hole. Since the
pairs are localized, the pair size vanishes. Conversely, the pairs are
very delocalized in momentum space and spread out over the whole
Brillouin zone in this limit.

Clearly, these two extreme cases are best described in the space where
the fermion pairs are as local as possible, which allows to map the
fermion problem to a tractable effective model. Our motivation is to
obtain a similar description for the intermediate regime, where @xmath
is neither small nor large, and hence momentum space concepts such as
the Fermi sea and real space phenomena like the suppression of double
occupancy both play a role. From this point of view it is quite natural
to employ phase space localized basis functions: Due to their
localization in real space some effects of local correlations can be
taken into account, and their localization in momentum space allows to
resolve certain features of the Brillouin zone, such as the approximate
position of the Fermi surface.

The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: First, we
introduce the specific context of our study, the pseudogap phase of the
cuprate superconductors. After a brief review of the part of the
phenomenology that is relevant in the following, we discuss some
theoretical studies that try to elucidate the opening of the pseudogap
from a weak coupling point of view [ 20 ] , and the problems faced there
related to the difficulties of treating renormalization flows that flow
to strong coupling. Then we explain the wave packet approach and how it
relates to the experimental and theoretical situation. Finally, we give
an outline of the remaining chapters.

### 3.2 The pseudogap phase of the cuprates and the saddle point regime
of the Hubbard model

##### The pseudogap phase of the cuprates

The pseudogap phase of cuprate superconductors is arguably one of the
more puzzling aspects of their phenomenology. Here we highlight some
aspects of this phase which are important for what follows, and refer to
the review [ 18 ] for a more detailed account. The phase lies between
the Mott insulating state at zero doping, and the superconducting state
at doping @xmath as displayed schematically in Fig. 3.1 a).
Spectroscopic experiments, in particular ARPES measurements have shown
that it is characterized by highly anisotropic electronic excitations,
shown in Fig. 3.1 b): In the nodal regions, close to @xmath a Fermi
surface exists and electronic excitations are gapless. For large enough
doping, a superconducting gap opens on these Fermi surface arcs. The
corresponding gap for electronic excitations tracks the @xmath of the
superconducting phase. At the same time, the gap for excitations at the
saddle points stays large and increases as the doping is decreased [ 24
] . The gap for excitations at the saddle points persists up to the
pseudogap temperature @xmath , which is much larger than @xmath at low
doping. NMR Knight shift measurements [ 19 ] indicate that a (partial)
spin gap opens below @xmath , which is generally taken as evidence for
spin-singlet pairing.

##### The saddle point regime of the Hubbard model

Despite the fact that the cuprates are often modeled as lightly doped
Mott insulators, we have seen in Ch. 2 that the opposite approach using
weak coupling renormalization group equations can yield valuable
insights. The analysis of the RG equations for the full Hubbard model is
still very complicated. Since the correlations are strongest in the
vicinity of the saddle points, various researchers were led to study a
reduced saddle point model instead of the full Hubbard model [ 59 , 60 ,
61 , 62 , 66 ] . Within the one-loop RG approach it has been established
that the model has strong correlations at low energies, with the leading
instablities occuring in the @xmath -wave pairing and antiferromagnetic
channels. However, it was found that at the same time, the uniform spin
and charge susceptibilities are suppressed. Since the latter behavior is
consistent with gaps for spin and charge excitations, Furukawa et al. [
66 ] were lead to conjecture that the ground state for this model is an
insulating spin liquid. The conjecture is based on an analogy to the
physics of ladder systems [ 33 , 53 ] , where a similar RG flow leads to
a spin liquid phase with gaps for all excitations. Later work using
exact diagonalization of the low energy Hamiltonian on small clusters [
12 ] corroborated this view. However, it has proven difficult to derive
an effective model for this problem, and to embed it into the full
Hubbard model.

### 3.3 Phase space localized basis functions

##### What is phase space localization?

In this section we give a gentle introduction to phase space localized
basis functions, the basic building block of out approach. As we have
stated above, these functions are localized to some extent in both real
space and momentum space at the same time. In order to contrast this
with the usual real space and momentum space basis states, Fig. 3.3
compares the phase space density of three different functions. The phase
space density can be defined in the following way: Take any function
@xmath , that is defined on a one-dimensional lattice with @xmath sites,
where the position is labelled by @xmath . Call its Fourier transform
@xmath , where @xmath is the wave-vector, such that @xmath . Define the
phase space density to be @xmath . The phase space density depends on
both position and momentum variables, and is a neat way to visualize the
localization of a function (or basis state) in real and momentum space
simultaneously. Clearly, the real space basis state @xmath in Fig. 3.3
a) is localized in real space, but completely delocalized in momentum
space, and thus represented by a vertical straight line in the phase
space plot. The function can be used to generate a complete orthogonal
basis by shifting it â€™horizontallyâ€™ in phase space, i.e. by shifting in
real space, @xmath . Repeating this procedure @xmath times yields a
complete orthogonal basis that is invariant under real space shifts.
Similarly, the plane wave @xmath in Fig. 3.3 is represented by a
horizontal line in phase space. A complete basis is generated by
shifting it â€™verticallyâ€™, i.e. @xmath , and repeating the procedure
@xmath times. Now consider the function in Fig. 3.4 , which is a
Gaussian. Due to its phase space localization, it looks more
two-dimensional than the real space and momentum space basis states, in
that it has both a definite mean position and mean momentum, so that it
appears like a smeared point in the phase space plot instead of an
extended line.

##### How can one construct a nice basis from phase space localized
functions?

The Gaussian is the type of state we intend to use as a basis function
for the description of interacting electron systems. Thus the question
arises how one can create a nice complete basis from this kind of wave
function. By analogy with the examples above, the naÃ¯ve approach is to
use one such function, which we denote by @xmath . @xmath is referred to
as the window function in the following. This function should be
localized in phase space in the same way as the Gaussian, i.e.Â it should
have a maximum in real space, say at @xmath , and a maximum in momentum
space, at @xmath . To be well localized, it should decay rapidly as one
moves away from this maximum. To generate a basis that covers the full
phase space, one shifts it around in both real space and momentum space,
by defining

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are integers. The mean position of
the shifted window function @xmath is @xmath , and its mean momentum is
@xmath . Counting the number of states that are obtained in this way, we
see that @xmath must satisfy @xmath . Note that the basis functions lie
on a lattice in phase space, as shown in Fig. 3.4 . This basis has the
following nice properties

1.  Good phase space localization of the basis functions,

2.  Shift invariance in real (with period @xmath ) and momentum space
    (with period @xmath ).

Unfortunately, orthogonality is not among them. However, Wilson [ 41 ]
found a way to obtain a orthogonal basis that shares the good phase
space localization with the naÃ¯ve approach here, and (almost) retains
its shift invariance properties. The construction principle is very
similar, but involves a second step. Essentially one first generates a
basis with @xmath states by setting @xmath (instead of @xmath ). One
then forms linear combinations such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are either even or odd under reflections (i.e. parity @xmath ).
Finally, one discards half of the states, such that neighboring states
in phase space have the opposite parity. In Ch. 4 we present more
details on the construction of this so-called Wilson-Wannier basis .

##### How can phase space localization help to understand correlated
electrons?

Most microscopic approaches to correlated electron systems can be
loosely categorized into two classes: First, there are methods that are
more naturally situated in momentum space such as the renormalization
group [ 10 ] . These methods are very effective in capturing longer
range correlations, and relatedly are good at resolving features in the
Brillouin zone, such as the anisotropy of quasi-particle life times on
the Fermi surface in Ch. 2 . In addition, they often lead to simple
physical pictures, that allow an intuitive understanding of complex
physical problems, a feature that has merits on its own. On the other
hand, it is rather difficult to treat strong short-range correlations,
and more often than not uncontrolled approximations are necessary. The
second class is usually defined in real space, and contains methods like
exact diagonalization of small clusters [ 21 ] , strong coupling
expansions [ 22 ] , or the dynamical mean-field theory [ 35 ] . These
methods are usually very effective when it comes to dealing with strong
correlations on small length scales, but it is difficult to incorporate
the build-up of correlations on longer length scales. Moreover, they
often involve a high computational cost, and the sheer complexity of the
calculations can make it hard to develop a physical understanding of the
solution.

We try to find a middle ground between these two approaches, by
combining features of both: We split the Brillouin zone into a
low-energy part in the vicinity of the Fermi surface, and the remaining
states which are at higher energies. It stands to reason that the states
at the Fermi surface are more strongly correlated than states that are
very far away from the Fermi surface. Hence we use the renormalization
group to treat the high-energy problem perturbatively and obtain an
effective Hamiltonian for the low energy degrees of freedom. Note that
this only makes sense when the onsite interactions are not too strong.
The remaining low-energy problem is then transformed to the
Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis, and solved using real space methods, namely
strong coupling approximations and real space RG [ 36 ] . The different
steps are summarized in Fig. 3.5 .

The usefulness of the momentum space localization lies in the fact that
one can isolate the low-energy degrees of freedom simply by truncating
the basis, retaining only those states whose mean moment lies close to
the Fermi surface, or a part of the Fermi surface, such as the saddle
points. At the same time, the real space localization is helpful because
the effective Hamiltonian in the WW basis remains short-ranged, which
makes it possible to analyze the strong coupling problem.

In closing, we would like to remark that the wave packet approach is not
really a method to solve Hamiltonians, but rather a different way to
view many-electron problems. Thus it is in principle compatible with
many different methods that can be used to solve these problems.

### 3.4 Outline of the remaining chapters

In the remainder of this thesis, we develop the above heuristic ideas in
more detail, and discuss applications to one- and two-dimensional
interacting fermion systems. Since our approach is novel, the exposition
starts from scratch, gradually moving towards the saddle point regime
that is the motivation for our work. We begin with two rather technical
chapters where the basic formalism for dealing with the Wilson-Wannier
basis is established.

In Ch. 4 we introduce the Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis states for
one-dimensional lattices, following the exposition given in [ 43 , 44 ]
. In particular, we show how the basis can be generated from a single
window function (or wave packet) by applying shifts in real space and
momentum space. We reformulate the construction by relating the
construction principle to the point group of the lattice, which leads to
a more compact and physically transparent form. Some elementary, yet
lengthy mathematical derivations are involved in the construction. These
are relegated App. A to avoid interrupting the logical flow. In order to
generate the basis, one must have a suitable window function first. We
introduce a family of such window functions which allows to obtain many
approximate analytical results. Finally, we extend the WW basis to the
square lattice by taking the tensor product of one-dimensional basis
functions.

Ch. 5 deals with the transformation of operators from real or momentum
space to the WW basis in one and two dimensions, respectively. For each
case, we derive the general basis transformation formula first. Then we
decompose it into two steps: First the operator is expanded into an
overcomplete wave packet basis, which has the advantage that matrix
elements are much simpler to understand than in the WW basis itself.
This step naturally leads to a systematic and intuitively appealing
approximation method for local operators (referred to as @xmath
-expansion, where @xmath is the size of a wave packet), similar to the
gradient expansion in field theory. In the second step, the
orthogonalization procedure for the WW basis is applied to the wave
packet transform in order to arrive at the final form. We find our group
theoretical formulation form Ch. 4 very helpful in developing intuition
and (relatively) simple formulas for this step.

In Chs. 6 and 7 we use the results from the preceding sections to
explore the physics of interacting fermions from the point of view of
phase space localization, focussing on superconductivity and
antiferromagnetism and the resulting Fermi surface instabilities.

In Ch. 6 we investigate correlations in the ground state of simple
mean-field Hamiltonians in the WW basis in one and two dimensions. This
exercise serves the purpose of relating the free parameter of the WW
basis, namely the size @xmath of the generating wave packet, to physical
length scales due to fermion correlations. In particular, the ground
state of all Hamiltonians considered exhibits fermion pairing, where the
pairs may consist of either two particles (superconductivity) or a
particle and a hole (antiferromagnetism). In one dimension, the pair
binding energy @xmath defined by the symmetry-breaking mean-field
corresponds to a length scale @xmath , which may be interpreted as the
pair size. We discuss the appearance of local physics in the WW basis as
the ratio @xmath is varied. We find a crossover between the two limits
@xmath , where all fermions are paired into bound states that are local
in the WW basis, and @xmath , where locally the system appears to be
almost uncorrelated. This insight will be used in later chapters in
order to map interacting fermion systems to bosonic systems with the
paired fermions as new degrees of freedom.

Subsequently we investigate the changes that appear in two-dimensions,
focussing on the saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard
model. We show that no single length scale can be associated to the pair
breaking energy because of the large anisotropy of the Fermi velocity.
Instead, we observe a separation of length scales along the Fermi
surface, similar to the crossover in one dimension as @xmath is varied.
Due to their small Fermi velocity, states in the vicinity of the saddle
points are effectively bound into pairs on very short length scales,
whereas states in the nodal direction around @xmath are very weakly
correlated at the same length scale. This leads us to conjecture that
the states at the saddle points decouple from the nodal states at short
length scales, corroborating the arguments made in earlier works that
were discussed above in Sec. 3.2 .

From Ch. 7 on we leap from simple mean-field Hamiltonians to interacting
models. As a preparation for the renormalization group based studies
that follow, we clarify the relationship between wave packets and the
RG. We start by relating the @xmath -expansion from Ch. 5 to the scaling
dimension of operators in the RG approach, which serves to understand
the relative importance of different operators. In a short technical
section, we discuss certain problems that occur due to the cutoff that
is introduced by the RG, and point out a remedy for this issue. Finally,
we pick up the discussion on the separation of length scales in the
saddle point regime (Ch. 6 ), and perform a similar analysis based on
the geometry of the low energy phase space from the point of view of the
renormalization group. We obtain similar results as before.

After this long preparation, we finally study actual interacting fermion
systems in Ch. 8 , starting with one-dimensional systems at weak
coupling, where exact solutions are available from bosonization [ 67 ,
68 ] . The main goal is not to aim at numerical accuracy, but to see if
and how the qualitative behavior at low energies is reproduced in the
wave packet approach. Hence we analyze two kinds of systems that exhibit
strong coupling fixed points with very different behavior: First we
treat chains with repulsive and attractive interactions, where the model
is known to show quasi long range order in the form of algebraic decays
of various correlation functions for charge, spin, and singlet pair
densities. The second kind of system is the two-leg ladder at
half-filling. This model is known to become Mott insulating with gaps
for all excitations at any coupling strength. Nevertheless, the ground
state features pronounced @xmath -wave pair and antiferromagnetic spin
correlations, on short length scale, resembling the RVB states proposed
in the context of cuprate superconductors [ 17 , 20 ] .

We study these models following the approach outlined in Fig. 3.5 above.
In each case we first introduce the relevant RG fixed point. Then we
transform the low energy degrees of freedom to the WW basis. In this
step, we limit ourselves to the simplest possible approximation, and
keep only states at the Fermi points. Effectively, this maps the low
energy sector of the chain (ladder) at weak coupling to another,
strongly coupled chain (ladder) with a larger lattice constant. The
resulting model is then analyzed step by step at strong coupling, using
mappings to effective bosonic models. The major reason for this approach
is that then the resulting Hamiltonians are relatively simple to
analyze, thus allowing to understand why and how the differences in low
energy physics come about. Despite the simplicity of the approximations,
we find that the qualitative behavior of all systems is reproduced well.
In particular, the difference between quasi long range order and the
RVB-like short ranged correlations show up very clearly. Finally, we
demonstrate that the different behavior of the two kinds of systems can
be related to the structure of the respective local Hilbert spaces in
the WW basis, a result that will be useful in two dimensions as well.
More concretely, for the chain models we generically obtain locally
degenerate ground states in the strong coupling limit, whereas for the
ladder the ground state is unique, with large gaps for all excitations.
We link this difference to the energy separation (or lack thereof)
between single particle excitations and collective modes.

In Ch. 9 we return to the discussion of the saddle point regime of the
Hubbard model, the main motivation for our study. In the same manner as
in one dimension, we use the RG in order to obtain an effective
Hamiltonian at low energies. Based on the arguments from Chs. 6 and 7 ,
we use the separation of length scales inherent to the model in the
saddle point regime to devise approximations. We only consider the
simplest such approximation, and ignore all low-energy states except the
ones in the vicinity of the saddle points. For these states, we show
that in the WW basis the saddle point states are mapped to a bilayer,
the two-dimensional analogue of the two-leg ladder system. Consequently,
the local Hilbert space is the same as the one for the ladder systems.
Moreover, from the RG flow for different model parameters we infer that
the effective low-energy Hamiltonian is similar as well, in that its
local part has a unique local ground state with large gaps for all
excitations and strong @xmath -wave pairing and antiferromagnetic
correlations. The main difference to the ladder model is that there is
no universal fixed-point of the RG, and that in particular we observe a
crossover between AF and @xmath SC dominated regimes as a function of
doping. In order to assess the effect of the higher dimensionality on
the stability of the local ground state, we diagonalize the effective
model on small clusters, and map it to an effective bosonic model that
is analyzed by means of variational coherent states. We find that the
RVB-like ground state appears to be robust over a sizable parameter
range, indicating spin-liquid behavior.

Even though the results are robust within our approximations, we are
reluctant to draw definite conclusions from the calculations at this
point, since the approximations involved are quite drastic. However,
since the wave packet approach is still in its early stages of
development, there is a lot of space for improvements in different
directions, some of which we point out in the conclusions. Moreover, the
approximation is based on physical arguments that are fairly elementary,
namely the separation of length scales due to the vicinity of the saddle
points and the possibility to localize states due to umklapp scattering
(manifested by the commensurability of the AF spin correlations), both
of which are independent of the details of the calculation.

Finally, we summarize our thesis in Ch. 10 , and give an outlook on
possible future work.

## Chapter 4 Wilson-Wannier basis for a finite lattice

In this technical chapter we introduce the Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis [
41 , 43 , 44 ] , an orthogonal basis whose basis states are wave packets
that are localized in real space and bimodal in momentum space. The
reason for using this type of basis is that even though there are no-go
theorems on the localization in both momentum- and real space of
orthonormal wave packet bases [ 47 , 48 ] , these can be circumvented if
one allows wave packets to be localized around two points in momentum
space. Moreover, the packets can be chosen such that in momentum space
each wave packet is localized around the two momenta @xmath , so that
for systems with inversion symmetry, they can still be used to resolve
states that are close to the Fermi points.

### 4.1 Wilson-Wannier basis in one dimension

#### 4.1.1 Construction of the basis functions

##### Definition

In the following we consider a finite one-dimensional lattice of size
@xmath with periodic boundary conditions. In order to introduce the
Wilson basis, we assume that @xmath can be written as @xmath , where
both @xmath and @xmath are even. The basis is generated from a single
window function (or wave packet) @xmath . We demand that it is
exponentially localized in both real and momentum space with widths of
order @xmath and @xmath , respectively. In order to generate the basis,
we will need the shifted window function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The shifted window functions are labelled by two coordinates, the
position coordinate @xmath , and the momentum coordinate @xmath . @xmath
is the step size of a momentum shift. These coordinates are connected to
the mean position @xmath and mean momentum @xmath of the function by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are @xmath shifted window functions @xmath in total for a lattice
of size @xmath .

We now use the @xmath to generate a complete and orthogonal basis for
the lattice. The basis states are denoted by @xmath . Their relation to
the real space states @xmath is given by the wave function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Following [ 43 , 44 ] , the wave functions @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

When the window function @xmath satisfies certain orthogonality
conditions to be stated below, the states @xmath form a complete
orthogonal basis. In addition, the functions @xmath have the useful
property of exponential localization in both real space and (around two
points in) momentum space if @xmath is chosen appropriately.

The window function @xmath has to satisfy certain conditions to make the
@xmath orthogonal. The derivation of the conditions on @xmath for the
case of a finite lattice with an even number of sites is given in
appendix A.1 . In real space, the conditions are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has to be satisfied for all @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath . Conditions ( 4.5 ) are in the form of a convolution. The
convolution can be turned into a multiplication by means of the Zak
transformation [ 45 ] , so that suitable window functions can be readily
constructed on a computer. The usage of the Zak transformation in this
context is detailed in appendix A.2 .

In Sec. 4.1.3 , we show that restriction to a special class of window
functions that are band limited in momentum space leads to considerable
simplification [ 43 ] . In fact, analytical window functions can be
easily constructed in this case.

The choice of @xmath in the factorization @xmath defines the length
scale over which the basis functions are delocalized. The unit cell for
the basis functions is @xmath because of the phase factors @xmath in (
4.9 ) that are different on adjacent WW sites but identical on second
nearest neighbor sites, corresponding to wave packets with even (odd)
parity on even (odd) phase space lattice sites. The states with @xmath
and @xmath are already parity eigenstates, so that they appear only once
per unit cell, for all other @xmath there are two states per unit cell
for even and odd parity (or @xmath and @xmath ). A schematic picture of
the basis function in one unit cell is shown in Fig. 4.1 . From @xmath
one sees that there are @xmath unit cells in total. Note that this
figure is intended to show how the states are rearranged in the new
basis only, and that it does not reproduce the shape of the wave packets
correctly. The real space form of the wave packets within one unit cell
is shown in Fig. 4.2 . The figure shows wave packets with @xmath and
@xmath . The parity of the states follows a checkerboard pattern in the
@xmath -plane, where nearest neighbors always have opposite parity.
These findings suggest to use another definition of the WW basis
function based on their symmetry properties.

##### Improved definition based on group theory

The definition ( 4.4 ) is awkward to work with. It can be simplified by
the action of the point group @xmath of the lattice on a wave packet
@xmath . Since the lattice is one-dimensional, @xmath , where @xmath is
the identity and @xmath is the inversion. For practical purposes, we
replace the elements of @xmath by their @xmath matrix representations
when acting on momenta @xmath . Note that the action on the mean
momentum @xmath of a wave packet @xmath is the same as the one on the
momentum @xmath . Hence we use the correspondence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and define the point group action on a wave packet to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath is its associated group element. Note that (
4.7 ) implies that the center of mass of the wave packet is used as the
origin of the lattice. For each @xmath we can find the stabilizer (or
little group) @xmath , which is the subgroup of @xmath that leaves
@xmath invariant. We find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, we denote the number of elements of a group @xmath by @xmath .
Then ( 4.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The phase factor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is straightforward to show that the definitions ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.9
) are equivalent.

#### 4.1.2 Relation to real space and momentum states

In the remainder of this work, we will frequently switch between
momentum space, real space, and WW descriptions. This section summarizes
the relation between states in all three bases. We begin by summarizing
the different variables and their meaning in Tab. 4.1 .

We have already introduced the relation between WW basis states @xmath
and real space basis states @xmath , which defines the basis functions
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

A brief glance at the definition ( 4.4 ) of the basis functions reveals
that they are real:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As a consequence, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation to momentum states follows directly from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the Fourier transform of @xmath . Note that @xmath
is not real in general, so that @xmath .

#### 4.1.3 Analytical window functions

In general, window functions that satisfy ( 4.5 ) have to be constructed
numerically. However, a special class of window functions can be readily
constructed analytically. The key condition for the simplification is
that the window function is band limited in momentum space. In order to
make this notion more quantitative, we introduce the Fourier transform
@xmath of @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we call the window function band limited when its Fourier transform
satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Condition ( 4.17 ) states that only shifted window functions that are
nearest neighbors in momentum space overlap, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, from condition ( 4.17 ) one sees it is more convenient to use
the momentum space representation in order to specify @xmath , since the
number of parameters needed to fix @xmath is @xmath , which is
independent of the wave packet size @xmath . In appendix A.3 we show
that for a band limited window function the orthogonality conditions (
4.5 ) become

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.19)
  -- -- -- --------

This implies that the values

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

are fixed. For the remaining momenta, any value @xmath can be chosen for
@xmath , the remaining values are fixed by ( 4.19 ) and ( 4.17 ), and
@xmath .

Window functions that satisfy ( 4.17 ) are listed in Tab. 4.2 for the
cases @xmath . Note that for @xmath , the window function is unique,
whereas for @xmath it is not. In the following, we use the window
function for @xmath for most calculations.

It is noteworthy that for @xmath the WW basis states are simply standing
waves with wave vector @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence, in order to resolve the full momentum dependence of
matrix elements, the interactions in at least one WW unit cell have to
be known, and the purely local matrix elements are insufficient to do so
(except for @xmath , where there is only one state per unit cell).

### 4.2 Wilson-Wannier basis for the square lattice

The Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis for a square lattice is the tensor product
of two one-dimensional bases. Each basis state @xmath is labelled by two
two-dimensional vectors: The mean position @xmath and the WW momentum
@xmath . The transformation from real- or momentum-space to the WW basis
is hence no different from the transformation in one dimension. Hence we
have for the state @xmath at lattice site @xmath , that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath defined above in ( 4.9 ). Thus the position labels @xmath
are integer vectors that define a square lattice with lattice constant
@xmath . The momentum label @xmath lies in the first quadrant of the
Brillouin zone since @xmath . In a similar manner, we can define the
two-dimensional window function as a tensor product of one-dimensional
ones,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to facilitate computations, it is again useful to consider
point group actions on the wave packets @xmath in order to simplify the
definition of basis functions. Since we use a product of one-dimensional
basis functions, we do not base the discussion on the point group @xmath
of the square lattice but on its subgroup

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

consisting of reflections around the @xmath and @xmath axes. The action
of a group element @xmath on a wave vector @xmath is given by a @xmath
matrix, parametrized by two numbers @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the following we use the vector @xmath in order to label elements of
@xmath , similar to what we have done above in one dimension. The
correspondence between group elements and vectors is summarized in Tab.
4.3 .

Now we can express the WW basis functions on the square lattice in a
convenient way as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of elements of @xmath , and @xmath is the
number of elements of the stabilizer @xmath of @xmath . @xmath when
@xmath lies in the interior of the first quadrant of the BZ, @xmath when
it lies on the boundary, and @xmath when it lies on a corner. Thus in
general each basis state is a linear combination of wave packet states
with up to four different momenta that lie on the @xmath -orbit of the
WW momentum @xmath . The connection between WW momentum @xmath and wave
packet momenta is shown in Fig. 4.3

Since the WW basis functions for a square lattice derive directly from
the one-dimensional variant, the analytical window functions from Sec.
4.1.3 can be directly used in two dimensions as well. For later
convenience, the variables used in the different representations - real
space, momentum space, and WW basis - are listed in Tab. 4.4 .

## Chapter 5 Wilson-Wannier representation of operators

This chapter discusses the transformation of operators to the WW basis.
We consider the one-dimensional case first, beginning with the general
transformation formula for many-body operators in Sec. 5.1 . In Sec. 5.2
we introduce a useful splitting of the general formula into two steps: A
transformation into an overcomplete wave packet basis, and a second step
to orthogonalize these basis states, similar to the construction in Ch.
4 . We focus in particular on the transformation of local and almost
local operators, leading to an expansion in @xmath for those operators
that is analogous to gradient expansions in field theory. The subsequent
sections apply these results to the most relevant cases, namely hopping
and interaction operators. Finally we generalize all results to two
dimensions in Sec. 5.4 .

### 5.1 General transformation formula in one dimension

##### Transformation of annihilation and creation operators

We consider transformation properties of the fermion creators and
annihilators first. We denote the state with no fermions by @xmath , and
states with one fermion in state @xmath by @xmath etc. For sake of
clarity, we omit spin indices in this section. The fermion annihilator
(creator) for a fermion in state @xmath is denoted by @xmath ( @xmath ).
Using the resolution of the identity @xmath , we the find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Taking the Hermitian conjugate of ( 5.1 ) yields a similar relation for
@xmath . Hence the transformation from real space to WW basis takes the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Using the resolution of the identity @xmath instead of @xmath , the
analogous transformation from momentum space to WW basis is obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

##### Transformation of arbitrary operators

Eqns.Â ( 5.2 , 5.3 ) can be used to transform all many-body operators
from real (momentum) space to the WW basis. This is done by applying the
transformation rule for the fermion operators to each operator
separately. Consider a general operator @xmath . It can be expanded in
any of the three bases. The transformation rule for the expansion
coefficients follows from the fact that the operator is independent of
the particular representation chosen. We assume that the real space
expansion is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The same operator in the WW representation can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 5.2 ), the relation between the two expansions is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

In a similar manner, the momentum space representation can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is related to the real space representation ( 5.4 ) by Fourier
transformation in each index. From the WW representation ( 5.5 ) and the
transformation rule ( 5.3 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eqns. ( 5.6 , 5.8 ) can be used directly in order to obtain the WW
representation of any operator. On the other hand, it is not very
intuitive due to the rather complicated definition of the @xmath . In
the next section, we bring ( 5.8 ) into a more easily understandable (if
less compact) form.

### 5.2 Wilson-Wannier basis and wave packet transformation

The goal of this section is to split the transformation ( 5.8 ) into two
steps, where the first step involves sums over products of window
functions. This step yields matrix elements between different wave
packet states with wave function @xmath , and hence we refer to it as
wave packet transformation . The second step involves the sum over the
point group @xmath that takes the overcomplete wave packet states to the
WW basis states. Simplifications occur because the wave packet states
are shift invariant under general phase space shifts, so that only a few
matrix elements have to be evaluated. Moreover, the wave packet matrix
elements are easier to understand, since each wave packet is localized
around one point in phase space (instead of two points for the WW basis
states). In the following we focus on the wave packet part of the WW
transformation, since this part contains most of the physical
information. The effect of the symmetrization is discussed in Secs.
5.3.1 - 5.3.2 below.

We restrict ourselves to the transformation from momentum space to the
WW basis, since this transformation will be used most of the time in the
remainder of this work. The corresponding formulas in real space are
completely analogous.

First, we use the definition ( 4.9 ) of @xmath (and hence @xmath ) in
terms of the wave packets, and split each sum over @xmath in two parts
as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Now we exploit the shift invariance of the window function in order to
replace all @xmath by @xmath , using Eq.Â ( B.7 ) that is derived in App.
B . It states that for an arbitrary function @xmath the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Applying ( 5.9 ) and ( 5.10 ) to ( 5.8 ), we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.12)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the wave packet transform @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Wave packet transformation for local operators

Eqns.Â ( 5.12 - 5.13 ) appear to be rather formidable, and it is indeed
tedious to discuss their properties in full generality. Hence we will
consider only a special case here, which is nevertheless instructive. To
be specific, we consider the wave packet transform of a local operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the delta function modulo @xmath that enforces momentum
conservation. We also define the wave packet momentum mismatch

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which specifies the amount of violation of conservation of @xmath ,
where @xmath when @xmath is conserved modulo @xmath . Inspection of (
5.13 ) shows that the delta function in ( 5.14 ) now enforces the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this is the only dependence on the variables @xmath and @xmath ,
these variables influence the matrix element only through @xmath . Thus
we may set @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath without loss of
generality. In order to keep the notation readable, we use @xmath as a
short hand. Then ( 5.13 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which depends only on @xmath , on @xmath , and on the @xmath . By virtue
of translational invariance of the wave packet states, the expression is
shift invariant in real space with period @xmath when @xmath , and with
period @xmath when @xmath .

It is important to realize that the assumption that @xmath is local is
not as restrictive as it might seem. Since the presence of the window
functions restrict all sums over @xmath to @xmath , in fact the local
case is a valid approximation whenever

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constant @xmath and @xmath . This translates into the statement
that the spatial range of @xmath should be small compared to @xmath .
This short range spatial dependence is then contained in the dependence
on @xmath in the wave packet transform, and @xmath in the WW basis. As a
consequence, only few matrix elements need to be evaluated, and the
evaluation is very fast because ( 5.2 ) can be computed once and
tabulated for later use.

When greater precision is necessary (for instance for longer ranged
interactions), or when matrix elements vanish in the local approximation
(which we will see to be the case for the hopping operator), it is
straightforward to improve the approximation by Taylor expanding @xmath
around the maximum of the product of wave packets. Since the window
functions restrict the summation over the momenta to @xmath , the Taylor
expansion leads effectively to an expansion in @xmath . This @xmath
-expansion leads to expansion coefficients that are universal in the
sense that they depend on the window function and a few parameters only.
We will pursue this procedure for the hopping matrix elements below in
Sec. 5.3.1 , but stick to the local approximation for interaction terms.
We discuss the relation of the wave packet transform of an operator to
the notion of scaling dimension of operators that is used in the
renormalization group below in Ch. 7 .

### 5.3 Transformation of hopping and interaction operators

#### 5.3.1 Hopping

In this section we discuss the WW representation of the kinetic energy
operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assume @xmath in the following, but the treatment below applies
to any dispersion. @xmath is the hopping rate for nearest neighbor
hopping, the bandwidth is @xmath . We denote the WW transform of @xmath
by @xmath . From the transformation formula ( 5.8 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is band limited (cf. Sec. 4.1.3 ), @xmath if @xmath because
of vanishing overlap of the WW basis functions in momentum space. In the
following we focus on the case @xmath , which, again by virtue of
momentum space localization, is the dominant term in the expansion. We
express @xmath in terms of @xmath using ( 5.12 ) as discussed above:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used @xmath . Note that the factor @xmath cancels against
one of the sums over @xmath for the case @xmath , where the Kronecker
delta does not restrict the summation over @xmath .

##### Wave packet transformation and @xmath-expansion around the local
limit

We note that the factor @xmath restricts the sum over @xmath to @xmath ,
so that it makes sense to expand @xmath around @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath etc.

We treat the kinetic energy contribution term by term, starting with the
first term. Since this term is a constant, the corresponding
contribution in the WW basis is diagonal by virtue of the orthogonality
of the basis states. Hence the contribution is @xmath

For the remaining contributions, we focus on the leading terms only.
These are the terms that are diagonal in @xmath and act over the
shortest distance. We use the wave packet transformation first in order
to estimate the magnitude of the different terms, and apply the
orthogonalization afterwards. Moreover, we use the analytical window
function for @xmath from Tab. 4.2 in order to obtain analytical
estimates. For the group velocity term the leading contribution arises
from nearest neighbor hopping with @xmath , with magnitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is @xmath as announced above. The term proportional to @xmath is
dominated by hopping to second nearest neighbors, @xmath , and its
contribution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Orthogonalization

In order to arrive at the WW representation of the hopping operator, its
wave packet transform has to be orthogonalized. This eliminates some
term that are finite in the wave packet transform. For example, consider
the first term of the expansion of @xmath . In the wave packet
transform, matrix elements between wave packets that are adjacent in
phase space are finite, since they involve the scalar product of two
wave packets,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the wave packet states are not orthogonal. The WW basis states, on
the other hand, are orthogonal, so that their scalar product is @xmath .
As a consequence, the constant term in the expansion of @xmath leads to
a diagonal contribution to the WW transform.

In a similar manner, other matrix elements that are finite in the wave
packet transform vanish in the WW basis due to the symmetry of the basis
states (recall that the orthogonalization amounts to linear combining
wave packet states such that they fall into irreducible representations
of the point group).

##### Hopping Hamiltonian in WW-representation

In summary, the hopping Hamiltonian in the WW basis is dominated by the
@xmath -diagonal part, however, in principle the other hopping matrix
elements are not negligible. Contributions can be evaluated using an
expansion around the local approximation, which yields an expansion of
@xmath in powers of @xmath . For the analytical window function for
@xmath , the analytical estimate of the kinetic energy Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.26)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the goal of this work is to use the WW basis in order to obtain
new approximation schemes to interacting fermion systems rather than to
aim at the highest precision, we will confine ourselves to the
approximate kinetic energy ( 5.26 ) in the remainder of this work.

#### 5.3.2 Interaction

In this section we consider the WW transform of a short ranged (compared
to @xmath ) interaction Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . @xmath contains the spatial dependence of @xmath , for a
purely local interaction with strength @xmath we have @xmath .

##### Wave packet transformation

Since we assume that @xmath is short ranged, we apply the local
approximation ( 5.2 ) to the wave packet transformation. Moreover, we
consider @xmath -conserving matrix elements only, i.e. matrix elements
for which @xmath . In order to obtain analytical estimates, we employ
the analytical window function from 4.2 with @xmath .

The first step is to make use of the local approximation by transforming
( 5.14 ) to real space. This leads to the wave packet transform

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (5.28)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It follows that the spatial dependence of the wave packet matrix
elements is determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dominant matrix elements arise for @xmath , where three operators
reside on one site, and @xmath , where two operators are located at the
same site. Note that only the relative positions matter due to the
residual translational invariance of the wave packet states. Approximate
analytical values of @xmath for these cases are tabulated in Tab. 5.1 .
Interactions decay rapidly, with spatial separation, so that @xmath .
Consequently, we will take only nearest neighbor interactions into
account. The table also shows the corresponding value for the case that
the window function for @xmath is used. Since these are very similar, we
will use the latter in the following for analytical calculations, and
the former for numerical ones.

##### Orthogonalization

In order to obtain the WW representation of the interaction, the wave
packet states have to be orthogonalized (see Sec. 5.2 ). The
orthogonalization leads to cancellations between some non-local terms.
We focus on weakly coupled systems, so that the states at @xmath can be
ignored, which implies @xmath in the following. Plugging the wave packet
transform ( 5.28 ) into the orthogonalization formula ( 5.12 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.30)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have introduced the short hand @xmath .

At low energies, the interaction Hamiltonian that couples states at the
Fermi points can be reduced to a small set of coupling constants. This
will be considered in Ch. 8 .

### 5.4 Two-dimensional square lattice

Having discussed the transformation of operators to the WW basis for the
one-dimensional case, we now turn to the two-dimensional square lattice.
All the steps from the one-dimensional calculation can be essentially
repeated in the same manner. Therefore the discussion in this section is
somewhat shorter, highlighting the differences to the one-dimensional
case. Only the transformation from momentum space to WW basis will be
treated. All the WW basis related quantities can be found in Tab. 4.4 .

#### 5.4.1 General transformation formula, wave packet transform, and
local approximation

##### Transformation of annihilation and creation operators

The transformation formula follows directly from the definition ( 4.26 )
of the basis functions @xmath and their Fourier transform @xmath , where
now all position related coordinates are vectors, e.g. @xmath . Thus we
have

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

##### Transformation of arbitrary operators

In the same way as in one dimension, an arbitrary many-body operator
@xmath can be expanded in any single-particle basis. The transformation
rules for the coefficients in the expansion follow from the fact that
the operator is independent of the basis. For sake of readability, we
continue to suppress spin indices in this section. We assume that @xmath
contains @xmath creators and @xmath annihilators. Hence its momentum
representation can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The WW representation can be similarly written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equating the right hand sides of ( 5.32 ) and ( 5.33 ), we obtain the
general transformation rule for the square lattice:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.34)
  -- -- -- --------

##### WW basis and wave packet transformation

In order to arrive at a more manageable form of ( 5.34 ), we use the
two-dimensional version of the wave packet transformation (cf. Sec. 5.2
) and write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We only treat @xmath -conserving matrix elements in the following. In
the local approximation, the wave packet transform of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The WW representation of @xmath is then obtained from the wave packet
transform using the orthogonalization part of the WW transformation.
This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the short hand @xmath . In analogy to the
one-dimensional case, the local approximation can be improved by
expanding @xmath around @xmath , leading to an expansion in @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Hopping

Wo consider the hopping operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which includes nearest and next-to-nearest neighbor hopping. First note
that when @xmath , the hopping Hamiltonian consists of two
one-dimensional hopping terms, so that in this case the results from one
dimension can be reused without any changes for each direction. In order
to take the @xmath term into account, we abbreviate @xmath and expand
@xmath to leading order around @xmath . To the first order we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the group velocity @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus we can still use the one-dimensional result without changes up to
@xmath , and the @xmath term merely leads to a @xmath -dependent
multiplicative correction to the nearest neighbor hopping term. At order
@xmath , a mixed term @xmath appears, which leads to diagonal hopping in
the WW basis. However, taking into account the leading order only, this
term can be neglected unless the first order term vanishes. This is the
case whenever @xmath , i.e. at the band edges @xmath and @xmath , and at
the saddle points @xmath and @xmath . In both cases, the group velocity
vanishes because of the higher symmetry around these points which
demands @xmath . However, the same symmetry forbids the mixed term
@xmath in the expansion of the kinetic energy, so that the second order
contribution is a sum of two one-dimensional terms as well in this case.

Summarizing the above, to the leading order in the @xmath -expansion the
hopping operator for the square lattice is the sum of two
one-dimensional hopping operators with a @xmath and direction dependent
hopping rate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 5.4.3 Interaction

We consider the WW representation of the interaction operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Similarly, in the WW basis we write

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.43)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath .

We follow the argumentation of Sec. 5.3.2 and focus on matrix elements
that are @xmath -conserving, i.e. @xmath in the wave packet transform
@xmath of @xmath . Moreover, we use the local approximation for the
interaction matrix elements in momentum space. The general
transformation formula ( 5.37 ) then reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to Sec. 5.3.2 , the wave packet transform @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.45)
  -- -- -- --------

with the same function @xmath as in the one-dimensional case. Thus the
decay properties are the same as in one dimension, and we restrict
ourselves to nearest neighbor interactions only, neglecting all but the
leading matrix elements. It is noteworthy that individual interaction
matrix elements @xmath are proportional to @xmath because @xmath (cf.
Tab. 5.1 ), whereas they are @xmath in one dimension. The scaling of
operators and its connection to their relevance in the RG sence is
considered in Ch. 7 . We conclude this chapter with the remark that
since the low-energy region of the Brillouin zone in two dimensions
extends over the whole Fermi surface, there is no universal low-energy
parametrization of interactions as it was the case in one dimension.
Instead, the full momentum dependence of the interaction along the Fermi
surface has to be taken into account in general. Whether approximations
are admissible has to be decided based on the shape of the Fermi surface
and the length scale @xmath under consideration. This is discussed in
Ch. 9 .

## Chapter 6 Wave packets and fermion pairing

Symmetry breaking in fermion systems can often be understood as a
transition from free to paired fermions. The best known example is
superconductivity [ 23 ] , where electrons bind into pairs which form
the condensate that characterizes the superconducting state. However,
spin and charge density waves may also be viewed as pairing of electrons
and holes, so that a wide variety of states falls into the class of
paired fermion states. Such a paired state introduces an energy scale
@xmath , given by the fermion gap, and a length scale, the pair size
@xmath . In the weak coupling limit, we can estimate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

on dimensional grounds.

In this section we discuss fermion pairing in the context of the WW
basis. Since the WW basis states are localized on the length scale
@xmath , one expects that for @xmath pairs are (predominantly) local in
the WW basis, whereas for @xmath they are non-local. On the other hand,
the pair correlations in the BCS state decay as one moves away from the
Fermi surface, and the corresponding width in momentum space is @xmath .
Hence, we expect states within a distance less than @xmath to the Fermi
surface to be strongly correlated, whereas they should be weakly
correlated when they are far away from the Fermi surface.

These estimates suggest that it is possible to replace fermionic degrees
of freedom by pairs that are local (in real space) in the WW basis when
@xmath is chosen large enough. In this way the low energy problem may be
bosonized. They also suggest that only about @xmath states in the
direction perpendicular to the Fermi surface are strongly correlated,
whereas the remainder may be treated perturbatively. Thus pairs may be
considered to be local in momentum space (in the direction perpendicular
to the Fermi surface) when @xmath is made small enough. It is natural to
expect that for @xmath , pairs are reasonably localized in both momentum
and real space, hence allowing for a simplified description of the low
energy physics in terms of relatively few (by momentum space
localization) bosonic degrees of freedom that are local in real space
(by virtue of real space localization) in the WW basis.

The remainder of this chapter elaborates on these heuristic
considerations. To this end, we compute the WW transform of several
mean-field Hamiltonians, discussing the relevance of different terms and
their dependence on @xmath . Moreover, we compute single-particle
correlations of the respective ground states in the WW basis. Motivated
by applications in later chapters, we focus on superconductivity and
antiferromagnetism. In Sec. 6.1 we treat one-dimensional systems, the
extension to the square lattice follows in Sec. 6.2 .

### 6.1 One dimension

#### 6.1.1 Superconductivity

We consider the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian in one dimension, which is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath can be easily diagonalized by applying a Bogoliubov
transformation to the fermion operators [ 23 ] , so that in particular
its ground state and correlation functions can be computed exactly. We
first transform @xmath to the WW basis and investigate the relative
importance of the hopping and the pairing term as a function of @xmath .
Afterwards we compute single-particle correlations of the exact ground
state in the WW basis. Both results illustrate that unpaired fermions
become less and less important as @xmath goes to zero.

##### WW representation of the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian

We consider the WW representation of @xmath . The hopping term has
already been discussed above in Sec. 5.3.1 , so we will turn directly to
the anomalous term @xmath . Its WW representation can be obtained using
Eq. ( 5.2 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The pairing mean-field term is local in the WW basis, hence it acts
independently on each WW orbital. All non-vanishing matrix elements are
@xmath . In conjunction with the WW transform of the hopping operator,
Eq.Â ( 5.26 ), we obtain in the limit of large @xmath that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to estimate the effect of the neglected @xmath hopping terms,
we first obtain the single particle gap @xmath for each WW orbital from
the local Hamiltonian. It is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we compare the single particle energy with the band width @xmath ,
where the hopping rate @xmath is given by the @xmath -diagonal
nearest-neighbor hopping matrix element @xmath (cf. Sec. 5.3.1 ). This
yields the dimensionless ratio

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used @xmath . It is clear that the importance of the
hopping term decreases as one moves away from the Fermi points since
@xmath . Thus we consider the states at the Fermi points, @xmath to
estimate the importance of the hopping term. When the gap @xmath exceeds
the band width @xmath , the system can be considered to be strongly
coupled in the sense that the hopping term leads to corrections that can
be treated perturbatively and decay over distances of about @xmath . On
the other hand, when @xmath , the energy gain from delocalizing an
electron is large enough to overcome the single particle gap locally. In
this case perturbation theory around the local Hamiltonian is not
expected to converge rapidly (if at all).

In summary, the hopping term can be treated perturbatively in the
mean-field Hamiltonian @xmath when we choose @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### One particle correlations in the BCS mean-field state

In the following, we will be interested in one-body equal time
correlation functions only. Since the calculation is elementary (see
e.g. [ 23 ] ), we state the results directly. There are two different
correlation functions, the normal part @xmath , which yields the fermion
distribution function, and the anomalous part @xmath , that contains
pair correlations. They are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the kinetic energy, and @xmath is the energy of a
Bogoliubov quasi-particle. The corresponding correlation function in the
WW representation is obtained using Eq. ( 5.3 ). For the normal part
@xmath this yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Similarly, for the anomalous part we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the following, we focus on two key quantities. First, we evaluate
@xmath , which non-local fermion correlations, and @xmath , which
measures the decay of pair correlations with distance from the Fermi
surface. Since correlations are strongest at the Fermi surface, we set
@xmath . A plot of these ratios as a function of @xmath is shown in Fig.
6.1 . It can be seen that the non-local correlators vanish when the pair
size @xmath is much smaller than @xmath .

Next we consider the decay of correlations with distance from the Fermi
surface. To this end, we evaluate the ratios @xmath for @xmath . This is
a measure of the occupation of WW orbitals next to the Fermi surface.
Analogously, we evaluate the anomalous correlator @xmath at @xmath ,
which measures the decay of pair correlations as one moves away from the
Fermi surface. This is shown in Fig. 6.2 .

We are interested in the case that the states at the Fermi points are
strongly coupled, i.e. @xmath (cf. Eq. 6.7 ), the non-local correlations
are strongly suppressed. At the same time, from Fig. 6.2 we see that the
WW orbitals next to the Fermi surface have a mean occupancy of about
@xmath above the Fermi surface ( @xmath below the Fermi surface). For
larger @xmath , the occupation number approaches its non-interacting
value apart from small deviations, as shown in Fig. 6.3 . This suggests
that most of the WW orbitals can be treated perturbatively, since they
deviate only slightly from their non-interacting ground state, where all
orbitals below (above) the Fermi surface are filled (empty).

#### 6.1.2 Antiferromagnetism

The antiferromagnetic case is relevant when the system half-filled,
which implies that @xmath and @xmath . The mean-field Hamiltonian is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mean-field for the staggered magnetization, which we
take to point into the @xmath -direction. In many respects, @xmath leads
to results similar to the BCS case above, so that the discussion will be
focussed on obtaining the WW transform of the AF mean-field operator.

##### WW representation of the AF mean-field Hamiltonian

The WW transform of the mean-field term is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we use that @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used that @xmath and @xmath in the third line. Plugging
the result into ( LABEL:eq:AF_ww_step_1 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the staggered magnetization couples the two WW orbitals
@xmath and @xmath . However, at the Fermi points we have @xmath , so
that only one orbital is involved.

The AF mean-field Hamiltonian in the WW representation is thus given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the single particle gap is exactly the same as for the BCS
case above, Eq. ( 6.5 ). Thus the ratio @xmath and the single particle
correlations show exactly the same behavior as a function of @xmath and
@xmath .

### 6.2 Two dimensions: Effect of anisotropy

In this section we apply a similar analysis to the case of the
two-dimensional square lattice. Since we will be interested mainly in
the case that the Fermi surface lies close to the saddle points @xmath
and @xmath , we use the kinetic energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and set the chemical potential @xmath . We consider two types of
mean-fields, @xmath -wave superconductivity ( @xmath SC) and
antiferromagnetism (AF). The major novelty compared to the
one-dimensional case is that now several WW orbitals lie close to the
Fermi surface. Moreover, the number of orbitals at the Fermi surface
depends on the wave packet scale @xmath , with @xmath orbitals at the
Fermi surface for the model considered here. In addition, the Fermi
velocity along the Fermi surface is strongly anisotropic. As one moves
from @xmath to @xmath along the Fermi surface, i.e. @xmath , its @xmath
-component (the @xmath -component is the same) varies as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence, no simple relation between the gap magnitude @xmath
and the pair size @xmath exists that holds for the whole Fermi surface
even in the case of an angle-independent mean-field.

Since correlations are expected to be strongest where @xmath is
smallest, we use estimates of the pair size at the saddle points in the
following, and adjust @xmath accordingly. In the vicinity of the saddle
point @xmath , the kinetic energy ( 6.17 ) can be approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for the other saddle point @xmath . The natural length
scale @xmath for a pair gap of size @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are mainly interested in cases where pairing occurs at relatively
small scales. We hence fix @xmath for the remainder of this chapter. The
phase space cells and the states at the Fermi surface for this case are
shown in Fig. 6.4 .

Since at the saddle points the distance between two WW states in real
space is @xmath (cf. Ch. 4 ), @xmath should be compared to @xmath . For
@xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which evaluates to @xmath .

In the following two sections we discuss pairing in the AF and @xmath SC
channels. We will show that even when the order parameter is constant
along the Fermi surface, the strength of correlation is much larger at
the saddle points than for the other states at the Fermi surface. This
is due to the large anisotropy of the Fermi velocity. In order to
measure the strength of correlation for different angles, we compute the
ratio

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.22)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the WW transforms of the hopping Hamiltonian
and the order parameter, respectively. @xmath in the denominator of the
right hand side is either @xmath for @xmath SC, or @xmath , as discussed
below. @xmath and @xmath are the WW transforms of the normal and
anomalous correlators, cf. Sec. 6.1 above. Hence ( 6.22 ) yields the
strength of correlation of the WW orbitals @xmath in the mean-field
ground state in the sense that when the ratio is large, the energy is
dominated by the kinetic energy, so that electrons in the orbital can be
considered as almost uncorrelated at scale @xmath . On the other hand,
when it is small, the pairing energy (AF or @xmath SC) dominates over
kinetic energy, so that the orbital can be approximated by almost local
fermion pairs.

#### 6.2.1 Antiferromagnetism

We start with the AF case, since this is more similar to the
one-dimensional examples in that the order parameter is constant along
the Fermi surface. The WW transform of the AF mean-field Hamiltonian can
be obtained in exactly the same way, as in one dimension, Eq.Â ( 6.16 ).
Since in two dimension the wave vector of the antiferromagnetic ordering
is @xmath , the WW orbitals @xmath and @xmath are coupled. The WW
transform of the staggered AF magnetization is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We use Eq. ( 6.22 ) in order to estimate the strength of correlation in
different orbitals, dependent on the ratio @xmath . This ratio is shown
in Fig. 6.5 . It is evident that for @xmath , the states at the saddle
points are very strongly correlated, with @xmath . The other states are
much less correlated, the corresponding ratios are given by @xmath for
the states with @xmath , and @xmath for the nodal states with @xmath .

The spatial decay of the pair correlations for the states at the Fermi
surface is shown in Fig. 6.6 . The pair correlations are strongest at
the saddle points. Surprisingly, the pair correlations decay very
rapidly even for the nodal states, which are weakly correlated. This is
probably connected to the fact that the system is half-filled and thus
perfectly nested, so that even the uncorrelated Fermi sea contains
relatively strong density-density correlations at the wave vector @xmath
.

#### 6.2.2 @xmath-wave superconductivity

In this section, we consider @xmath -wave superconductivity. The
corresponding mean-field Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are unit vectors in the @xmath - and @xmath
-directions, respectively.

##### WW representation of the Hamiltonian

The transformation of this Hamiltonian to the WW basis can be obtained
from the transformation of the hopping operator ( 5.26 ), noting that in
real space @xmath and @xmath transform in the same way because the basis
functions are real. Thus we obtain to leading order in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence, the @xmath -wave pairing term for the nodal states
vanishes to leading order in @xmath , so that the pairs are always
non-local there. By symmetry, the corrections at the saddle point are
@xmath and hence relatively small. Naturally, the correlations are
strongest at the saddle points because of the @xmath -wave symmetry of
the order parameter.

##### Correlations in the mean-field ground state

Similar to the AF case above, we calculate the ratio @xmath for all
states at the Fermi surface. In the @xmath SC case, the correlations
decay faster towards the nodal direction because of the angle dependence
of the order parameter. We compute the pair correlations to order @xmath
, so that the pair amplitude is finite for the nodal states. The results
are shown in Fig. 6.7 . The behavior at the saddle points is almost the
same as in the AF case, namely, the saddle points are strongly
correlated for @xmath , with @xmath at @xmath . The states at @xmath are
less correlated, with @xmath for @xmath . This is a slightly larger
ratio than for the AF case, but still similar. The nodal states, on the
other hand have @xmath , so that correlations can be neglected at scale
@xmath .

The spatial decay of the pair correlations at @xmath is different from
the AF case because of the angular dependence of the order parameter.
Since pair correlations for the nodal states are small, we only show the
decay of correlations for the other states. This is displayed in Fig.
6.8 . The increase of the correlation function for the states at @xmath
is again an artifact of the window function that is used, which is
obtained for @xmath (cf. Ch. 4 ). The main result is that correlations
at the saddle points decay very rapidly, similar to the AF case.

### 6.3 Conclusions

In this chapter we have used the WW basis states in order to analyze the
correlations of AF and @xmath SC mean-field states in one and two
dimensions. We found that the ratio @xmath of the (particle-hole or
particle-particle) pair size to the size of the wave packets that define
the WW basis controls a crossover between locally almost uncorrelated
fermions for @xmath and tightly bound fermions for @xmath . Even though
this result is based on simple mean-field Hamiltonians, it is reasonable
to expect that locally the physics is similar at scale @xmath
independently of the behavior at larger scales. This insight will be
used in the following sections to analyze strong coupling fixed points
of the renormalization group in one and two dimensions. The key idea
from this section is that if the wave packet size @xmath is chosen
appropriately, the fermions can be replaced by effective bosonic degrees
of freedom corresponding to the paired fermions. The interactions
between the new degrees of freedom determine the physical behavior at
larger distances and low energies.

In two dimensions, we have seen that even in simple mean-field states
the physics involves multiple length scales when the Fermi velocity is
strongly anisotropic. In particular, when the Fermi surface lies in the
vicinity of the saddle points, the wave packets there are easily
localized and bound into pairs. On the other hand, states in the nodal
direction remain essentially uncorrelated at the same length scale. This
separation of length scales forms the basis of the treatment of the
saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model in Ch. 9 .

## Chapter 7 Wave packets and the renormalization group

In the last chapter we have discussed the manifestation of fermion
pairing in the WW basis for simple mean-field Hamiltonians. The type of
pairing and its associated length scale @xmath have been put in by hand.
It is clear, however, that microscopic Hamiltonians rarely are of the
mean-field variety, instead it is a complex task by itself to obtain an
effective Hamiltonian that eventually leads to pair formation (or more
complicated orderings) from the microscopic interactions. For weak to
moderate initial interactions, the renormalization group is one of the
standard methods for obtaining effective Hamiltonians for the low-energy
degrees of freedom of a many-fermion system from the microscopic
interactions [ 26 ] .

In this chapter we seek to establish the connection between the
renormalization group for interacting fermions and the WW basis. We
begin in Sec. 7.1 by relating the @xmath -dependence of the wave packet
transform of an operator to its naÃ¯ve scaling dimension. This serves to
discuss the relevance of different operators for large @xmath . In Sec.
7.2 we introduce very briefly the method of continuous unitary
transformations [ 54 , 55 , 56 ] , a Hamiltonian formulation of the
renormalization group, which avoids certain problems connected with the
cutoff in the renormalization group. Since this topic is rather
technical, we relegate the bulk of the material to App. C . Finally, in
Sec. 7.3 we discuss the implications of the geometry of the Brillouin
zone and the Fermi surface for the treatment of low-energy problems. In
particular, we show that in the proximity of the van Hove singularity,
the problem can be simplified due to a separation of scales. This is an
ingredient to the treatment of the saddle point regime of the Hubbard
model in Ch. 9 .

### 7.1 Scaling dimensions

In the following we elaborate on the relation between the so-called
naÃ¯ve scaling dimension of operators in the RG approach [ 26 ] and the
dependence of matrix elements on the wave packet scale @xmath in the
wave packet transform of operators. In particular, we will see that the
latter is given by the scaling dimension of the operator under
consideration.

##### Scaling dimensions in the RG approach

The scaling dimension within the renormalization group arises as
follows: In its original formulation [ 26 ] , each renormalization step
consists in integrating out degrees of freedom with energy @xmath ,
where @xmath is close to one. Afterwards, the cutoff @xmath is lowered
to @xmath , and all length scales are rescaled, such that in the new
units the cutoff is again @xmath . All field operators are rescaled such
that the kinetic energy part remains unchanged, which allows to compare
the relative growth of the interaction part compared to the kinetic
energy. In addition to the rescaling, perturbative corrections arise
from integrating out degrees of freedom, which completes the RG step.
The naÃ¯ve scaling dimension of an operator is related to the rescaling
of lengths, and is thus obtained by omitting the perturbative
renormalization. It measures the importance of operators at low
energies. An operator that becomes asymptotically more important than
the kinetic energy is called relevant, it is called marginal if it
scales in the same way as the kinetic energy, and irrelevant if it
decreases at low energies. We follow the discussion in [ 26 ] for the RG
part.

For interacting fermion systems, the programme is implemented by
imposing an upper cutoff on all momentum space integrals as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath measures the distance to the Fermi surface, @xmath with the
Fermi momentum @xmath . @xmath is the Fermi velocity which is assumed to
be constant. The remaining integral @xmath runs over fixed energy
shells, with energy @xmath . The action of spinless free fermions in the
vicinity of the Fermi surface (i.e. with cutoff @xmath ) is then given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This action is a fixed point of the RG transformation @xmath when @xmath
, and @xmath are rescaled as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is rescaled in the same way as @xmath . This definition of the
rescaling ensures that the kinetic energy part of the action remains
invariant, so that the effect of rescaling on other operators measures
the change in their importance when the cutoff is lowered. Relevant
(irrelevant) operators are proportional to some positive (negative)
power of @xmath after rescaling, whereas marginal ones are unchanged. On
the other hand, other types of operators are affected by the rescaling,
for example one may add a quadratic term @xmath to the kinetic energy.
Under rescaling (omitting the angular integrals over @xmath which do not
play a role), this term changes as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

so that it decreases as the cutoff is lowered. It is clear that
additional powers of @xmath make the decrease even faster. In a similar
manner, one finds that interactions that involve the full Fermi surface
when evaluated at @xmath are marginal, whereas all others are
irrelevant. Since it is quite lengthy to show this, we refer the reader
to [ 26 ] . Instead, we show how the scaling dimensions of operators
follow directly from their wave packet transform.

##### Scaling dimensions from wave packets

The dependence of the wave packet transform of an operator on @xmath can
be found using the transformation rules from Ch. 5 . Instead of
reiterating them, we give intuitive arguments why they are true in this
section. We first consider the kinetic energy, and consider its wave
packet transform. We focus on @xmath -conserving matrix elements that
involve wave packets with @xmath . Since the states are wave packets
with a mean momentum @xmath , they move at the group velocity @xmath .
The distance between two adjacent sites is @xmath , hence we find for
the wave packet hopping rate

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Rescaling the Hamiltonian by @xmath , the leading part of the kinetic
energy is hence independent of @xmath . Consequently, operators that
decrease faster (slower) than @xmath as @xmath are irrelevant
(relevant), and operators that scale like @xmath are marginal. Expanding
the kinetic energy to higher order around @xmath leads to higher powers
of @xmath that are integrated against the wave packets. Since the wave
packets are narrow in @xmath -space, with a width @xmath , each
additional power of @xmath contributes an additional power of @xmath ,
so that corrections to the leading term are less and less important as
@xmath .

For states at points of high symmetry in the Brillouin zone, the
behavior is different. Because of the symmetry, @xmath vanishes, and the
kinetic energy is @xmath . Consequently, the kinetic energy at these
points can be neglected compared to generic points on the Fermi surface
for large @xmath .

The scaling of local (at scale @xmath ) interactions can be understood
as follows: The matrix element of a local interactions between two pairs
of wave packet states is of the form

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (7.6)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Note that the interaction need only be local compared to the wave packet
scale @xmath for the argument to hold, since all @xmath -conserving
matrix elements transform in the same way, regardless of the momenta
involved.

In order to link this result to the scaling dimensions from the RG
approach, we implement the cutoff by restricting the WW basis states to
states that lie at the Fermi surface. There is one such state per WW
lattice site in one dimension, regardless of @xmath . Since the
interaction matrix elements for this state scale like @xmath , the
interaction is marginal in one dimension. The matrix elements in two
dimensions scale like @xmath and may thus appear to be irrelevant.
However, the number of states at the Fermi surface scales linearly with
@xmath , since the Fermi surface has a fixed length in momentum space,
cf. Fig. 7.1 . Thus each state can couple to @xmath other states, and
interaction terms that involve a finite fraction of the states at the
Fermi surface (i.e. with all four momenta at the Fermi surface) scale
like @xmath instead. In the same manner as for the kinetic energy, when
the interaction is not local but contains additional powers of @xmath ,
each power of @xmath contributes an additional power of @xmath in the
wave packet transform, so that for large enough @xmath interactions can
be assumed to be local to high accuracy.

The argument that interactions have to couple many states at the Fermi
surface is not new, and has been used by various investigators to
facilitate the analysis of weakly coupled fermion systems by means of a
@xmath -expansion, where @xmath is the number of states at the Fermi
surface with discretized angles [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] .

It should be noted, that for the states at the saddle points (or other
points of high symmetry) the interaction in two dimensions always scales
in the same way as the hopping terms. This suggests that when the Fermi
surface touches the saddle points, the states there may become strongly
coupled even when they are not coupled to the rest of the Fermi surface.

### 7.2 One-loop RG via continuous unitary transformations

In this section we introduce the continuous unitary transformations
(CUT) [ 54 , 55 , 56 ] , which are the Hamiltonian equivalent of the
action-based RG flow equations [ 26 , 10 ] . Whereas the RG is based on
integrating out degrees of freedom, and thus decreases the number of the
degrees of freedom in the system, the CUT method merely decouples states
with different kinetic energies, so that the number of degrees of
freedom stays the same. The decoupling is achieved by a sequence of
infinitesimal canonical transformations that is applied to the
Hamiltonian of the system. We denote the generator of the infinitesimal
transformation by @xmath , where @xmath is the flow parameter related to
the renormalization scale. The flowing Hamiltonian @xmath obeys the
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is just the first order expansion of the unitary transformation
@xmath . In principle, the flow equation is exact, but in practice one
has to resort to approximations. In App. C we show that for a suitable
generator @xmath , the flow equation ( 7.7 ) leads to a set of coupled
flow equations for a set of auxiliary coupling constants @xmath . These
flow equations are structurally very similar to the usual RG equations
when the frequency dependence is neglected. The major difference to the
RG equations is that there is no cutoff. Instead, the physical coupling
constants @xmath are obtained from the auxiliary ones via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the RG energy scale. The exponential on the right hand
side contains the kinetic energy differences of the initial and final
states of an interaction matrix elements. As a consequence, states with
kinetic energy larger than @xmath decouple from the low energy states
and can be neglected when @xmath . The advantage of this scheme within
the wave packet approach is that the wave packet states may lie
partially below and partially above the cutoff. In the RG scheme it is
difficult to obtain an effective Hamiltonian in this situation, whereas
in the CUT method, Eq. 7.8 gives a simple rule for all cases. Since the
CUT flow equations in the one-loop approximations are essentially
equivalent to the RG one-loop equations, we do not discuss them any
further. The only CUT related equation that is needed in the remainder
of this work is Eq. 7.8 .

More details can be found in App. C and many more in the book by Kehrein
[ 57 ] .

### 7.3 The geometry of the low-energy states in the Brillouin zone

In this section we discuss the influence of the shape of the low-energy
phase space on the low-energy physics of the Hubbard model in two
dimensions. In particular, we look at the influence of strong anisotropy
in the Fermi velocities along the Fermi surface. The most extreme case
of anisotropy is realized when the Fermi surface touches the saddle
points, where the van Hove singularity in the density of states
manifests itself through a vanishing Fermi velocity at the saddle
points. We will show that in this case, slow and fast parts of the Fermi
system at a fixed energy scale @xmath live on different length scales,
which leads to an approximate decoupling of these two kinds of states.

##### van Hove singularities

The influence of the latter can be seen in Fig. 7.2 , which shows the
tube of states with energy @xmath for @xmath . In the case of a generic
Fermi surface, the Fermi velocity is approximately constant along the
Fermi surface. Since the energy close to the Fermi surface is @xmath ,
the tube has width @xmath everywhere. On the other hand, when the Fermi
surface is in the vicinity of the saddle points, the Fermi velocity
becomes strongly anisotropic (and vanishes at the saddle points). In the
vicinity of the saddle points the width of the tube is asymptotically
@xmath .

We will be mainly interested in the latter case in the following. Due to
the large anisotropy of the Fermi velocity, there is no unique length
scale associated to the problem, so that there exists no single wave
packet size @xmath that fits for all angles. However, a second glance at
Fig. 7.2 reveals that most of the low energy phase space is concentrated
around the saddle points, so that it appears reasonable to adjust the
size of the wave packets to this part of the Brillouin zone.
Accordingly, the wave packets are too small (in real space) for the
remaining part of the Fermi surface. This is shown in Fig. 7.3 for
@xmath and @xmath . At the saddle points the phase space cell covers the
low energy region neatly, but the tube is much narrower than a phase
space cell as one moves into the nodal direction. The fact that the
cells are too large in momentum space is also reflected in the WW
transform of the interactions.

##### Approximate decoupling of fast and slow states

At this point we can appreciate the CUT approach from Sec. 7.2 above, as
it treats states below and above the cutoff on the same footing. From
Eq. 7.8 we see that states above the cutoff decouple exponentially,
whereas states below the cutoff are relatively unaffected by the
exponential suppression of the energy transfer. Therefore the WW
transform for interactions at the saddle points is essentially the same
whether the flowing auxiliary coupling @xmath (which is the pendant of
the usual RG couplings) or the physical coupling @xmath is used. In
particular, the coupling can be transformed using the local
approximation from Sec. 5.4 . When the tube is much narrower than a
cell, however, the exponential suppression of interactions effectively
restricts all the momentum space summations in the wave packet transform
to the area of the tube. As a rule of thumb, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus we expect the interactions in the nodal directions to decrease in
the WW basis representation when the tube is chosen too small. This
expectation is born out, and the decrease of the local interaction as a
function of @xmath , which measures the size mismatch between the tube
and the cells, is shown in Fig. 7.4 . The decrease of the local
effective interactions leads to a partial decoupling of the slow parts
of the Fermi surface from the fast parts, where slow and fast refer to
the Fermi velocity compared to @xmath , i.e. a region is fast when
@xmath and slow otherwise. This effect is increased because of the
kinetic energy in the WW basis. The key observation is that the RG flow
does not enter the strong coupling regime for all parts of the Fermi
surface simultaneously. In particular, for the states at the saddle
points the band width in the WW basis is @xmath , where @xmath is the
full band width of the model. The flow goes to strong coupling at the
saddle points when the interaction strength @xmath . In the nodal
region, on the other hand, the band width is @xmath . Thus, even for the
relatively small value @xmath we have @xmath . As a consequence, the
fast regions behave almost like non-interacting fermions at scale @xmath
, and correlations involve very delocalized states only.

This separation of scales justifies to treat the region around the
saddle point in isolation when it becomes strongly coupled. The strong
correlations imply that at larger length scales this region should be
modeled in terms of the low energy degrees of freedom that emerge from
the strongly correlated problem at scale @xmath . The coupling to the
remaining states at larger length scales involves these new degrees of
freedom only. This route is pursued in Ch. 9 for the saddle point regime
of the two-dimensional Hubbard model. It should be emphasized that the
decoupling of scales does not rely on the fact that the Fermi surface
touches the saddle points exactly. Indeed, it is clear that for strong
coupling problems at finite @xmath , the width of the tube with @xmath
limits the sensitivity to the precise position of the Fermi surface. For
@xmath , the width at the saddle points is @xmath , so that the same
reasoning should hold when the Fermi surface is dislocated from the
saddle points by less than about half this distance.

Finally, it is noteworthy that the idea of a decoupling of fast and slow
fermions is not new. In fact, it is a well established effect for
multi-band systems, where the most celebrated example is probably the
Kondo-lattice model of heavy fermion systems [ 31 , 32 ] , where slow
@xmath -electrons are modeled as localized spins (i.e. effective
low-energy degrees of freedom), whereas the fast @xmath -electrons are
treated as non-interacting. Another example that is more closely related
to the problem here is given by @xmath -leg ladders at weak coupling,
where a similar decoupling of slow and fast bands has been observed
within the renormalization group [ 33 ] .

## Chapter 8 Wave packets and effective Hamiltonians in one dimension

### 8.1 Introduction

In this chapter we apply the WW basis states to three strongly coupled
fixed points of RG flows for one dimensional systems: Chains with
attractive interactions away from half-filling (Sec. 8.4 ), chains with
repulsive interactions at half-filling (Sec. 8.3 ), and the two-leg
ladder with repulsive interactions at half-filling (Sec. 8.5 ). The
low-energy phenomenology of these systems is very well understood (see
e.g. [ 67 , 68 ] ), so that we can compare the results obtained from the
wave packet approach with exact solutions that are obtained from
bosonization and Bethe ansatz [ 67 , 68 ] . We do not aim at
quantitative results, and merely seek to obtain qualitative features of
the low-energy physics. The main concern in this respect is the
distinction between algebraic decays and exponential decays of
correlation functions. Since the WW basis breaks the translational
invariance of the system, it is not obvious that power-law correlations
can be obtained at all.

The qualitative nature of the study is reflected in the approximations
used: Throughout, we discard all basis states except the ones at the
Fermi points, with @xmath , where @xmath is the Fermi momentum. We use
the fixed point Hamiltonians obtained from one-loop RG for the
interaction, and expand around the strong coupling limit. Somewhat
surprisingly, we recover the nature of the dominant correlations in the
ground state in all three cases, despite the simplicity of the
approximations.

More explicitly, we will see that within the WW approach, the long range
physics at the strong coupling fixed points is to a large extent
determined by the structure of the local (at scale @xmath ) Hilbert
space and its ground state degeneracy. This motive is picked up in the
study of the two-dimensional Hubbard model in the next chapter.

### 8.2 Renormalization group and wave packets for chains

In this section we briefly review the one-loop renormalization group
equations for the one-dimensional Hubbard model at weak coupling (see
e.g. [ 67 ] ). Based on the weak coupling assumption we take into
account only interaction terms that are allowed in the vicinity of the
Fermi points. Momentum conservation can then be used to parametrize the
interaction in terms of four coupling constants @xmath following the
so-called g-ology scheme [ 67 ] .

##### Low energy Hamiltonian in momentum space

We begin with the interaction part of the Hamiltonian, and introduce the
current operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The indices @xmath label right- and left-movers and take the values
@xmath . Note that this use of @xmath coincides with the one in the
definition of the WW basis functions, Ch. 4 .

In the spirit of the renormalization group we assume that the
interaction does not depend on the momenta relative to the Fermi points,
i.e. we set

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the interaction in momentum representation. Note that
this approximation is analogous to the local approximation in the wave
packet transformation introduced in Ch. 5 . Momentum conservation
restricts the values of the @xmath , so that one can parametrize

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Note that @xmath is present at half-filling only, when umklapp
scattering is allowed at low energies because of @xmath . The coupling
@xmath will be neglected in the following, since it does not influence
the flow to strong coupling.

The prefactors in ( 8.3 ) are chosen such that for the case of an onsite
interaction @xmath the coupling constants have the value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is used as initial condition for the renormalization group.

The kinetic energy can be linearized around the Fermi points at weak
coupling and is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### Renormalization group equations and their fixed points

The one-loop RG equations for the coupling constants @xmath are given by
[ 49 , 50 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the dot is shorthand for the logarithmic scale derivative @xmath ,
so that @xmath . @xmath is the renormalization scale, and @xmath is the
initial bandwidth. We will be interested in two cases, both involving
finite scale singularities. The first one is the half-filled repulsive
Hubbard model, for which the strong coupling fixed-point of ( 8.6 ) is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This fixed point is characterized by a diverging staggered
spin-susceptibility.

The second one is the attractive Hubbard model away from half-filling
(i.e. @xmath ), for which the fixed point couplings are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This fixed point is characterized by diverging singlet pairing
correlations.

The couplings @xmath and @xmath diverge at a critical scale @xmath ,
that depends on the initial interaction strength @xmath and the full
band width @xmath . Here we are not interested in the magnitude of this
scale. It is sufficient to know that at some scale the couplings exceed
the band width below the cutoff, at which point the perturbative
approach breaks down.

In order to obtain a qualitative picture of the fixed point behavior, we
assume in the following that the couplings define the largest energy
scale in the problem, and investigate the strong coupling limit. This
approach is similar to the semi-classical approximation to the
sine-Gordon problem that describes the low-energy physics of
one-dimensional chains in the bosonization method [ 67 , 68 ] . In order
to study the fixed points, we need the WW representation of the fixed
point Hamiltonian first.

The kinetic energy part has been discussed in Sec. 5.1 , and will not be
important in what follows.

##### WW representation of @xmath

Moreover, we will restrict the WW basis to states @xmath with @xmath ,
and assume that @xmath is chosen such that only this state lies below
the cutoff, as indicated in Fig. 8.2 . In order to investigate the
properties of the fixed points, we first transform the fixed point
interactions to the WW basis using the methods from Sec. 5.3.2 , in
particular Eq.Â ( 5.30 ), which we restate here for convenience. Since we
set all the @xmath to @xmath , we suppress the WW momentum index @xmath
in the following. Then Eq.Â ( 5.30 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath ( @xmath ) for @xmath even (odd). The values
of @xmath depend on the window function, the values we use are tabulated
in Tab. 5.1 .

Plugging the g-ology couplings ( 8.3 ) into the right hand side of ( 8.9
), we observe that the Kronecker deltas can be used to perform three of
the four sums over the @xmath . We evaluate the remaining sum for the
@xmath term (the other terms being similar) only, and state the results
for the other terms. We note that @xmath , and find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now recall from Eq. ( 4.10 ) that @xmath can take on the values @xmath
(for @xmath even) and @xmath (for @xmath odd) only. Then the @xmath
vanishes when an odd number of operators acts on an odd (i.e. @xmath
odd) WW orbital, since its argument is either @xmath or @xmath . In
particular, terms of the form @xmath vanish, since there is always an
even number of odd @xmath (for @xmath -conserving matrix elements).
Since the interactions decay rapidly with distance, the contribution
from this type of interaction is thus strongly suppressed in one
dimension, and we neglect it in the following. Now we turn to the type
@xmath . Focussing on nearest neighbor interactions and setting all
@xmath , we find that the cosine contributes @xmath , depending on which
of the @xmath are even (odd). Thus there are no terms that vanish
exactly in this case. Finally, when all sites involved are even (odd),
the cosine always evaluates to @xmath .

The general form of the Hamiltonian for the states at the Fermi points,
@xmath can now be written down using similar considerations for the
other parts of the interaction. In order to simplify the notation, we
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the WW Hamiltonian for the states at the Fermi points is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used the values of @xmath from Tab. 5.1 . The WW
transforms of the fixed point couplings can be obtained in a
straightforward manner from ( 8.13 ). This is used in the following two
sections to analyze the two fixed points above.

### 8.3 Chain with repulsive interactions at half-filling

In this section we discuss the fixed point @xmath for the half-filled
chain with repulsive interactions. We use Eq.Â ( 8.13 ) in order to
obtain the WW representation of the interaction. We proceed by
diagonalizing the local part of the Hamiltonian, and find that charge
degrees of freedom are gapped, so that locally only the spin degree of
freedom survives. As a consequence, the ground state of the local
interaction Hamiltonian has two-fold degeneracy per site, corresponding
to the two possible spin states. In the next step, we show that the
non-local part of the interaction is of the Heisenberg form, so that it
leaves the local low-energy subspace invariant. The Heisenberg model can
be solved using the Bethe ansatz [ 67 ] , so that the asymptotic form of
the spin-spin correlation functions can be obtained. The correlation
functions of the effective model in the WW basis are then transformed
back to momentum space, revealing a power-law form of the spin-spin
correlation function for momenta close to @xmath and @xmath . This
result is in qualitative agreement with the bosonization solution of the
chain problem [ 67 , 68 ] .

##### Fixed point interaction in WW representation

The fixed point interaction can be transformed to the WW basis by
plugging @xmath into ( 8.9 ). The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

the non-local part of the interaction can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath and @xmath are spin and charge operators at site @xmath
, respectively. Similarly, the local part can be rewritten as

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.17)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Local Hilbert space and effective spin model

In order to arrive at suitable low-energy degrees of freedom, we
investigate the local part ( 8.17 ) of the interaction first. The local
Hilbert space consists of the four states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . Since the wave packets lie at the Fermi surface, there is one
fermion per site, and after adjusting the chemical potential
accordingly, the energies of the four states are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence the low energy sector of the local Hamiltonian consists of the two
states @xmath . Since these states are degenerate, the effective
Hamiltonian to leading order is found by simply projecting each WW site
down to the spin sector.

The action of the non-local interactions in the spin sector can be
inferred from ( 8.16 ). The charge operators @xmath have no effect on
the spin sector. Therefore we are left with the nearest-neighbor
spin-spin interactions. Hence we arrive at the effective Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The effective model is simply an antiferromagnetic @xmath
Heisenberg model.

##### Asymptotic spin-spin correlation function

The properties of the Heisenberg model in one dimension are well known,
and the spin-spin correlation function has been derived using the Bethe
ansatz [ 51 , 67 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are constants. It follows that there are soft
excitations at the points @xmath and @xmath of the Brillouin zone of the
superlattice defined by the WW basis states.

Now we transform this correlator back to momentum space in order to see
what these results mean. We denote the momentum representation of the
spin density by @xmath , where @xmath is the momentum transfer. Since
the WW basis states are localized in momentum space around @xmath , the
momentum transfer @xmath of two-fermion operators such as the @xmath is
restricted to the vicinity of the two points @xmath and @xmath , as
indicated in Fig. 8.3 . In Ch. 6 we have found that the staggered
magnetization @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in the WW basis. Therefore the power law in the staggered magnetization
in the WW basis corresponds to the same power law in the staggered
magnetization in real space. A similar line of reasoning for the uniform
spin-density, @xmath shows that in the same manner the uniform spin
density in the WW basis corresponds to the uniform spin density in the
original lattice. The momenta that lie far away from the center and
boundary of the Brillouin zone of the WW basis are in general
superpositions of momenta close to @xmath and @xmath , reflecting the
broken translational invariance.

In summary, the asymptotic behavior of the spin-spin correlation
function in the real space lattice inferred from the effective model is
the same as in eq. ( 8.20 ), with @xmath replaced by @xmath . The wave
velocity of excitations has to be rescaled because the unit cell is
larger in the WW basis by a factor of @xmath . We conclude that our
approximation produces algebraically spin-density correlations round
@xmath and @xmath , and gaps for all charged excitations in agreement
with bosonization treatments. However, the exponents of the power law
decays, which are influenced by the Luttinger liquid physics are not
recovered. This is not surprising given that the Luttinger liquid
physics has its origins in the asymptotically linear fermion dispersion
[ 52 ] , a feature that is hard to conserve in a cluster approximation
(not to mention that the Fermi velocity appears nowhere in the present
treatment). Nevertheless, we emphasize that the qualitative features of
the model including algebraic decays are recovered, which is in our view
a non-trivial result, in particular when taking into account the
simplicity of the approximation.

### 8.4 Chain with attractive interactions

Now we consider the fixed point for attractive interactions at arbitrary
filling, characterized by @xmath . We follow the same step as in Sec.
8.3 above. First we obtain the WW representation of the interaction
Hamiltonian. We analyze the local part of the interaction and find that
the low energy sector contains only singlet pairs of fermions. Then we
map the projected Hamiltonian to a spin problem and deduce the
asymptotic correlation function from the Bethe ansatz solution.

##### Fixed point interaction in WW representation

The WW transform of the interaction Hamiltonian is again obtained using
( 8.13 ). The local part is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the non-local part, we introduce the additional pair annihilation
operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and their hermitian conjugates @xmath . In terms of the spin-, charge-
and pair-operators the non-local interactions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### Local Hilbert space and effective spin model

The analysis of the local Hilbert space and Hamiltonian is the same as
in Sec. 8.3 , except that now the interactions are attractive, so that
the low-energy states are @xmath and @xmath . Again, the ground state is
two-fold degenerate per site so that we obtain the effective Hamiltonian
by projection onto the degenerate subspace. The spin operators in the
second line of ( 8.24 ) do not contribute since in the low energy sector
all spins are bound into singlet pairs. In order to treat the remaining
interactions we note that the local low energy subspace can be mapped
onto a spin system with @xmath , similar to the repulsive chain above.

The mapping is accomplished by identifying

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of the spin operators, the projection of the interaction
Hamiltonian to the low energy subspace becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The effective Hamiltonian is hence an XXZ spin chain
model. Note that the sign of the first term can be reversed by a gauge
transformation on the spin states, e.g. @xmath on every second site
without changing the model. Consequently, we find that the effective
model is again an antiferromagnetic @xmath Heisenberg model. Note
however, that the emergent @xmath -symmetry is due to the approximation,
and that in general the symmetry is @xmath .

##### Asymptotic correlation functions

Since the effective Hamiltonian ( 8.27 ) is again of the Heisenberg
type, we do not need to discuss the asymptotic correlations in the WW
basis, for the results we refer to Eq.Â ( 8.20 ). Instead we discuss the
meaning of the different correlators in real space. In the same way as
before, the uniform spin-densities in the WW basis correspond to uniform
spin-densities in real space. The staggered spin-density in the WW basis
corresponds to spin-density in real space that oscillates with wave
vector @xmath (instead of @xmath ). Translating the spin operators back
to the fermion operators (using Eq. 8.26 ), we obtain that the charge
density (corresponding to @xmath ) becomes soft at the momenta @xmath
and @xmath . The pair correlations (corresponding to @xmath ) show
algebraic decay for the same momenta.

Comparison with the solution from bosonization [ 67 ] shows that the
slow decay of pair correlations with momentum @xmath is an artifact of
our approximation. The other power laws are in qualitative agreement,
however. For the same reasons as for the repulsive chain, it is clear
that the precise power laws connected to Luttinger liquid physics can
not be recovered.

### 8.5 Two-leg ladder at half-filling

In this section we discuss the low energy behavior of the SO(5)
symmetric two-leg ladder at half-filling. Since the Hubbard ladder has
two legs, the diagonalization of the hopping term leads to two bands.
The bands will be labelled by indices like @xmath in the following.
There are four Fermi points in total which are all equivalent in the
sense that the Fermi velocity is the same (because of particle-hole
symmetry). Compared to the single chains considered so far, this opens
up the possibility of competition between different order parameters.
Indeed, it is well established that the Hubbard ladder has a Mott
insulating ground state at half-filling, regardless of the interaction
strength. In this so-called @xmath -Mott phase [ 53 ] , @xmath SC and AF
correlations are strong, but decay exponentially, and all excitations
are gapped. Remarkably, the single particle excitations at weak coupling
are of the same order of magnitude as the bosonic spin- and
pair-excitations.

The renormalization group flow for the Hubbard ladder at half-filling
has been derived by Lin and Balents [ 53 ] . There it was also shown
that the system generically flows to strong coupling, and that the fixed
point displays an enhanced SO(8) symmetry. The resulting low-energy
Hamiltonian turns out to be exactly solvable, with a so-called @xmath
-Mott ground state, which has gaps for all excitations. When the
high-energy Hamiltonian is SO(5) symmetric, the system retains this
symmetry, which shows up as a degeneracy of @xmath -wave pair
excitations and AF spin-excitations. Since the interplay between
superconductivity and antiferromagnetism is our main interest, we focus
on the SO(5) case.

The existence of more than one band poses no problems for the
transformation to the WW basis. Since the problem is weakly coupled, we
transform each band to the WW basis separately, and label all WW
quantities by an additional band index. The position of the WW states in
the Brillouin zone is illustrated in Fig. 8.4 . In the following, we use
the same approximations as before, namely, we truncate the WW basis and
keep only the states at the Fermi points. We use the fixed point
couplings of the RG to define the interaction Hamiltonian, and solve it
in the strong coupling limit.

We will see that within the WW basis, the presence of two bands leads to
a local problem with a non-degenerate ground state. This is to be
contrasted with the generic case of degenerate ground states for chains
above. The ground state features pronounced @xmath -wave SC and AF
correlations. The lowest excited states fall into two classes: There are
eight degenerate fermionic excitations, and five degenerate bosonic
excitations that correspond to the vector bosons above. Both types of
excitations have comparable gaps. We find that this situation is robust
against the perturbation by non-local interactions and fermion hopping,
hence reproducing the exact solution of this problem qualitatively.

##### Effective Hamiltonian

The SO(5) symmetry at low energies is realized in terms of local fermion
bilinears in the continuum limit. The Lie algebra is generated by 10
operators: The particle number, the three spin operators and six
so-called @xmath -generators which create and annihilate triplet pairs
with total momentum @xmath . Because of the high symmetry of the kinetic
energy part of the Hamiltonian, all these operators commute with the
kinetic energy. The Lie algebra generators will not be important in the
following, so that we refer the interested reader to the review by Zhang
[ 64 ] . In addition to the generators, there are five bilinears that
transform in the vector representation of SO(5). In order to avoid
amassing more indices than necessary, we omit position labels, and write
@xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath . With this notation, the vector
operators are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The effective interaction can be written in terms of these operators.
Due to the symmetry, it is convenient to introduce the vector @xmath
.The fixed-point interaction is given by [ 53 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the continuum limit, where @xmath . The operators @xmath create AF
spin-fluctuations with momentum @xmath . Note that this involves a
transition from one band to the other. The operators @xmath create
@xmath -wave pair excitations with both fermions of a pair in the same
band, and a relative minus sign of the phase between the bands.

##### WW representation of the effective Hamiltonian

We now turn to the transformation of the interaction ( 8.29 ) to the WW
basis. Surprisingly, the transformation is simpler for the ladder than
for the chain systems. The reason is that the interaction is written as
a scalar product of operators with definite parity. In fact, all
components of the vector @xmath are even under parity. Since the parity
of a bilinear is the product of the parity of its constituting fermions,
the fact that the parity of the WW basis states is opposite on
neighboring sites can be expected to lead to cancellations of terms in
the WW transformation.

We show the highlights of the transformation for the @xmath SC operators
only, since the AF operators behave essentially in the same way. We use
the local approximation as before, so that we only need the matrix
elements @xmath at the Fermi points:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have omitted the @xmath â€™s on the left hand side. The important
point is that there are only two Kronecker deltas involving the @xmath ,
and that the first pair of coordinates is indpendent of the second pair
of coordinates, because the of the factorization into bilinears. In the
orthogonalization formula ( 8.9 ) the summation over @xmath then leads
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Recalling that @xmath at the Fermi points, we see that the contribution
is finite for @xmath and @xmath . Since we keep nearest neighbor
interactions only, this leads to @xmath , @xmath . In the SC case this
implies that interactions involve local pairs only, which may interact
locally or hop to the neighboring site. The same conclusion holds for
the operators @xmath , which involve local particle-hole pairs only.

In summary, the local Hamiltonian can be expressed conveniently in terms
of the operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding local SO(5) vector operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interaction is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.34)
  -- -- -- --------

As usually, the numerical prefactors depend on the choice of the window
function.

##### Local Hilbert space and effective quantum rotor model

Following the same routine as before, we start by investigating the
local Hilbert space of the problem, focussing on the bosonic states. The
ground state @xmath is non-degenerate, and consists of one @xmath -wave
pair per site,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition, there are five degenerate bosonic excited states that are
obtained by applying the components of the vector operator @xmath to the
ground state,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath etc. Finally, there are eight equivalent single fermion
excitations. The energies of these two types of excitations are are very
close to each other. In units of the WW basis coupling, they are given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This situation is quite different from the behavior of the single
chains, where the bosonic (spin or pair) excitations are in the
degenerate ground state manifold of the local Hamiltonian, and thus far
below the single particle spectrum. In the ladder case, the bosonic and
fermionic excitations are almost degenerate locally, and in fact the
bosonic excitations lie slightly above the fermionic ones.

##### Results

Since the ground state is non-degenerate, we may expect it to be of the
RVB form [ 17 , 20 ] , with strong but short ranged @xmath -wave pairing
and AF correlations. In order to check the robustness of these findings
with respect to non-local perturbations, we use the CORE algorithm [ 36
] to integrate out the fermionic degrees of freedom. A short description
of this algorithm can be found in App. D . The resulting bosonic model
is then diagonalized on a cluster. Results of finite size scaling of the
bosonic gap and the inferred value at infinite size are shown in Fig.
8.5 . The gap remains practically unchanged, and we conclude that the
system is in a RVB state, in agreement with the exact solution [ 53 ] .

In addition to the results at half-filling, we can infer the behavior
when the system is doped away from half-filling. From the spectrum of
the local Hamiltonian it follows directly that doped holes (or
electrons) are bound into pairs, since the pair binding energy is of the
same order as the single particle gap. As soon as hole pairs are
introduced, the ground state of the system is degenerate, and a
low-energy model is obtained by projecting the Hamiltonian onto the
degenerate ground state. This leads to a hardcore boson problem at small
filling, with the number of bosons (i.e. hole pairs) equal to @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the doping level. We conclude that the system turns
into a superfluid with superfluid density @xmath .

### 8.6 Conclusions

In this section we have applied the simplest possible wave packet
approximation to a variety of one-dimensional systems. The approach
consists of first applying the renormalization group to the microscopic
model to find possible fixed points of the flow. The fixed point
Hamiltonians are then solved in the strong coupling limit for the set of
WW basis states that lie at the Fermi surface. Due to the fact that the
WW basis states always involve at least nearest neighbor interactions,
the resulting effective Hamiltonians are non-trivial even when the
kinetic energy is neglected.

A surprising amount of information about the nature of the ground state
has been shown to be present in the local interaction and the excitation
spectrum of the local problem in the WW basis. We have seen two
radically different cases: For the chain problems, the â€™order parameterâ€™
decouples from the fermionic degrees of freedom locally, in the sense
that the corresponding bosonic excitations are ungapped, whereas
fermions have a gap. This kind of behavior is very much in line with the
assumptions made in deriving effective field theories for slow order
parameter fields that separate from the gapped fermions. For the ladder
case, on the other hand, we have seen that fermions and â€™order
parameterâ€™ excitations exist on the same energy scale, due to strong
short ranged singlet correlations, leading to an RVB state that has very
little in common with the paradigm of effective theories for slow
variables.

In the next chapter, we will apply a similar methodology to the
two-dimensional Hubbard model, where we will find a similar behavior at
the saddle points.

In closing this chapter, we would like to explain briefly how the
admittedly oversimplified approach presented here can be extended. Based
on our findings of correlations in mean-field states in Ch. 6 , it is
clear that it is inconsistent to use the strong coupling limit for
states at the Fermi surface while neglecting states away from the Fermi
surface. The reason is that correlations of the neglected states are
significant when the coupling at the Fermi points is strong. A
straightforward extension of the approach considered here is two include
more WW momenta, so that the transition from weak-coupling RG to
strong-coupling wave packet approach becomes smoother. However, in the
presentation here we have chosen simplicity over numerical accuracy, and
leave this exploration for future work.

## Chapter 9 Saddle point regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model

### 9.1 Introduction

In this chapter we apply the methodology developed in the previous
chapter to the two-dimensional Hubbard model at moderate coupling. We
focus on the so-called saddle point regime, where the Fermi surface lies
in the vicinity of the saddle points @xmath and @xmath . As discussed in
Ch. 3 , earlier RG studies [ 58 , 66 ] in this regime have shown that
both @xmath -wave pairing ( @xmath SC) and antiferromagnetic (AF)
correlations are strong in this region of the phase diagram, and
especially the exact diagonalization study by LÃ¤uchli et al. [ 12 ]
points to the possibility that an insulating RVB is realized in the
vicinity of the saddle points, which would lead to a natural explanation
for the truncated Fermi surface of the cuprate superconductors [ 18 , 20
] that does not rely on symmetry breaking. This type of scenario
requires a â€™phase separation in the Brillouin zoneâ€™, in that electrons
at the saddle points are localized on relatively short length scales,
whereas the electrons in the nodal directions are delocalized over large
distances.

In Ch. 6 we have seen that the corresponding separation of length scales
naturally appears even at the mean-field level in the saddle point
regime due to the vastly different Fermi velocities in the nodal and
anti-nodal directions. Relatedly, we have shown in Ch. 7 that in this
situation RG flows to strong coupling lead to a strongly correlated
problem at the saddle points, whereas the faster states in the nodal
directions behave almost like free particles at the same length scale
(at moderate coupling). As a consequence, the slow states decouple from
the fast states, and may be bound into pairs at relatively small length
scales more or less independently of the what the fast states in the
nodal direction do.

These findings in conjunction with the experimental phenomenology
discussed in Ch. 3 motivate us to apply the wave packet method to states
in the vicinity of the saddle points. Following the procedure we have
already used for one-dimensional systems, we first compute an effective
Hamiltonian using the one-loop renormalization group. Details of the
implementation can be found in Sec. 9.2 . In order to monitor the flow
of correlations at the saddle points, we compute the WW transform of the
flowing interaction vertex at each step, as discussed in Sec. 9.3 . In
particular, we compute the single particle gap from the local
interactions, and stop the flow when the gap exceeds the bandwidth of
the wave packet states at the saddle points. The analysis of this local
problem is dealt with in Sec. 9.4 . We find a striking similarity
between the local (in the WW basis) behavior of the saddle point states
and the low-energy problem for the two-leg ladder from Sec. 8.5 . In
particular, the system has the same local ground state, and large gaps
for all excitations when the flow approaches the strong coupling region.
In order to assess the stability of the local ground state to the
non-local couplings, we diagonalize the effective saddle point
Hamiltonian on a plaquette in Sec. 9.5 . Depending on the parameters, we
find cooperon- and spin triplet-modes emerging below the single particle
continuum. In order to overcome the limitations of small clusters, we
compute an effect model for the @xmath -wave pairs at the saddle points
using the CORE algorithm [ 36 ] (see App. D ), and estimate the
stability of the insulating RVB state against pair fluctuations with a
variational ansatz in Sec. 9.6 . In this section we also discuss the
general structure of the low energy states and relate it to the
phenomenological SO(5) theory proposed by Zhang [ 64 ] .

### 9.2 The microscopic model and its renormalization group treatment

##### Model

We investigate the two-dimensional Hubbard model on a square lattice
with nearest and next-to-nearest neighbor hopping. The Hamiltonian is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . The kinetic energy part is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We focus on the case that the Fermi surface touches the saddle points,
which fixes @xmath . The interaction part describes onsite repulsion of
strength @xmath .

##### Renormalization group

The setup of the RG in this chapter is different from the one in Ch. 2 .
Based on the findings of Ch. 7 , we prefer to use the Hamiltonian flow
equations (or continuous unitary transformations [ 54 , 55 , 56 ] ) that
are derived in App. C . The main reason is that it is unclear in the
usual RG approach [ 10 ] how the transformation to the WW basis is to be
performed when the cutoff cuts through a phase space cell. We recall,
however, that the Hamiltonian flow equations are essentially the same as
the RG equations when both are performed in the leading one-loop
approximation as shown in App. C .

Moreover, we use a different discretization of the flowing vertex. This
is connected to our aim to use the WW basis states in order to treat the
low-energy problem. As discussed in Sec. 5.4 , this is facilitated when
the interaction vertex is known on a discrete set of @xmath -points that
lie on a square lattice. The lattice spacing (in the Brillouin zone)
should be @xmath for some integer @xmath in order to be able to
transform the interaction to the WW basis using the formulas from Sec.
5.4 . Since such a discretized Brillouin zone corresponds to a lattice
of linear extension @xmath , the analytical window function for @xmath
(cf. Sec. 4.1.3 ) can be used in order to transform the discretized
interaction numerically. In practice, we use @xmath and @xmath
throughout, so that the vertex is computed for 256 different momenta in
total. The discretization is shown in Fig. 9.1 .

The restriction to @xmath has different reasons. First, this value
corresponds to a strong coupling scale @xmath , which is in the range
where the unconventional RG flows have been observed in earlier studies
[ 58 ] . In addition, we think it is advantageous to use a relatively
large value for the minimum energy scale @xmath at which the RG flow is
stopped, since for small values the results depend very strongly on the
precise shape of the Fermi surface, whereas we are more interested in
the effect of short-ranged correlations which build up at higher
energies and are therefore relatively insensitive to the detailed
geometry of the Fermi surface.

Fixing @xmath implies that we do not use a fixed value for @xmath .
Instead, we adjust the value of @xmath such that the flow goes to strong
coupling at @xmath . We estimate the onset of the strong coupling regime
by computing the local fermion gap at the saddle points in the WW basis
(see Sec. 9.4 ), and stop the flow when the gap exceeds the band width
of the states there. All calculations are done at zero temperature.
Since @xmath is fixed, the only parameter that is varied is @xmath . We
consider the cases @xmath and @xmath in the following. The corresponding
values of @xmath are @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The flows are very similar to the ones reported in earlier works [ 58 ]
, with the dominant correlations in the @xmath SC and AF channels. The
AF channel is dominant for small @xmath , but the @xmath SC channel
becomes increasingly important for larger @xmath . Since the general
behavior of the RG flows in this regime has been dealt with extensively
in the literature [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 ] , we focus on the analysis of the
saddle point states in the following.

### 9.3 Effective Hamiltonian for the saddle points

In the following we restrict the WW basis to the states right at the
saddle points @xmath and @xmath . Accordingly, we restrict the WW
momentum coordinates @xmath to the two vectors @xmath and @xmath .

##### Interaction Hamiltonian in momentum space

Since we focus on the region around the saddle points in the following,
only a fraction of the renormalized couplings is needed. It is useful to
parametrize the couplings that act on states in the vicinity of the
saddle point such that short- and long-range behavior are separated.
This is achieved by shifting @xmath , where @xmath labels the saddle
points. Since all momentum space sums are effectively restricted to a
square with side length @xmath around the saddle points, there is no
risk of double counting.

We introduce the operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In terms of the @xmath , the part of the flowing interaction @xmath that
acts on states in the vicinity of the saddle points can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where all momentum sums are restricted to @xmath for some @xmath that
depends on the renormalization scale as discussed above. The spatial
dependence of the interaction for scales less than @xmath is contained
in the average values of the @xmath , whereas the dependence on scales
greater than @xmath is given by the @xmath dependence of each @xmath .
In accordance with the usual RG scaling arguments [ 26 ] , we find
numerically that the @xmath -dependence of the interactions is always
small compared to the @xmath -dependence, so that the effective
interactions are short ranged for length scales larger than the
renormalization scale.

##### Effective Hamiltonian in the Wilson-Wannier basis

Summarizing the results established above, we arrive at a model on a
square lattice with lattice constant @xmath . There are two orbitals per
site, labelled by the orbital index @xmath . The hopping Hamiltonian
connects nearest neighbors only, and is determined by the two hopping
terms @xmath and @xmath of the original Hamiltonian. Interactions are
local, and there are four coupling constants @xmath that are related
directly to the corresponding coupling constants in the two-patch model
from Sec. 8.2 . All couplings scale like @xmath , so that it makes sense
pull this factor out to arrive at an @xmath -independent Hamiltonian.
The Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .

### 9.4 The local problem

##### Local Hilbert space

The unperturbed Hamiltonian @xmath is local, so that we begin the
investigation with the local physics. The local Hamiltonian has a
non-degenerate ground state for all values of the couplings @xmath
considered here. The local ground state is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (9.6)
  -- -- -- -------

with energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are eight degenerate single particle excitations with energy
@xmath per site, corresponding to all combinations of the three quantum
numbers orbital, spin, and charge (particle or hole). Furthermore, there
are six bosonic excitations with relatively low energy, corresponding to
the three order parameters for antiferromagnetism (three states,
labelled by @xmath ), @xmath -wave superconductivity (two states @xmath
) and @xmath CDW (one state @xmath ). The states are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The remaining state is given by an @xmath -wave pair on a WW site, and
is always highest in energy. The energies of the fermionic and bosonic
excited states (relative to the groundstate) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

At the beginning of the flow we have @xmath , so that the excitation
energy of the triplet states @xmath vanishes exactly. This can be
understood by performing a linear transformation on the two states
@xmath and @xmath (at fixed @xmath ), such that

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (9.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

In terms of the new states, the Hubbard interaction is a local repulsive
interaction for a two-orbital model, so that locally the two orbitals
are decoupled, and the ground state degeneracy is two per orbital. All
other excitations have gaps of order @xmath (corresponding to about
@xmath in the original units). The following section discusses how this
picture changes when renormalization is taken into account.

##### Influence of renormalization on the local problem

In this section, we use the RG method discussed in Sec. 9.2 together
with the analysis of the local spectrum above to investigate the
influence of the renormalization group flow on the saddle point states.
Instead of monitoring the flowing couplings @xmath , we use ( 9.9 ) and
follow the flowing local energy gaps. Results for @xmath , @xmath are
shown in fig. 9.2 . Initially, the excitation energies for charge and
(AF) spin excitations are separated: The spin excitation energy vanishes
for the initial interaction, whereas the pair and @xmath CDW energies
are exactly twice the single particle energy @xmath . However, in the
course of the RG flow a spin gap starts to build up. At the end of the
flow at @xmath , the spin gap is comparable to the single particle gap.
The energy of the @xmath CDW excitations remains comparable to the
energy to excite a @xmath -wave pair, but the pair excitations are
slightly lowered when @xmath is increased. For @xmath , the spin
excitations are pushed up in energy, so that they lie above the single
particle excitations and their energy is comparable to that of a pair
excitation. The local behavior for @xmath is similar to the strong
coupling fixed point of the RG for the two-patch model [ 65 ] with
particle-hole symmetry, which displays an emergent O @xmath symmetry. In
this case, all three bosonic excitations are degenerate. However, the
symmetry is realized only locally in the case at hand. Particle-hole
symmetry violating terms show up in the non-local part of the
Hamiltonian, in particular in the hopping term. In order to obtain a
more complete picture of the local physics of the effective saddle point
Hamiltonian we turn to the diagonalization of a plaquette in the next
section.

### 9.5 Diagonalization of small clusters

In order to better estimate the interplay between kinetic energy and
interaction at low energy scales, we diagonalize the effective
Hamiltonian on a @xmath plaquette. We also take into account the
non-local part of the interaction. The non-local interactions are
generally an order of magnitude smaller than their local counterparts,
so that their overall effect is not large, but still noticeable. The
main effect is to push pair- and spin-excitations down in energy with
respect to single particle and @xmath CDW excitations. We use periodic
boundary conditions, so that bandwidth of the hopping operator is the
same as for an infinite size system. The effect of renormalization on
the saddle point degrees of freedom is discussed in the same way as
before, by evaluating all quantities at different stages of the flow,
characterized by the flow parameter @xmath .

We compute three different kinds of observables: First, the excitation
energies for the four types of interactions discussed above in Sec. 9.4
. The flow of the excitation energies is shown in Fig. 9.3 . Compared to
the local Hamiltonian above, we note that the @xmath CDW excitations are
raised in energy compared to the other excitations in the later stages
of the flow. For the other bosonic excitations, we find that there is a
crossover controlled by @xmath . For @xmath , the AF spin excitations
are lowest in energy, and are lowered in energy compared to the local
Hamiltonian, so that they lie significantly below the single particle
excitations. For @xmath , on the other hand, the pair excitations have
the lowest energy. At @xmath , pair and spin excitations are
approximately degenerate, and are both comparable to the single particle
energy. Note that for all parameter values the bosonic excitations
retain a large gap that is of the order of the fermion gap on the
plaquette. However, it is clear that the system is very small, so that
finite size effects are expected to be large. In order to gain a better
understanding of the model, we now turn to the ground state properties
of the plaquette Hamiltonian.

The saddle point Hamiltonian consists of a local part, with a
non-degenerate local ground state, and the non-local terms, which are
dominated by the kinetic energy. The ground state of the kinetic energy
is the half-filled Fermi sea. In order to characterize the behavior of
the saddle point system, we compute the weight of two trial ground
states in the plaquette ground state. The first state is the
uncorrelated Fermi sea state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where here the momenta @xmath refer to the Fourier transform with
respect to @xmath , and @xmath is the single particle energy associated
to the WW hopping operator @xmath . The second state is the tensor
product of the local ground state @xmath , defined in Eq.Â ( 9.6 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The label is shorthand for insulating spin liquid, because the state is
compatible with a charge gap and has short ranged spin correlation only.
The weight of the two states in the @xmath -dependent plaquette ground
state is shown in Fig. 9.4 .

In all three cases ( @xmath ) there is a crossover during the RG flow.
Initially, the FS state is always a better approximation to the
plaquette ground state than the ISL state. Due to the renormalization of
interactions, this situation is reversed in the later stages of the
flow. As an interesting feature, we find that the weight of the ISL
state at the end of the flow is maximal for @xmath , which, by
comparison with Fig. 9.3 , marks the transition between an AF and a SC
dominated regime. In all three cases we find that the excitation energy
of AF and pair excitations is comparable to or lower than the single
particle gap. This motivates a mapping to a bosonic low-energy model,
which is the subject of the next section.

### 9.6 Effective quantum rotor model

The form of the excitation spectrum of the saddle point model on a
plaquette suggests to reduce the model to an effective bosonic model,
with either @xmath -wave pairs, AF triplet excitations, or both as
degrees of freedom. The mapping is performed using the contractor
renormalization (CORE) [ 36 ] algorithm to reduce the local Hilbert
space appropriately.

We first revisit the local Hilbert space and show that the low-energy
part of the local Hilbert space is the same as that for a truncated O
@xmath quantum rotor. The value of @xmath depends on the degrees of
freedom that are kept, and is given by @xmath when only pairs are kept,
@xmath for triplet excitations only, and @xmath when both are included.
Note that the effective Hamiltonian is O @xmath symmetric for the case
@xmath only, where the symmetry is the usual spin rotation invariance.

Afterwards we briefly discuss the CORE algorithm, and point out some
problems we have encountered connected to the fact that the gaps of
bosonic excitations are large. Finally, we introduce a variational
coherent state for the effective model in order to overcome the
limitations of small clusters.

##### The quantum rotor subspace of the local Hilbert space

In order to elucidate the structure of the low-energy local Hilbert
space, we discuss its properties and show that it has the same structure
as a truncated quantum rotor.

The local Hilbert space is 16-dimensional, and has already been
discussed in Sec. 9.4 . We keep the local ground state @xmath , and the
pair and/or spin excitations @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
excited states are obtained from the ground state by applying pair- and
AF-spin-operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We also introduce the total charge and spin operators for a WW site,
that locally generate the corresponding O @xmath (equivalently U @xmath
) and O @xmath symmetries:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the charge operator has zero eigenvalue at half-filling, and
that the charge of a fermion is @xmath in this convention. Then it is
straightforward to verify the commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first and third line are identical to the defining commutation
relations of the O @xmath and O @xmath quantum rotors, respectively [ 46
] . The second and fourth line originate in the fact that the Hilbert
space is finite, as opposed to the infinite Hilbert space of the quantum
rotor. When both pairs and AF triplets are kept, the symmetry generators
( 9.15 ) can be augmented by the so-called @xmath -generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and their hermitian conjugates. These operators transform @xmath into
@xmath and vice versa. In conjunction with the spin and charge
operators, they generate the O @xmath algebra [ 64 ] .

The local ground state @xmath is annihilated by all the generators, and
is thus a singlet under O @xmath and its O @xmath and O @xmath
subgroups, the five states @xmath and @xmath transform under the vector
representation of O @xmath . Hence the bosonic state may be viewed as
the first two levels of a quantum rotor system with the appropriate
dimensionality (2,3, or 5). We stress, however, that the Hamiltonian is
not O @xmath symmetric, and that the rotor model is only a convenient
way to organize the low-energy sector of the local Hilbert space. The
Hamiltonian is always O @xmath symmetric. The O @xmath charge symmetry
holds when it is particle-hole symmetric, which can only be the case
when @xmath .

##### Contractor Renormalization

The CORE method is a real space renormalization scheme for lattice
systems. It consists of two steps: First, one truncates the local
Hilbert space to a subset of states that are the most relevant for the
low energy behavior. The effective Hamiltonian for these local degrees
of freedom is then found by diagonalization of small clusters using the
linked cluster theorem, essentially by projecting low energy cluster
states to the reduced Hilbert space followed by orthogonalization.
Contributions from clusters with @xmath sites lead to @xmath -site
interactions in the effective model. @xmath is called the range of an
interaction. When the reduction is good, the importance of interactions
decays with their range. For a detailed discussion, we refer to [ 36 ]
and to App. D . In the following, we keep interactions up to range 3.

Since the CORE algorithm is based on an application of the linked
cluster theorem and it is controlled only when the renormalization due
to high energy states is short ranged. For this reason, we apply it only
to the Hamiltonian obtained at the end of the flow, where the weight of
the RVB state in the ground state of the plaquette system is large, cf.
Fig. 9.4 .

We have encountered problems when applying the method to the spin
excitations. The main reason is that the bosonic excitations are not
well separated from the fermionic excitations, due to the insulating
spin liquid nature of the local ground state. In a nutshell, the
algorithm works by diagonalizing a small cluster, and projecting
low-lying eigenstates to the tensor product of local bosonic states.
When there are @xmath states in the local projected Hilbert space, then
@xmath eigenstates have to be projected for the simplest case of a
two-site cluster. However, even when these bosonic states are lower in
energy locally than the fermions, the tensor product state contains
high-energy states as well. For example, there are nine possible states
with two spin excitations, with @xmath . The state with @xmath has the
same quantum numbers as the ground state, a state with two fermion
excitations that form a singlet, or a state with two pair excitations of
opposite charge. Hence there are many possibilities which Eigenstate
should be chosen, and the algorithm tends to become unstable with
respect to level crossings.

As a consequence, we limit ourselves to the case @xmath , and obtain an
effective Hamiltonian for the pair states.

##### Variational ground state for @xmath-wave pair excitations

The effective quantum rotor Hamiltonian obtained from the CORE method is
very complicated, since it contains interactions involving up to three
sites in the present setup. Since our main interest here is to
distinguish regimes with long range order from quantum disordered
states, we use a family of coherent states in order to estimate the
behavior of the effective model on longer length scales.

For @xmath , we reduce the model to the pair excitations (or O @xmath
rotor model). We estimate the charge gap using the variational wave
function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.18)
     @xmath   @xmath               (9.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the sign of the charge carriers is selected according to the
charge carrier type with the lower gap. The wave function @xmath is a
coherent state wave function, the local charge fluctuations depend on
@xmath . For @xmath , there are no charge fluctuations at the mean-field
level, and the system is insulating. For finite @xmath , the system is
doped away from half-filling, and charges move freely. The charge gap is
estimated by introducing a chemical potential term into the Hamiltonian.
Results are shown in Fig. 9.5 . For small values of @xmath , the system
remains insulating. For large negative (positive) values, hole
(particle) pairs are doped into the system, and it becomes
superconducting, with a superfluid density that depends on the doping
level. The size of the insulating region yields an estimate of the
charge gap. We find that the charge gap remains large within this
approach. It is clear, however, that the nature of the approximations
made does not allow to make firm conclusions at present.

### 9.7 Conclusions

In summary, we have applied the wave packet approach to the saddle point
regime of the two-dimensional Hubbard model. Based on arguments
developed in earlier chapters, we have argued that a separation of
length and energy scales takes place in this regime, allowing the states
at the saddle points to become localized independently of the behavior
of the nodal states, which extend over much larger length scales. We
have then used the WW basis states to isolate the region around the
saddle points, and have analyzed the flow of the effective saddle point
Hamiltonian using exact diagonalization and a mapping to an effective
bosonic model. We observed that the local Hilbert space at the saddle
points is identical to the two-leg ladder, Ch. 8 . Similarly, the local
ground state is the same, even though the excitation spectrum depends on
the doping, displaying a crossover between AF dominated and @xmath SC
dominated regimes as @xmath (and therefore the doping) is increased.
Correspondingly, the non-degeneracy of the local ground state and the
fact that it is compatible with AF and @xmath SC fluctuations make it
very difficult to perturb. Within all methods we found that all
excitations remain gapped in a finite range of chemical potentials.

## Chapter 10 Conclusions and outlook

### 10.1 Summary

The unifying theme of this work is the investigation of the competition
and mutual reinforcement of antiferromagnetism and superconductivity in
one- and two-dimensional interacting electron systems, motivated by the
phenomenology of cuprate superconductors. We have pursued a weak
coupling approach, sacrificing the possibility to treat strong coupling
effects, while gaining momentum space resolution. Throughout, we have
employed the renormalization group which treats all particle-particle
and particle-hole channels on an equal footing - a prerequisite for the
study of the mutual influence of different possible instabilities.

##### Anisotropic scattering rates in the Hubbard model

We began our investigation with an experimentally motivated study of
anisotropic quasi-particle scattering rates in the two-dimensional
Hubbard model with parameters corresponding to the overdoped regime of
Tl @xmath Ba @xmath CuO @xmath . We found that the strongly renormalized
interactions lead to enhanced scattering for electrons in the anti-nodal
direction. In conjunction with the scale-dependence of the renormalized
vertex this was found to give rise to a highly anisotropic
quasi-particle scattering rate at the Fermi surface. Moreover, the
anisotropic part, which was shown to be peaked in the anti-nodal
direction, was seen to have an almost linear temperature dependence down
to very low temperatures, in qualitative agreement with experiment [ 1 ]
. We traced this behavior back to the simultaneous growth of
correlations in the antiferromagnetic and @xmath -wave superconducting
channels in the vicinity of the saddle points.

In fact, it has been known for a long time that the Hubbard model
exhibits other peculiar features in the so-called saddle point regime [
58 ] , where the Fermi surface lies in the vicinity of the saddle points
(but not necessarily at these points). In particular, the overlap
between the antiferromagnetic and @xmath -wave pairing channels is large
there, especially when the couplings are not too weak. The strong
coupling phase does not appear to lead to a simple ordered phase, but to
an insulating spin liquid phase with RVB correlations [ 12 , 20 ] .

##### The wave packet approach to the saddle point regime

In order to investigate this phase we set out to try to obtain a better
grasp of the low-energy physics in this regime in the remaining
chapters. To this end, we introduced a novel tool, the use of the
Wilson-Wannier basis functions [ 41 , 43 , 44 , 42 ] , for the study of
the strongly correlated low energy problem. The basis is generated from
wave packet states with a fixed length scale @xmath . It involves two
coordinates, a coarse grained momentum coordinate that describes the
physics on scales less than @xmath , and a coarse grained real space
coordinate, that describes scale larger than @xmath .

The basic idea was based on the fact that a gap in the single particle
spectrum introduces a length scale into the problem that is given by the
exponential decay of spatial correlations. This led us to expect that
the description simplifies if a basis is chosen that reflects this
length scale, the fermions should â€™disappearâ€™ from the physics at larger
length scales, leaving only effective degrees of freedom that can be
determined from an analysis of the Hamiltonian. At the same time, the
dependence on the wave packet momentum can be used to single out the low
energy states close to the Fermi surface, and to incorporate effects of
Fermi surface anisotropy.

Since the approach is new, we spent some time developing the necessary
formalism and useful approximation methods. These were used in order to
highlight the influence of the (coarse grained) geometry of the
Brillouin zone on Fermi surface instabilities. In particular, we have
seen in Ch. 6 that a separation of length scales between nodal and
anti-nodal states occurs whenever the Fermi surface lies in the vicinity
of the saddle points. While it is well known that because of the van
Hove singularity the low energy phase space tends to concentrate around
the saddle points [ 59 , 60 ] , our approach allowed us to estimate the
anisotropy of the strength of correlations at a fixed length scale. We
found that generically the states at the saddle points are much more
correlated than the nodal states at the same length scale, so that they
effectively decouple.

We proceeded by studying one-dimensional chains with quasi-long range
order, and the two-leg ladder at half-filling, which is known to exhibit
a RVB-like insulating spin liquid phase [ 53 ] . The main aim was to
compare the results from the wave packet approach to exact solutions,
and we found good qualitative agreement in all three cases despite of
very simplistic approximations. We explained the agreement in terms of
the separation of scales between fermionic and bosonic excitations at
the length scale where the pairing occurs.

We used this separation of scales and computed and effective Hamiltonian
for the anti-nodal states in isolation. We analyzed this Hamiltonian,
and compared it to the two-leg ladder system that was treated in a
similar approximation. We found that locally, the two models are very
similar. Consequently, the states at the saddle point appear to be prone
to localize in a state with strong (but short ranged) singlet
correlations, resembling the RVB state of the ladder system with large
gaps for all excitations at the pairing scale, in agreement with earlier
calculations based on exact diagonalization [ 12 ] .

We emphasize that all the results are only qualitative, and that the
approximations made are quite drastic. Nevertheless, we think that the
underlying physical arguments based on the separation of length scales
on the one hand and the non-degeneracy of local ground states are sound.
Clearly the WW basis breaks the underlying translational invariance so
that one might think that it overestimates gap formation. While this is
certainly true to some extent, the states involved can localize because
they are coupled by umklapp scattering. Moreover we have seen that our
approach does lead to quasi-long range order for one-dimensional chains,
where the order parameter modes separate from the fermionic degrees of
freedom. It is worth pointing out that it is not necessary for the Fermi
surface to lie exactly at the van Hove points, since we consider
singlet-pair formation on rather short scales (about 8 lattice
constants), so that the pairs are too delocalized in momentum space to
resolve the exact position of the Fermi surface.

Finally, our results are compatible with other studies that start from
the strong correlation limit. In particular, exact diagonalization
studies for the @xmath -model [ 21 ] find a cooperon mode with weight at
the saddle point at finite energy for a lightly doped system. This is
consistent with our results which naturally lead to such a mode.
Similarly, recent cluster DMFT calculations indicate that strong
short-ranged singlet correlations can lead to the formation of a
pseudogap in the anti-nodal direction without long range ordering [ 63 ]
. The authors attributed the opening of the single fermion gap to strong
single correlations, similar to our observation.

In summary, the wave packet approach to interacting fermions provides
surprising insights to complicated problems already in its simplest
implementation. Its main strength in our view is that it provides a
relatively straightforward bridge between effective interactions and the
geometry of the Brillouin zone on the one hand to effective models low
energy physics on the other hand. However, the approach is still in its
infancy, and much more work is needed in order to assess its merits and
shortcomings.

### 10.2 Outlook

We see several possible extensions to this work. First and foremost, we
think it would be highly useful to improve on the approximations made in
this thesis by using more WW orbitals (recall that we have truncated the
basis to only one or two states per WW site). There is no problem of
principle, and only the finite time horizon of this project has
prevented us from pursuing this route so far.

From the point of view of flexibility it would be interesting to see
whether similar constructions can be worked out for other lattice
geometries, such as the honeycomb lattice. Note that the WW basis is in
essence a one-dimensional construct, so that it can be used for all
rectangular lattices directly, but not for lattices that are not tensor
products of the one-dimensional chain. We hope that our group
theoretical reformulation from Ch. 4 may be helpful for this problem.

The WW basis incorporates a single length scale, but many problems, such
as the pseudogap problem, exhibit multiple length scales. In this work
we invoked the separation of length scales in order to treat the
anti-nodal states in isolation. However, it is clear that for a full
account of the phenomenology the nodal states have to be dealt with. We
see two possible approaches: First, in the sprit of two-length-scale
expansions, one could use the effective Hamiltonian for the @xmath -wave
pairs at anti-nodal states and couple them to the nodal states. This is
feasible since all couplings are known. Since the translational
invariance breaking strongly distorts the Fermi surface, one might then
take the continuum limit, effectively setting the length scale for the
nodal states to infinity. This leads to a model of mobile fermions
coupled to immobile pairs, similar to some phenomenological models [ 69
] .

On the other hand, one might try to develop a true multiscale approach,
that can deal with several length scales at once, for example by
applying the WW transformation for a second time to some of the WW
orbitals of the first transformation. However, we can not judge at
present the feasibility or usefulness of this idea.

Finally, the model developed so far exhibits several features which
should be elaborated from a phenomenological point of view: First, as
the doping level is increased, a transition in the charge sector arises
at the nodal points (cf. Fig. 9.5 , and the hole pairs become mobile.
Intuitively, this transition may be linked to the rapid rise of the
superconducting dome at this point. Second, our model includes spin
excitations with wave vector around @xmath , which are expected to be
coherent since they lie below the particle-hole continuum at the saddle
points. These might offer a natural explanation of the so-called
hourglass that is observed at optimal doping [ 70 ] .

We are confident that more such extensions can be found, and that many
routes are open to extend the very modest first steps presented in this
work.

## Appendix A Construction of the window function

### a.1 Conditions on the window function

We derive the conditions that the window function @xmath has to satisfy
to make the Wilson basis orthonormal. The derivation closely follows the
ones given in [ 43 , 44 ] .

The conditions on @xmath that make the @xmath an orthogonal basis can be
derived from the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We consider only the case of a real window function @xmath , so that the
@xmath are real, too. Condition ( A.1 ) then amounts to demanding that
the matrix @xmath with rows given by @xmath is an orthogonal matrix.
This implies that the condition of orthonormality, @xmath , is
automatically fulfilled whenever ( A.1 ) is satisfied.

We use the definition ( 4.9 ), and write @xmath in terms of the window
function @xmath . Moreover, we split the sum over @xmath into sums over
even and odd @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we use

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Because of the symmetry @xmath we can transform the domain of the sums
over @xmath from @xmath to @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for terms even in @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the odd terms. Now the summation over @xmath can be performed using
the orthogonality of exponential functions, yielding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is any integer and @xmath is the Kronecker delta modulo
@xmath . The final expression is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we show that whenever @xmath , the second line vanishes identically.
We set @xmath (with @xmath ) to satisfy the Kronecker delta. The
resulting expression is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used @xmath . To see that this sum vanishes we introduce
the new summation variable @xmath . Under this transformation the
product of the window functions is invariant, but @xmath , and hence the
sum has to vanish.

From ( A.7 ) we then conclude that the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

guarantee orthonormality of the Wilson basis. These are the conditions
stated above in eq. ( 4.5 ). Since ( A.8 ) depends on @xmath only, the
number of independent conditions is @xmath .

### a.2 Zak transformation

To simplify these conditions it is convenient to introduce the so-called
finite Zak transform @xmath of @xmath [ 45 ] . From the definition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , one can see that the Zak transform of a
function is very similar to the Bloch representation of wave functions
in a periodic potential. The lattice is split into unit cells of size
@xmath , and the degrees of freedom within one unit cell are represented
in real space, but the change from unit cell to unit cell is Fourier
transformed leading to the pseudo-momentum @xmath . The Zak transform
simplifies conditions ( 4.5 ) because they are in the form of a
convolution with the sum running over unit cells of size @xmath . The
convolution is turned into a multiplication, and the conditions on
@xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is independent of @xmath . @xmath is fixed by the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a practical consequence of this simple condition, one can use
(almost) any initial window function @xmath as long as @xmath and @xmath
do not vanish simultaneously for some @xmath . A window function @xmath
that satisfies conditions ( A.10 ) up to a constant prefactor can then
be obtained via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalization is fixed by demanding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the modified window function. For finite lattices this procedure is
easily implemented on a computer. A convenient choice of @xmath is a
Gaussian centered around @xmath with width @xmath , but the qualitative
results do not depend on the exact choice of @xmath . In particular, one
one can show that salient features like the exponential decay are
preserved [ 43 ] . To illustrate the preservation of rapid decay, we
display the effect of the transformation ( A.12 ) on a Gaussian initial
window function in fig. A.1 .

### a.3 Conditions for band limited window functions

The orthogonality conditions ( A.8 ) on the window function simplify
when it is band limited in the sense that the Fourier transform @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case it is more useful to express ( A.8 ) in momentum space. We
first express @xmath in ( A.8 ) in terms of @xmath , which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we take the Fourier transform of ( A.8 ) with respect to @xmath .
The right hand side becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left hand side becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first Kronecker delta can be used to eliminate via @xmath , and
using @xmath we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the Kronecker deltas to replace @xmath by the integer
@xmath . From the condition ( A.14 ) that @xmath is band limited it
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that all conditions with @xmath are identically satisfied, so that
only the case @xmath has to be taken into account. Hence the
orthogonality conditions become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

since @xmath by assumption. The exponential on the right hand side is
periodic in @xmath with period @xmath , so that we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the reduced Brillouin zone (rBZ) @xmath . Hence
( A.20 ) states that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of the constant on the right hand side is determined by the
number of points in the reduced Brillouin zone, which is @xmath . This
can be further simplified using the fact that @xmath is band limited and
symmetric. The band limitation implies that only @xmath contribute to
the sum. Moreover, we must have @xmath , otherwise the term vanishes. By
virtue of the symmetry of @xmath , it is clear that @xmath , so that it
is sufficient to consider the case @xmath . Hence we obtain the final
form of the orthogonality conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that these conditions can be trivially satisfied by fixing @xmath
to arbitrary values less than @xmath for @xmath , and to use ( A.23 ) to
infer the absolute value of @xmath for @xmath . Note that @xmath and
@xmath are fixed. When we choose @xmath everywhere, the window function
is fully determined.

## Appendix B Window function gymnastics

This appendix summarizes some useful relations between window functions.
In particular, it is shown how to replace the shifted window functions
@xmath by their unshifted counterparts. All relations follow from the
fact that @xmath is symmetric around the origin and real for all @xmath
, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We recall the definition (cf. Eq. ( 4.1 )) of the phase space shift of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It follows directly that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the complex conjugate of @xmath .

For the Fourier transform @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used ( B.3 ) in the second line, and shifted the summation
variable @xmath in the third line.

Now we note that the properties ( B.1 ) and ( B.2 ) imply that @xmath is
real, and that @xmath . For the complex conjugate @xmath of @xmath this
leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used ( B.5 ) in the first line and @xmath in the second
line.

The replacement of @xmath by @xmath , Eq. ( B.5 ) can be used in order
to simplify sums involving the shifted window function. Let @xmath be an
arbitrary function of the momentum, then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used ( B.5 ) in the first line, and shifted @xmath in the
second line.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that the phase space shift ( B.3 ) could
also be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both definitions can be used, since the difference amounts to a gauge
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

With the alternative definition ( B.8 ), the factor @xmath shows up in
the real space representation of the shifted window function instead of
the momentum space form, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In this work, we will stick to the definition ( B.3 ), however, since it
is more convenient for practial calculations.

## Appendix C One loop RG equations from Wegnerâ€™s flow equation

We derive equations that are structurally similar to the one loop RG
equations from Wegnerâ€™s flow equation [ 54 ] , also known as continuous
unitary transformation (CUT, [ 55 , 56 ] ). In this method, a sequence
of infinitesimal canonical transformations is applied to partially
diagonalize the Hamiltonian. Since each transformation is infinitesimal,
it can be approximated by linearizing in its generator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Introducing a parameter flow parameter @xmath , the flow equation for
the Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can show [ 54 ] that the so-called canonical generator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

leads to a Hamiltonian that commutes with the kinetic energy in the
limit @xmath . In general, single particle states with a kinetic energy
difference @xmath start to decouple at @xmath . In particular, states
with a kinetic energy greater than @xmath decouple from the states at
the Fermi surface. From the low energy point of view, the method is thus
similar to the usual renormalization group approach of integrating out
states [ 26 ] that are far away from the Fermi surface, with the RG
scale @xmath . However, it should be noted that no modes are integrated
out, and thus the full information about the Hamiltonian and its
spectrum is conserved in the flow equation approach. Moreover, whereas
in the renormalization group an effective action is obtained, the flow
equation yields an effective Hamiltonian , which is more suitable for
our purposes.

In order to solve eq.Â ( C.2 ), approximations are necessary, since
infinitely many operators are generated during the flow. We follow the
usual practice of making an ansatz for the flowing Hamiltonian @xmath ,
and thus truncating the number of operators. More specifically, we use
the ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes normal ordering of the operator @xmath with respect
to the Fermi sea. We omit the flow of the kinetic energy in the
following, so that only the couplings @xmath depend on @xmath . From (
C.3 ), the canonical generator is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Plugging this into the flow equation ( C.2 ), we see that there are two
different contributions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term gives rise to a set of linear differential equations for
the couplings @xmath , whereas the second term incorporates perturbative
renormalization effects. We will first investigate the flow equation to
@xmath . With the generator given by ( C.5 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing the coefficients of the operators @xmath @xmath : on both
sides, we obtain an equation for the couplings @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is solved by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the solution one sees that interaction matrix elements that couple
states with energy difference larger than @xmath are suppressed
exponentially, as announced above. In order to include the
renormalization effects, the second order equation has to be solved. In
order to satisfy the first order equation automatically, it makes sense
to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and to use @xmath as flowing coupling function. The flow equation for
@xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term cancels the @xmath term in the flow equation ( C.6 ) for
@xmath , so that only the second order term contributes. In order to
evaluate the commutator @xmath , Wickâ€™s theorem for the product of
normal ordered operators can be used. This allows to decompose a product
of normal ordered operators into a sum of normal ordered operators. The
decomposition is achieved by means of contractions of fermion operators.
With the ansatz ( C.4 ), only terms with two contractions are needed.
When contractions are represented as Feynman diagrams, the standard
second order diagrams for the renormalization of the interaction appear.

Applying Wickâ€™s theorem and comparing coefficients of operators on both
sides of the flow equation yields the following equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three terms in ( C.12 ) correspond to different physical
renormalization processes, via particle-hole excitations in the charge (
@xmath ) and spin ( @xmath ) channels, and through particle-particle
excitations ( @xmath ). The diagrams contributing to each term are shown
in Fig. C.1 . The mathematical expressions look different from the usual
one loop diagrams, but we will show in the following how they are
related to them.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.15)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the Fermi function evaluated at @xmath . The terms
containing Fermi functions correspond to the numerators in one loop
diagrams, whereas the denominators of the diagrams are not explicitly
visible in the present formulation. In the remainder we show how Eqns.Â (
C - C.15 ) relate to the usual one loop RG expressions. Since the the
steps are essentially the same for all three types of diagrams, we will
do the analysis for @xmath only, and summarize the results for the other
contributions in the end.

First we substitute @xmath for @xmath in ( C.12 ) and plug the result
into the flow equation for @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the subscript â€™phcâ€™ indicates that we have suppressed phd and pp
contributions. In analogy with the one loop RG we now distinguish
between internal (or loop) lines and external legs. The external legs
correspond to the momenta @xmath , whereas the internal lines are the
momenta which are summed over, here @xmath and @xmath . Since we are
chiefly interested in the couplings in the vicinity of the Fermi
surface, we set the kinetic energy of all external lines to zero in the
@xmath . This step is the analogue of evaluating diagrams at zero
external frequency in the one loop RG. This simplifies the flow equation
considerably. In ( C ), this leads to the replacements

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e. only the energies of the loop momenta @xmath and @xmath remain.
This leads to the approximation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We now define the ph loop function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which differs from the standard expression by the scale dependent
prefactor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

that suppresses low-energy excitations with energy less than @xmath .
Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is just the second line of ( C ). Thus we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we can substitute the scale @xmath for the flow parameter
@xmath , where @xmath is chosen such that the flow at scale @xmath
receives contributions mainly from states with single particle energy
@xmath . Since the derivative with respect to @xmath appears on both
sides, the form of ( C.22 ) is unchanged under this substitution.

Similar manipulations on the other contributions to the flow equation
lead to the final form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the contributions from the different channels given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.24)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The loop functions with @xmath as a flow variable are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Once the flow equation is solved up to some scale @xmath , the
renormalized interaction Hamiltonian is obtained by transforming from
@xmath back to @xmath . Recalling ( C.10 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

the physical interaction decouples states at the Fermi surface from
states with single particle energy @xmath . As a consequence, states
above the cutoff may be neglected or treated perturbatively, so that
only states below the cutoff remain.

Comparison of ( C.23 ) with the flow equation derived from functional RG
[ 25 ] shows that the structure of the two equations is identical when
the FRG equation is evaluated in the one-loop approximation,
i.e.Â omitting the frequency dependence and using bare propagators in all
diagrams. In both equations, the flow is generated by second order
perturbation theory. The bubble diagrams are scale dependent due to the
presence of an infrared cutoff, and their contribution to the flowing
couplings is given by the scale derivative of the bubble. However, in
the present approach, the cutoff function acts on the energy of
two-particle excitations (pp or ph), whereas in the functional RG the
cutoff acts on single particle energies. From a practical point of view,
however, this difference should be small in most situations, since the
two types of cutoff only differ when the single particle energies of the
two particles taking part in the excitation are very different. Due to
kinematic restrictions in the presence of a Fermi surface this is not
expected to matter in most situations.

## Appendix D Contractor renormalization

In the following we review briefly the contractor renormalization (CORE)
method [ 36 ] for correlated lattice systems. The method is based on
first choosing a truncated set of @xmath states for the local Hilbert
space of a lattice system. There is no general rule how to choose these
states, so that the choice has to be based on physical insight. These
@xmath states are used as effective degrees of freedom per site. The
dimension of the local Hilbert space is denoted by @xmath . The
couplings between sites are evaluated by diagonalizing connected
clusters of lattice sites and projecting lowest states onto the tensor
product of the truncated local basis. For an @xmath -site cluster, one
has to diagonalize an @xmath -dimensional matrix and find its lowest
@xmath states.

We denote the @xmath tensor products of projected single-site states by
@xmath . We need the @xmath lowest eigenstates of the two-site cluster
for the projection, and will denote the @xmath -th such state by @xmath
. The CORE algorithm consists of three steps:

First the low-lying states of the cluster are projected onto the @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Second, the projected states @xmath are orthonormalized, using the
Gram-Schmidt method starting with the groundstate:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effective Hamiltonian for the @xmath -site cluster is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy of state @xmath . Finally, one can write the
total effective Hamiltonian as a sum over irreducible @xmath -site
operators, where the irreducible part of the @xmath -site Hamiltonian
for the cluster @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes summation over all connected subclusters of @xmath
of size @xmath . One can show [ 36 ] that the expansion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

reproduces the lowest @xmath energies of the original Hamiltonian in the
limit @xmath . In practice, however, the expansion has to be truncated
at some point, and here we will consider the simplest approximation
only, and restrict ourselves to two-site interactions.