The complexity of the cuprate superconductors continues to challenge
physicists even 25 years after their discovery. At half-filling they are
antiferromagnetic Mott insulators. Upon doping the antiferromagnetism
vanishes, and at some finite doping superconductivity sets in. In
between these two phases lies the so-called pseudogap phase, which
features a gap for electronic excitations in the anti-nodal directions
around the saddle points @xmath and @xmath as well as a partial spin gap
[ 18 ] . At the same time, electronic excitations around the nodal
points @xmath are gapless even for relatively small doping. For large
doping, the superconductivity vanishes, and the cuprates behave like
ordinary Fermi liquids.

The Mott insulator and the Fermi liquid phase are understood very well,
yet the intermediate pseudogap phase remains controversial. In order to
tackle this problem theoretically, one may base the description either
on the Mott insulator and consider the effect of doping, or on the Fermi
liquid, and consider the partial truncation of the Fermi surface.

In this thesis, we use the latter approach, and study the breakdown of
the Fermi liquid state using the renormalization group (RG) [ 10 ] . The
advantage of the method is that it is well suited for studying
anisotropies in momentum space. Moreover, it treats @xmath -wave
pairing- and antiferromagnetic spin-fluctuations on an equal footing.

In the first part of this thesis, we use the RG approach in order to
study anisotropic quasi-particle scattering rates. This undertaking is
motivated by transport experiments on overdoped cuprates [ 1 ] , which
point towards a breakdown of the Fermi liquid phenomenology due to
strong scattering at the saddle points, leading to a linear temperature
dependence of the transport scattering rates. We show that a similar
linear dependence arises from the renormalization group treatment down
to low temperatures, thus providing an additional piece of evidence that
the breakdown of the Fermi liquid phase is dominated by the saddle
points.

In the remainder of the thesis, we seek to extend the work on the
crossover from the Fermi liquid state to the pseudogap phase [ 20 ] . In
earlier works it has been argued that the RG flows in the so-called
saddle point regime, where the Fermi surface lies close to the saddle
points, are indicative of a transition to an insulating spin liquid
state, which truncates the Fermi surface in the vicinity of the saddle
points [ 66 , 58 , 12 ] . Progress in the derivation of effective models
for the conjectured spin liquid state has been hindered, however, by the
difficulties involved in solving the strong coupling low energy
Hamiltonian. We approach the problem by observing that the pseudogap
phase is intermediate between a phase where electrons are localized in
real space (Mott insulator) and a phase where they are localized in
momentum space (Fermi liquid). We introduce an orthogonal wave packet
basis, the so-called Wilson-Wannier (WW) basis [ 41 , 42 ] , that can be
used to interpolate between the momentum space and the real space
descriptions. Its main feature is that the basis functions are localized
in phase space, which allows for a coarse grained description of the
physics in both momentum space and real space at the same time. The
price that is paid for this convenience is that the translational
invariance of the lattice is explicitly broken from the onset.

Nevertheless, the positive features of the WW basis appear to be very
attractive for studying the pseudogap regime because it is
experimentally well established that nodal and anti-nodal states behave
very differently in this regime, so that the anisotropy in momentum
space is important. At the same time, scanning tunneling microscope
measurements suggest that the physics of the anti-nodal states takes
place in real space, rather than momentum space [ 24 ] .

In order to prepare the stage for the study of the saddle point regime,
we develop the necessary ideas step by step, starting with the
construction of the basis and the derivation simple approximate formulas
for the transformation of the Hamiltonian. Since the approach is novel,
these steps are performed in considerable detail.

We then discuss the relation of the WW basis to the phenomenon of
fermion pairing in both particle-particle and particle-hole channels in
one and two dimensions. We use the example of simple mean-field
Hamiltonians to show that when the size of the wave packets is chosen
properly, the description of states with fermion pairing simplifies
considerably. Moreover, we relate the geometry of the Brillouin zone in
two dimensions to a separation of length scales between nodal and
anti-nodal directions, which suggests that the anti-nodal states are
locally decoupled from the nodal states. The phase space localization
allows to include both of these aspects.

In the remainder we show how to combine the WW basis with the RG, such
that the RG is used to eliminate high-energy degrees of freedom, and the
remaining strongly correlated system is solved approximately in the WW
basis.

We exemplify the approach for different one-dimensional model systems,
and find good qualitative agreement with exact solutions even for very
simple approximations.

Finally, we reinvestigate the saddle point regime of the two-dimensional
Hubbard model. We show that the anti-nodal states are driven to an
insulating spin-liquid state with strong singlet pairing correlations,
thus corroborating earlier conjectures [ 66 , 20 ] .

Throughout, we limit ourselves to the simplest treatment of each model,
so that all results are rather qualitative in nature. On the other hand,
we hope that this allows to understand the workings of the method and
the physical arguments that are derived from the phase space analysis of
the interacting fermion system.
