##### Contents

-    1 INTRODUCTION
    -    1.1 General Relativity
    -    1.2 Black Holes
    -    1.3 Wormholes
        -    1.3.1 Traversable Lorentzian Wormholes
        -    1.3.2 Energy Conditions
        -    1.3.3 Hawking Radiation of the Traversable Wormholes
-    2 ROTATING THIN-SHELLS IN (2+1)-D
    -    2.1 Construction of the Rotating Thin-Shells
    -    2.2 Israel Junction Conditions For Rotating Thin-Shells
    -    2.3 Energy Conservation
    -    2.4 Stability Analyses of Thin-Shells
    -    2.5 Example of BTZ Thin-Shells
    -    2.6 Generalization of Rotating Thin-Shells
    -    2.7 Israel Junction Conditions For Thin-Shell
-    3 THIN-SHELL WORMHOLES
    -    3.1 Mazharimousavi-Halilsoy Thin-Shell WH in 2+1 D
    -    3.2 Stability of the Thin-Shell WH
    -    3.3 Some Models of EoS Supporting Thin-Shell WH
        -    3.3.1 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via the LBG
        -    3.3.2 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via CG
        -    3.3.3 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via GCG
        -    3.3.4 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via LogG
    -    3.4 Hayward Thin-Shell WH in 3+1 D
    -    3.5 Stability of Hayward Thin-Shell WH
    -    3.6 Some Models of EoS
        -    3.6.1 Linear Gas
        -    3.6.2 Chaplygin Gas
        -    3.6.3 Generalized Chaplygin Gas
        -    3.6.4 Modified Generalized Chaplygin Gas
        -    3.6.5 Logarithmic Gas
    -    3.7 Perturbation of Small Velocity
    -    3.8 Rotating BTZ Thin-Shell Wormholes
    -    3.9 Linearized Stability of Wormhole
    -    3.10 Rotating BTZ Thin-shell Wormhole
        -    3.10.1 Phantomlike EoS
-    4 CONCLUSION

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 General Relativity

100 years ago, Albert Einstein presented to the world his theory of
General Relativity (GR) which is said that space and time are not
absolute, but can be distorted or warped by matter. Einstein’s genius
was in his willingness to confront the contradictions between different
branches of physics by questioning assumptions so basic that nobody else
saw them as assumptions. One prediction of the GR is that in particular,
a cataclysmic event such as the collapse of a star could send shock
waves through space, gravitational waves (GWs),discovered and announced
in February 2016 by LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory) [ 2 , 3 ] . The GWs the other proposal that matter can warp
space and time leads to many other predictions, notably that light
passing a massive body will appear bent to a distant observer, whereas
time will appear stretched. Each of these phenomena has been observed;
the bending of distant starlight by the sun was first observed in 1919,
and the synchronization of clocks in GPS satellites with earthbound
clocks has to take account of the fact that clocks on Earth are in a
strong gravitational field. Another prediction of GR is that if enough
matter is concentrated in a small volume, the space in its vicinity will
be so warped that it will curve in on itself to the extent that even
light cannot escape [ 4 ] . Astronomical observations suggest that each
galaxy has a super massive Black Hole (BH) at its centre [ 5 ] .
Mind-blowing concepts wormholes (WHs) can be considered his last
prediction, which is also known as Einstein–Rosen bridge [ 6 ] . It is a
short-cut connecting two separate points in spacetime. Moreover, GR is
used as a basis of nowadays most prominent cosmological models [ 56 ] .
Einstein’s equations start to break down in the singularities of BHs.
Before going to study deeply BHs and WHs, lets shortly review the GR.

The GR is the Einstein’s theory of gravity and it is a set of non-linear
partial differential equations (PDEs). The Einstein field equations are
[ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Newton constant, @xmath is a Einstein tensor and
@xmath is a energy momentum tensor, which includes both energy and
momentum densities as well as stress (that is, pressure and shear),
which must satisfy the relation of @xmath . This relation can be called
as the equation of motion for the matter fields. Furthermore, the
Einstein tensor @xmath is also divergence free @xmath Noted that the
Einstein tensor @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is called the Ricci tensor [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Ricci scalar of curvature scalar @xmath is the contraction of the
Ricci tensor.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where  the Christoffel symbols @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath is the inverse of the metric function and it is the main
ingredient of the Einstein field equations.

GR is based on two important postulates. The first one is the principle
of special relativity. The second one is the equivalence principle.
Einstein’s ‘Newton’s apple’ which in sighted to gravitation was the
equivalence principle. As an example, consider two elevators one is at
rest on the Earth and the other is accelerating in space. Inside the
elevator suppose that there is no windows so it is impossible to realize
the difference between gravity and acceleration. Thus, it gives the same
results as observed in uniform motion unaffected by gravity. In
addition, gravity bends light in which a photon crossing the elevator
accelerating into space, the photon appears to fall downward.

### 1.2 Black Holes

A BH is an object that is so compact that its gravitational force is
strong enough to prevent light or anything else from escaping. It has a
singularity where all the matter in it is squeezed into a region of
infinitely small volume. There is an event horizon which is an imaginary
sphere that measures how close to the singularity you can safely get [
61 , 62 ] .

By far the most important solution in this case is that discovered by
Karl Schwarzschild, which describes spherically symmetric vacuum
spacetimes. The fact that the Schwarzschild metric is not just a good
solution, but is the unique spherically symmetric vacuum solution, is
known as Birkhoff’s theorem. It only has a mass, but no electric charge,
and no spin. Karl Schwarzschild discovered this BH geometry at the close
of 1915 [ 7 ] , within weeks of Einstein presenting his final theory of
GR. Real BHs are likely to be more complicated than the Schwarzschild
geometry: real BHs probably spin, and the ones that astronomers see are
not isolated, but are feasting on material from their surroundings.

The no-hair theorem states that the geometry outside (but not inside!)
the horizon of an isolated BH is characterized by just three quantities:
Mass, Electric charge, Spin. BHs are thus among the simplest of all
nature’s creations. When a BH first forms from the collapse of the core
of a massive star, it is not at all a no-hair BH. Rather, the newly
collapsed BH wobbles about, radiating GWs. The GWs carry away energy,
settling the BH towards a state where it can no longer radiate. This is
the no-hair state.

In this thesis, we will use some of the exact solution of the Einstein
field equations to construct WHs and thin-shells. In GR, Birkhoff’s
theorem states that any spherically symmetric solution of the vacuum
field equations must be static and asymptotically flat. This means that
the exterior solutions (i.e. the spacetime outside of a spherical,
non-rotating, gravitating body) must be given by the Schwarzschild
metric.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Noted that it is singular at @xmath To see that this is a true
singularity one must look at quantities that are independent of the
choice of coordinates. One such important quantity is the Kretschmann
scalar, which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that Schwarzschild solution has those properties: spherically
symmetric, static, coordinates adapted to the time-like Killing vector
field @xmath , time-symmetric and time translation invariant, a
hyper-surface-orthogonal time-like Killing vector field @xmath ,
asymptotically flat and geometric mass @xmath .

### 1.3 Wormholes

Wormholes (WHs) is a hypothetical connection between widely separated
regions of space–time [ 10 , 13 ] . Although Flamm’s work on the WH
physics dates back to 1916, in connection with the newly found
Schwarzschild solution [ 8 ] , WH solutions were firstly considered from
physics standpoint by Einstein and Rosen (ER) in 1935, which is known
today as ER bridges connecting two identical sheets [ 6 ] . Then in 1955
Wheeler used ”geons” (self-gravitating bundles of electromagnetic
fields) by giving the first diagram of a doubly-connected-space [ 9 ] .
Wheeler added the term ”wormhole” to the physics literature, however he
defined it at the quantum scale. After that, first traversable WH was
proposed by Morris-Thorne in 1988 [ 10 ] . Then Morris, Thorne, and
Yurtsever investigated the requirements of the energy condition for WHs
[ 13 ] . After while, Visser constructed a technical way to make
thin-shell WHs which thoroughly surveyed the research landscape as of
1988 [ 11 , 12 ] . After this, there are many papers written to support
this idea [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 ] . WHs are existed in the
theory of GR, which is our best description of the Universe. But
experimentally there is no  evidence and no one has any idea how they
would be created.

#### 1.3.1 Traversable Lorentzian Wormholes

A WH is any compact region on the space time without any singularity,
however with a mouth to allow entrance [ 22 , 23 ] .  Firstly one
considers an interesting exotic spacetime metric and solves the Einstein
field equation, then finds the exotic matter  needed as a source
responsible for the respective geometry. It is needed the exotic matter
which violates the null energy condition, @xmath , where @xmath is a
null vector. It also violates the causality by allowing closed time-like
curves. Furthermore, the other interesting outcome is that time travel
is possible without excess the speed of light. Those outcomes are based
on theoretical solutions and useful for “gedanken-experiments”. As it is
well known the Casimir effect has similar features that violates this
condition in nature [ 26 ] . Now, lets give an example of a traversable
WH metric which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first defined traversable WH is Morris Thorne WH [ 10 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the red-shift function (the lapse function)  that change
in frequency of electromagnetic radiation in gravitational field and
@xmath is the shape function. At @xmath and @xmath , the 2-curved
surface is embedded into 3-dimensional Euclidean space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To be a solution of a WH, one needs to impose that the geometrical
throat flares out conditions, the minimality of the wormhole throat,
which are given by [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with new radial coordinate @xmath (proper distance), while @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although there is a coordinate singularity where the metric coefficient
@xmath diverges at the throat, the proper radial distance which runs
from @xmath to @xmath can be redefined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Properties of the metric:

-No event horizons ( @xmath @xmath ),

- @xmath must be finite everywhere,

- Spherically symmetric and static: Static means that the metric does
not change over time and irrotate, on the other way, stationary
spacetime means that the metric does not change in time, however it can
rotate. Hence, the Kerr metric is a stationary spacetime and not not
static, the Schwarzschild solution is an example of static spacetime.

-Solutions of the Einstein field equations,

-Physically reasonable stress energy tensor,

-Radial coordinate @xmath such that circumference of circle centered
around throat given by @xmath

- @xmath decreases from @xmath to @xmath (minimum radius) at throat,
then increases from @xmath to @xmath

-At throat exists coordinate singularity where @xmath component
diverges, -Reasonable transit times,

-Proper radial distance @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath and vice
versa,

-Throat connecting two asymptotically flat regions of spacetime,

-Bearable tidal gravitational forces,

-Stable against perturbations,

-Physically reasonable construction materials.

The Einstein field equations are [ 60 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only non-zero components of @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.20)
     @xmath   @xmath               (1.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

At the throat they reduce to the simplest form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the sign of @xmath and energy density @xmath must be same to
minimize the exotic matter, since the condition of @xmath must be
satisfied. Moreover, the next condition is the flare outward of the
embedding surface ( @xmath ) at/near the throat. Therefore it shows that
@xmath on this regime, in which the radial pressure is named by @xmath .
So, the exotic matter which supports this WH spacetime violates the null
energy condition.

The four velocity is calculated by @xmath and four acceleration is
@xmath , so one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in which the prime @xmath is ” @xmath ”. Furthermore, the geodesics
equation  is used for a radial moving particle to obtain the equation of
motion as following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition, static observers are geodesic for @xmath . WH has an
attractive feature if @xmath and repulsive feature if @xmath . The sign
of @xmath is important for the behaviour of the particle geodesics. The
shape function is obtained by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is used to find the effective mass of the interior of the WH that
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also  at the limit of infinity, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.3.2 Energy Conditions

WHs are supported by exotic matter, and the suitable energy condition is
defined as diagonal [ 21 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath and @xmath denotes to the mass density and the three
principal pressures, respectively. Perfect fluid of the Stress-energy
tensor is obtained if @xmath . It is believed that the normal matters
obey these energy conditions, however, it violates the energy conditions
and needs certain quantum fields (Casimir effect) or dark energy.

  Null energy condition (NEC)  

    The NEC is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is null vector. Using the Eq.( 1.32 ), we obtain

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

  Weak energy condition (WEC)  

    The WEC is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where the timelike vector is given by @xmath . Eq.( 1.35 ) is for
    the measured energy density by moving with four-velovity @xmath of
    any timelike observer. It must be positive and the geometric
    defination refer to the Einstein field equations Eq.( 1.2 ) @xmath .
    It can be written as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The WEC involves the NEC.

  Strong energy condition (SEC)  

    The SEC asserts that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    in which @xmath is the trace of the stress energy tensor. Because
    @xmath , according to Einstein field equations Eq. ( 1.2 ) the SEC
    is a statement about the Ricci tensor. Then by using the diagonal
    stress energy tensor  given in Eq. ( 1.32 ), the SEC reads

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The SEC involves the NEC, but not necessarily the WEC.

  Dominant energy condition (DEC)  

    The DEC is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The energy density must be positive. Moreover, the energy flux
    should be timelike or null. The DEC involves the WEC, and
    automatically the NEC, but not necessarily the SEC. It becomes

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

It can be verified that WHs violate all the energy conditions. Therefore
using the Eq.s ( 1.20 )-( 1.21 ) with @xmath we  obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thanks to the flaring out condition of the throat from Eq. ( 1.11 ) :
@xmath , one shows that @xmath at the throat and because of the
finiteness of @xmath , from Eq. ( 1.41 ) we have @xmath . Hence all the
energy conditions are violated and this matter is named as the exotic
matter.

#### 1.3.3 Hawking Radiation of the Traversable Wormholes

Since Einstein, Hawking’s significant addition to understanding the
universe is called the most significant [ 27 ] . Hawking showed that the
BHs are not black but grey which emit radiation. This was the discovery
of Hawking radiation, which allows a BH to leak energy and gradually
fade away to nothing. However, the question of what happens to the
information is remains. All the particles should fall into BH and we do
not know what happened to them. The particles that come out of a BH seem
to be completely random and bear no relation to what fell in. It appears
that the information about what fell in is lost, apart from the total
amount of mass and the amount of rotation. If that information is truly
lost that strikes at the heart of our understanding of science.

To understand whether that information is in fact lost, or whether it
can be recovered, Hawking and colleagues, including Andrew Strominger,
from Harvard, are currently working to understand “supertranslations” to
explain the mechanism by which information is returned from a BH and
encoded on the hole’s “event horizon” [ 28 ] . In the literature, there
exist several derivations of the Hawking radiation [ 32 , 29 , 33 , 34 ,
70 , 69 , 68 , 67 , 66 , 65 , 64 , 63 , 59 , 58 , 57 ] .

The transmission probability @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the action of the classically forbidden trajectory.
Hence, we have found the Hawking temperature from the tunneling rate of
the emitted particles.

For studying the HR of traversable WHs, we consider a general
spherically symmetric and dynamic WH with a past outer trapping horizon.
The traversable WH metric can be transformed into the generalized
retarded Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates as following [ 37 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath and @xmath . The gravitational energy is @xmath
which is also known as a Misner-Sharp energy. @xmath It reduces to
@xmath on a trapping horizon [ 38 ] . Furthermore,  there is a past
marginal surface at the @xmath (at horizon: @xmath ) for the retarded
coordinates [ 39 ] .

Firstly, we give the equation of motion for the vector particles which
is known as the Proca equation in a curved space-time [ 64 , 67 , 35 ,
36 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which the wave functions are defined as @xmath By the help of  the
method of WKB approximation, the following HJ ansätz is substituted into
Eq. ( 1.44 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the real constants @xmath . Furthermore, we define the action
@xmath as following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the ( 1.43 ) is symmetric, the Killing vectors are @xmath and
@xmath . Then one can use the separation of variables method to the
action @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is noted that @xmath and @xmath are energy and real angular
constants, respectively. After inserting Eqs. ( 1.45 ), ( 1.46 ), and (
1.47 ) into Eq. ( 1.44 ),  a matrix equation @xmath (to the leading
order in @xmath ) is obtained @xmath which has the following non-zero
components:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The determinant of the @xmath -matrix ( @xmath ) is used to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then  the Eq. ( 1.49 )  is solved for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above integral near the horizon ( @xmath ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

As shown in the Eq. ( 1.42 ), the probability rate of  the
ingoing/outgoing particles only depend on the imaginary part of the
action. Eq. ( 1.51 ) has a pole at @xmath on the horizon. Using the
contour integration in the upper @xmath half-plane, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

From which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

that the @xmath is the surface gravity. Note that the @xmath is positive
quantity because the throat is an outer trapping horizon [ 37 , 39 ] .
When we define the probability of incoming particles @xmath to @xmath
such as @xmath . Consequently @xmath stands for the outgoing particles.
Then we calculate the tunneling rate of the vector particles as [ 33 ,
36 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Boltzmann factor @xmath @xmath where @xmath is the inverse
temperature is compared with the Eq. ( 1.54 ) to obtain the Hawking
temperature @xmath of the traversable WH as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

However @xmath is negative, as also shown by [ 37 , 39 ] . The main
reason of this negativeness is the phantom energy [ 37 , 67 ] , which is
located at the throat of WH. Moreover, as a result of the phantom
energy, the ordinary matter can travel backward in time because in QFT
particles and anti-particles are defined via sign of time.

Surprisingly, we derive the the negative @xmath that past outer trapping
horizon of the traversable WH radiate thermal phantom energy (i.e. dark
energy). Additionally, the radiation of phantom energy has an effect of
reduction of the size of the WH’s throat and its entropy. Nonetheless,
this does not create a trouble. The total entropy of universe always
increases, hence it prevents the violation of the second law of
thermodynamics. Moreover, in our different work, we show that the
gravitino also tunnels through WH and we calculate  the tunneling rate
of the emitted gravitino particles from traversable WH.

## Chapter 2 Rotating Thin-Shells in (2+1)-D

The procedure of dealing with a given  surface of discontinuity is well
known since the Newtonian theory of gravity [ 31 ] . Firstly, the
continuity of the gravitational potential should be checked and then
from the surface mass the discontinuity of the gravitational field might
be occured. Those boundary conditions are derived from the field
equation. Notwithstanding, for the case of GR there is different problem
because of the nonlinearity of the field equations as well as the
principle of general covariance. To solve this headache, on a
hypersurface splitting spacetimes one must introduce specific boundary
conditions to the induced metric tensor and the extrinsic curvature.
This method is called the Darmois-Israel formalism or the thin-shell
formalism [ 52 ] . There are many different using areas of this method
such as dynamic thin-layers, connecting branes, quantum fields in
thin-shell spacetimes, WHs, collapsing shells and radiating spheres [ 53
, 54 , 50 , 30 , 25 , 24 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 ,
41 , 42 ] . It is well known that this method and the searching for
distributional solutions to Einstein’s equations are same. This method
is also used for the stars that are expected to display interfacial
layers much smaller than their characteristic sizes with nontrivial
quantities, such as surface tensions and surface energy densities.
Another example is compact stars with interfaces separating their cores
and their crusts, (i.e. strange quark stars and neutron stars) [ 45 ] .
Note that the Darmois-Israel formalism gives the nontrivial properties
of transitional layers fully taking into account GR, but just under the
macroscopic point of view. Furthermore, the thin-shell formalism would
be the proper formalism for approaching any gravitational system that
presents discontinuous behaviors in their physical parameters.

On the other hand, this method can be used to screen the BH’s hairs
against the outside observer at infinity [ 46 , 47 ] . One should show
that the thin-shell is a stable under the perturbations. Our main aim is
to apply such a formalism to the general charge carrying rotating BH
solution in 2+1 dimensions. The BH has a thin-shell which has a radius
greater than the event horizon [ 43 , 44 ] . Once this situation is
occurred, we check the stability analysis.

### 2.1 Construction of the Rotating Thin-Shells

The metric for the general rotating BH solution in 2+1 dimensions is
given as [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using the famous cut-and-paste method introduced by help of
Darmois-Israel junction conditions, the thin-shell WH is constructed.
Firstly we take two copies of the bulk

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the line elements given above. Then we paste them at an identical
hypersurface

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For convenience we move to a comoving frame to eliminate cross terms in
the induced metrics by introducing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then for interior and exterior of WH, it becomes

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.5)
  -- -- -- -------

The geodesically complete manifold is satisfied at the hypersurface
@xmath which we shall call the throat. We define the throat for the line
element by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

First of all the throat must satisfy the Israel junction conditions so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it is found that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which a @xmath stands for the derivative with respect to the proper
time @xmath Second step is the satisfaction of the Einstein’s equations
in the form of Israel junction conditions on the hypersurface which are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath @xmath and the extrinsic curvature with embedding
coordinate @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parametric equation of the hypersurface @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the normal unit vectors to @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

so they are found as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normal unit vector must be satisfied @xmath non-zero normal unit
vectors are calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

it reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before calculating the components of the extrinsic curvature tensor, we
redefine the metric of the bulk in 2+1 dimensions given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

It becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the line element on the throat is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding Levi-Civita connections which is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the metric given in Eq.( 2.25 ) these are calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

One finds the extrinsic curvature tensor components using the
definition given in Eq.( 2.11 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that on the hyperplane i.e @xmath , @xmath . The extrinsic
curvature for tau tau is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

After substituting all the variables it becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also it is found that the psi-psi component of the extrinsic curvature
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lastly the tau-psi component of the extrinsic curvature is also found as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can write them also in the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a thin-shell with different inner and outer spacetime, they become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 Israel Junction Conditions For Rotating Thin-Shells

In this section, we briefly review the Darmois-Israel junction
conditions [ 52 , 24 ] .

The action of gravity is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term is Einstein-Hilbert action and second term is
Gibbons-Hawking boundary action term.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of this action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath Also @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then for other components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the last component is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The special condition of @xmath @xmath so @xmath Therefore it implies
that the upper-shell and the lower-shell are corotating. The surface
stress-energy tensor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The case of the static is obtained by assuming @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 Energy Conservation

The Darmois-Israel junction condition for connecting a hypersurface
@xmath with a hypersurface @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The boundary surface @xmath is defined when both ( 2.84 ) and ( 2.85 )
are satisfied. If only ( 2.84 ) is satisfied then we refer to @xmath as
a thin-shell.
Conditions ( 2.84 ) and ( 2.85 ) require a common coordinate system on
@xmath and this is easily done if one can set @xmath . Failing this,
establishing ( 2.84 ) requires a solution to the three dimensional
metric equivalence problem. After the signs of normal vector is choosen,
there is no ambiguity in ( 2.85 ) and ( 2.84 ) and ( 2.85 ) are used in
conjunction with the Einstein tensor @xmath to calculate the identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that for timelike @xmath the flux through @xmath (as measured
comoving with @xmath ) is continuous.
The Israel formulation of thin shells follows from the Lanczos equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we refer to @xmath as the surface stress-energy tensor of @xmath .
The “ADM” constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

along with Einstein’s equations then gives the conservation identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The “Hamiltonian” constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives the evolution identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dynamics of the thin-shell are not understood from the identities (
2.90 ) and ( 2.92 ). The evolution of the thin-shell is obtained by the
Lanczos equation( 2.88 ) [ 50 ] . The @xmath and @xmath are used to
satisfy the energy condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that ” @xmath ” prime stands for the derivative respect to @xmath
and the energy on the shell is not conserved.

### 2.4 Stability Analyses of Thin-Shells

Another relation between the energy density and pressure which is much
helpful is the energy conservation relation which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation must be satisfied by @xmath and @xmath even after the
perturbation which gives an inside to the problem.

The idea is to perturb the shell while it is at the equilibrium point
@xmath . By using the Eq.( 2.80 ), we apply the perturbation and find
the equation of motion of the shell  (note that @xmath ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

This one dimensional equation describes the nature of the equilibrium
point whether it is a stable equilibrium or an unstable one. To see that
we expand @xmath about @xmath and keep the first non-zero term which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can easily show that @xmath and therefore everything depends on the
sign of @xmath Let’s introduce @xmath and write the equation of motion
again

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

which after a derivative with respect to time it reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation explicitly implies that if @xmath the @xmath will be an
oscillating function about @xmath with the angular frequency @xmath but
otherwise i.e., @xmath the motion will be exponentially toward the
initial perturbation. Therefore our task is to find @xmath and show that
under what condition it may be positive for the stability and negative
for the instability of the shell. Can naturally formed absorber
thin-shells, in cosmology to hide the reality from our telescopes? This
can be revise the ideas of no-hair black hole theorem. Thin-shell can be
used to find exhibiting a remarkable property of QCD-like charge
confinement to cover the Dirac and Yang-Mills fields. The charged
interior spacetime is completely con- fined within the
finite-spacial-size – analog of QCD quark confinement. Naturally this
takes us away from classical physics into the realm of gravity coupled
QCD.

### 2.5 Example of BTZ Thin-Shells

Let’s set the lapse function of @xmath for the inner shell which is de
Sitter spacetime with mass @xmath and outer shells which is a BTZ BH
with mass @xmath and charge @xmath to be as follows [ 46 , 49 , 51 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where s and l are constants.  After some calculations, we obtain that
the energy density and the pressures can be recast as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.104)
  -- -- -- ---------

For a static configuration of radius a, we obtain (assuming @xmath and
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To obtain the stability criterion, one starts by rearranging Eq. ( 2.103
) in order to obtain the equation of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath is the potential as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we impose the energy conservation condition which must be satisfied
after the perturbation and try to find out weather the motion of the
shell is oscillatory or not. This openly means a relation between @xmath
and @xmath Finally in order to have the thin-shell stable against radial
perturbation, @xmath at the equilibrium point i.e., @xmath where @xmath
To keep our study as general as possible we assume @xmath to be an
arbitrary function of @xmath and @xmath i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath In Fig.2.2 we plot @xmath for the specific value of @xmath
and @xmath As one observes in the region with @xmath the thin-shell is
stable while otherwise it occurs for @xmath

### 2.6 Generalization of Rotating Thin-Shells

The generalized spacetime metric is given as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define the throat for the line element by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The throat must satisfy the Israel junction conditions so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and it is found that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in which a @xmath stands for the derivative with respect to the proper
time @xmath For convenience we move to a comoving frame to eliminate
cross term in the induced metrics by introducing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then for interior and exterior of WH, it becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The parametric equation of the hypersurface @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the normal unit vectors to @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in which @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The normal unit vector must satisfy @xmath so that non-zero normal unit
vectors are calculated  as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so corrresponding unit vectors are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we will calculate the extrinsic curvatures

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Levi-Civita connections calculated @xmath ;

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also it is found that the phi,phi component of the extrinsic curvature
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and lastly the tau,phi component of the extrinsic curvature is also
found as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in which @xmath They become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we take @xmath with @xmath one finds same as part 1.

### 2.7 Israel Junction Conditions For Thin-Shell

Now we define the junction conditions by using the exterior curvatures
as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the trace of @xmath and @xmath is the surface
stress-energy tensor on @xmath , and @xmath . Also @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then for other components

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the last component is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The special condition of @xmath @xmath so @xmath Therefore it implies
that the upper-shell and the lower-shell are co-rotating. The surface
stress-energy tensor is @xmath One calculates the charge density and the
surface pressure as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.171)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## Chapter 3 Thin-Shell Wormholes

Thin-shell WHs is constructed with the exotic matter which is located on
a hypersurface so that it can be minimized. Constructing WHs with
non-exotic source is a difficult issue in GR. On this purpose, firstly ,
Visser use the thin-shell method to construct WHs for minimizing the
exotic matter on the throat of the WHs. We need to introduce some
conditions on the energy-momentum tensor such as [ 47 , 53 , 54 ]

-Weak Energy Condition

This energy condition states that energy density of any matter
distribution must be non-negative, i.e., @xmath and @xmath .

- Null Energy Condition

This condition implies that @xmath .

- Dominant Energy Condition

This condition holds if @xmath and @xmath .

- Strong Energy Condition

This condition demands @xmath and @xmath

### 3.1 Mazharimousavi-Halilsoy Thin-Shell WH in 2+1 D

In this section [ 71 ] , we introduce a SHBH (SHBH) investigated by
Mazharimousavi and Halilsoy recently [ 55 ] . The following action
describes the Einstein-Maxwell gravity that is minimally coupled to a
scalar field @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the Ricci scalar, @xmath is the Maxwell invariant,
and @xmath stands for the scalar ( @xmath ) potential. From the action
above, the SHBH solution is obtained as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are constants, and event horizon of the BH is
located at @xmath . It is clear that this BH possesses a
non-asymptotically flat geometry. Metric ( 3.2 ) can be written in the
form of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is noted that the singularity located at @xmath , which is also seen
from the Ricci and Kretschmann scalars:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, One obtains the scalar field and potential respectively as
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath are constants. The corresponding Hawking temperature is
calculated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is constant. Having a radiation with constant temperature is the
well-known isothermal process. It is worth noting that Hawking radiation
of the linear dilaton BHs exhibits similar isothermal behavior.

### 3.2 Stability of the Thin-Shell WH

In this section, we take two identical copies of the SHBHs with [ 71 ]
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the manifolds are bounded by hypersurfaces @xmath and @xmath , to
get the single manifold @xmath , we glue them together at the surface of
the junction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the boundaries @xmath are given. The spacetime on the shell is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the proper time . Setting coordinates @xmath ,
the extrinsic curvature formula connecting the two sides of the shell is
simply given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the unit normals ( @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The non zero components of @xmath are calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dot over a quantity denotes the derivative with respect to
@xmath . Then, the non-zero extrinsic curvature components yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is not continuous around the shell, we use the Lanczos
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the trace of @xmath , @xmath . Firstly, @xmath while
@xmath For the conservation of the surface stress–energy @xmath and
@xmath is stress energy-momentum tensor at the junction which is given
in general by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the surface pressure @xmath and the surface energy density @xmath .
Due to the circular symmetry, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, from Eq.s ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.19 ) one obtains the surface pressure
and surface energy density . Using the cut and paste technique, we can
demount the interior regions @xmath of the geometry, and links its
exterior parts. The energy density and pressure are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then for the static case ( @xmath ), the energy and pressure quantities
reduce to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once @xmath and @xmath hold, then WEC is satisfied. Besides, @xmath is
the condition of NEC. Furthermore, SEC is conditional on @xmath and
@xmath . It is obvious from Eq. (24) that negative energy density
violates the WEC, and consequently we are in need of the exotic matter
for constructing thin-shell WH. We note that the total matter supporting
the WH is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Stability of the WH is investigated using the linear perturbation so
that the EoS is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of @xmath . Furthermore, the
energy conservation equation is introduced as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the bulk energy-momentum tensor. It can be written in
terms of the pressure and energy density:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

From above equation, one reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its second derivative yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where prime and tilde symbols denote derivative with respect to @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. The equation of motion for the shell is in
general given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective potential @xmath is found from Eq. ( 3.22 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, Eq. ( 3.32 ) is nothing but the equation of the oscillatory
motion in which the stability around the equilibrium point @xmath is
conditional on @xmath . We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation of motion of the throat, for a small perturbation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for the condition of @xmath , TSW is stable where the motion
of the throat is oscillatory with angular frequency @xmath .

### 3.3 Some Models of EoS Supporting Thin-Shell WH

In this section, we use particular gas models (linear barotropic gas
(LBG) , chaplygin gas (CG) , generalized chaplygin gas (GCG) and
logarithmic gas (LogG) ) to explore the stability of TSW.

#### 3.3.1 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via the LBG

The equation of state of LBG is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant parameter. By changing the values of @xmath
and @xmath in Eq. (35), we illustrate the stability regions for TSW, in
terms of @xmath and @xmath , as depicted in Fig.3.2.

#### 3.3.2 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via CG

The equation of state of CG that we considered is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one naturally finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

After inserting Eq. (39) into Eq. (35), The stability regions for
thin-shell WH supported by CG is plotted in Fig.3.3.

#### 3.3.3 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via GCG

By using the equation of state of GCG

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and whence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting Eq. (41) in Eq. (35), one can illustrate the stability
regions of thin-shell WH supported by GCG as seen in Fig.3.4.

#### 3.3.4 Stability analysis of Thin-Shell WH via LogG

In our final example, the equation of state for LogG is selected as
follows ( @xmath @xmath are constants)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

After inserting the above expression into Eq. (35), we show the
stability regions of thin-shell WH supported by LogG in Fig.3.5.

In summary, we have constructed thin-shell WH by gluing two copies of
SHBH via the cut and paste procedure. To this end, we have used the fact
that the radius of throat must be greater than the event horizon of the
metric given: ( @xmath ). We have used LBG, CG, GCG, and LogG EoS to the
exotic matter. Then, the stability analysis ( @xmath ) is plotted. We
show the stability regions in terms @xmath and @xmath . The problem of
the angular perturbation is out of scope for the present paper. That’s
why we have only worked on the linear perturbation. However, angular
perturbation is in our agenda for the extension of this study. This is
going to be studied in the near future.

### 3.4 Hayward Thin-Shell WH in 3+1 D

The metric of the Hayward BH is given by [ 72 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the metric function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is noted that @xmath and @xmath are free parameters. At large @xmath
the metric function behaves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas at small @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.49)
  -- -- -- --------

One observes that for small @xmath the Hayward BH becomes a de Sitter BH
and for large @xmath it is a Schwarzschild spacetime. The event horizon
of the Hayward BH is calculated by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and changing @xmath and @xmath , it turns to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for @xmath there is no horizon, for @xmath single horizon
which is called a extremal BH and for @xmath double horizons. Hence the
ratio @xmath is important parameter where the critical ratio is at
@xmath . Set @xmath where @xmath For the case of @xmath the event
horizon is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath The extremal BH case occurs at @xmath and the single horizon
occurs at @xmath When @xmath , the temperature of Hawking is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which clearly for @xmath vanishes and for @xmath is positive so note
that @xmath . Entropy for the BH is obtained by @xmath with @xmath to
find the heat capacity of the BH

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clearly positive.When the heat capacity of the BH is positive
@xmath , it shows the BH is stable according to thermodynamical laws.

To find the source of the Hayward BH, the action is considered as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar and the nonlinear magnetic field
Lagrangian density is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the Maxwell invariant @xmath with two constant positive parameters
@xmath and @xmath . The analyses of the stability depends on the fixing
the @xmath . Moreover, the magnetic field is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charge of the magnetic monopole is @xmath . It implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the line element given in Eq.( 3.45 ). The Einstein-Nonlinear
Electrodynamics field equations are ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath After using the nonlinear magnetic field Lagrangian @xmath
inside the Einstein equations, one finds @xmath for the Hayward regular
BH @xmath The limit of the weak field of the @xmath is found by
expanding it around @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that at the limit of the weak field, the lagrangian of the NED does
not reduce to the lagrangian of the linear Maxwell

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, this spacetime has not any Reissner–Nordström limit at weak
field.

### 3.5 Stability of Hayward Thin-Shell WH

We use the cut and past technique to constructe a thin-shell WH from the
Hayward BHs. We firstly take a thin-shell at @xmath where the throat is
outside of the horizon ( @xmath ). Then we paste two copies of it at the
point of @xmath . For this reason the thin-shell metric is taken as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the proper time on the shell. The Einstein equations on
the shell are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It is noted that the extrinsic curvature tensor is @xmath
. Moreover, @xmath stands for its trace.  The surface stresses, i.e.,
surface energy density @xmath and surface pressures @xmath , are
determined by the surface stress-energy tensor @xmath . The energy and
pressure densities are obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then they reduce to simple form in a static configuration ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Stability of such a WH is investigated by applying a linear perturbation
with the following EoS

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover the energy conservation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in closed form it equals to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

after the line element in Eq.( 3.64 ) is used, it opens to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 1-D equation of motion is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is the potential,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equilibrium point at @xmath means @xmath and @xmath Then it is
considered that @xmath , one finds @xmath To obtain @xmath we use the
given @xmath and it is found as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath After we use @xmath finally it is found that

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.78)
  -- -- -- --------

### 3.6 Some Models of EoS

In this section, we consider some specific models of matter such as
Linear gas (LG), Chaplygin gas (CG), generalized Chaplygin gas (GCG) ,
modified generalized Chaplygin gas (MGCG) and logarithmic gas (LogG) to
analyze the effect of the parameter of Hayward in the stability of the
constructed thin-shell WH.

#### 3.6.1 Linear Gas

For a LG, EoS is choosen as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is a constant and @xmath Fig. 3.6 shows the stability
regions in terms of @xmath and @xmath with different Hayward’s
parameter. It is noted that the @xmath shows the stable regions.

#### 3.6.2 Chaplygin Gas

For CG, we choose the EoS as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath In Fig. 3.7 , the stability
regions are shown in terms of @xmath and @xmath for different values of
@xmath The effect of Hayward’s constant is to increase the stability of
the Thin-Shell WH.

#### 3.6.3 Generalized Chaplygin Gas

The EoS of the GCG is taken as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. We check the effect of parameter
@xmath in the stability and @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find @xmath . In Fig. 3.8 , the stability regions are shown in terms
of @xmath and @xmath with various values of @xmath

#### 3.6.4 Modified Generalized Chaplygin Gas

In this case, the MGCG  is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are free parameters. Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

To go further we set @xmath and @xmath . In Fig. 3.9 , the stability
regions are plotted in terms of @xmath and @xmath with various values of
@xmath . The effect of Hayward’s constant is to increase the stability
of the Thin-Shell WH.

#### 3.6.5 Logarithmic Gas

Lastly LogG is choosen by follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is a constant. For LogG, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 3.10 , the stability regions are plotted to show the effect of
Hayward’s parameter clearly. The effect of Hayward’s constant is to
increase the stability of the Thin-Shell WH.

### 3.7 Perturbation of Small Velocity

Now we check the stability of the Hayward WH using the small velocity
perturbations( @xmath ). The EoS is calculated by @xmath and @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.87)
  -- -- -- --------

One finds the 1-D motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

After integrating both sides,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

then it is obtained by taking the second integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is noted that @xmath is the equilibrium point, however we consider
that there is an initial small velocity after perturbation, which is
called @xmath We firstly consider the Schwarzschild BH as an example.
For the Schwarzschild spacetime, @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is non-oscillatory so it means that the throat isn‘t stable. Now we
give the another example of the Hayward thin-shell WH. For this case,
using the Hayward metric and the relation given in Eq.( 3.90 ),expanding
to the second order of @xmath , admits

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here again we find that there is not stability of the throat against the
small velocity perturbation. Therefore this motion is not also
oscillatory. The throat’s acceleration is @xmath . Note that for the
Schwarzschild and Hayward spacetimes we show that it is positive.
Therefore, the corresponding thin-shell WH is not stable.

In this section we constructe thin-shell WHs from the Hayward BH.
Firstly it is showed that a magnetic monopole field in the NED is the
source of the Hayward BH. On the thin-shell  we use the different type
of EoS with the form @xmath and plot possible stable regions. We show
the stable and unstable regions on the plots. Stability simply depends
on the condition of @xmath . We show that the parameter @xmath , which
is known as Hayward parameter has a important role. Moreover, for higher
@xmath value  the stable regions are increased. It is checked the small
velocity perturbations for the throat. It is found that throat of the
thin-shell WH is not stable against such kind of perturbations. Hence,
energy density of the WH is found negative so that we need exotic
matter.

### 3.8 Rotating BTZ Thin-Shell Wormholes

For constructing the thin-shell WH, we study 2 copies of a
2+1-dimensional background spacetime given. These copies are used at a
radius @xmath , where the throat of the WH will be located larger than
the event horizon. All steps for thin-shell by using the Isreal junction
conditions are also valid for the constructing of WH, only difference
appears when  calculating the energt density and pressure of WH. Then we
have the jump if the extrinsic curvature components at the surface
@xmath , furthermore, we take the @xmath and also @xmath for the WH
case, and calculate associated linear energy density and pressure for
WH.

Once more we add that all functions are evaluated at @xmath Therefore it
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

To finalize this section we add that at the equilibrium point where
@xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.98)
  -- -- -- --------

in which all functions are evaluated at @xmath

### 3.9 Linearized Stability of Wormhole

Furthermore, the equation of motion for the thin-shell is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the effective potential ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is noted that stability of WH solution depends upon the conditions of
@xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let’s introduce @xmath and write the equation of motion again

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which after a derivative with respect to time it reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence our main aim is to discover the behaviour of @xmath and point out
the conditions of its positive value for the stability by also the help
of the Eq.( 2.95 ).

It is now interesting to reduce our general results to some specific
examples. such as rotating AdS-BTZ thinshell WH and rotating BTZ
thinshell WH.

### 3.10 Rotating BTZ Thin-shell Wormhole

Our last WH example is on very recent work where they introduce a
counter rotating thin shell WHs as follows [ 54 ] . In @xmath and @xmath
the spacetimes are given by rotating BTZ whose line elements are written
as with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which are the rotating BTZ. Here @xmath and @xmath are the integration
constants which respectively correspond to the mass and angular
momentum, and @xmath is the charge carried by the BH. The exterior
curvatures are derived as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then it is found that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.108)
  -- -- -- ---------

Note that @xmath is diagonal so that @xmath which consequently admits
@xmath It means that between the upper and lower shells there is a
counterrotating.

After some calculations, the energy density and the pressures is
calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The static case where @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We  have already imposed a generic potential equation in Eq.( 3.100 ).
Now, Eq. ( 3.100 ) can be written for the rotating BTZ thinshell WH as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the more general form of the pressure as a function of @xmath and
@xmath i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, at equilibrium point @xmath it is obtained that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can show that @xmath .

#### 3.10.1 Phantomlike EoS

The EoS of a LG is given by @xmath in which @xmath is a constant
parameter. One observes that for the cases

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and the equilibrium is stable. In Fig. 3.12 we plot the stability
region with respect to @xmath and @xmath In the same figure the result
for different @xmath are compared. As one can see, increasing the value
of @xmath increases the region of stability

## Chapter 4 Conclusion

In this thesis, we have studied the stability of thin-shells around the
BHs and the stability of the thin-shell WHs. Firstly, we have introduced
generally the BHs, WHs and their properties in the theory of the GR.
Furthermore, we have calculated the Hawking Radiation from the
traversable WHs. In Chapter 2, we have studied the rotating thin-shells
methods and gave some examples. Especially, the Bardeen BH with a
charged thin-shell is used to produce thin-shell matching inside and
outside. We have created the thin-shell by using the Israel junction
conditions which we derived earlier. Then as a result of the thin-shell,
the effect of the charge is disappeared to outside. Moreover, we have
checked the stability regions of the thin-shell and we have plotted the
areas of the stability. Experimentally, there is a possibility that
thin-shells can cancel the charge’s effects for the outside observers.
Our example is in the 2+1 dimensions but it can be found similar effects
for the higher dimensions.

In Chapter 3, we have defined the methods of the constructing thin-shell
WHs and we have studied two example of thin-shell WHs in 2+1 dimensions
and 3+1 dimensions by using same method which is gluing two copies of
bulks via the cut and paste procedure. To this end, we have used the
fact that the radius of throat must be greater than the event horizon of
the metric given: ( @xmath ). We have adopted LBG, CG, GCG, and LogG gas
equation of states to the exotic matter locating at the throat. Then,
the stability analysis has become the study of checking positivity of
the second derivative of an effective potential at the throat radius
@xmath : @xmath . In all cases, we have managed to find the stability
regions in terms of the throat radius @xmath and constant parameter
@xmath , which are associated with the EoS employed. Hence, in our
studies the exotic matter is needed to support construction of the
throat of the thin-shell.

In last section, we have studied the rotating thin-shell WHs in
2+1-dimensions. This time we use the counterrotating shells around the
throat which has no effect on the gluing procedure and Lanczos energy
conditions. It can be thought that the upper and lower pressures cancel
each others and leaving no cross terms of the pressure component.
Stability of a counterrotating TSW for a gas of linear equation of state
turns out to make the TSW more stable. For very fast rotation the
stability region grows much larger in the parameter space. For a
velocity dependent perturbation, however, it is shown that TSW is no
more stable. That is, perturbation of the throat radius ( @xmath ) that
depends on initial speed ( @xmath ), no matter how small, doesn’t return
to the equilibrium radius @xmath again. Although our work is confined to
the simple @xmath dimensional spacetime it is our belief that similar
behaviours are exhibited also by the higher dimensional TSWs. However,
even for the @xmath dimensional spacetime cases it is not easy task to
check the stability because there are more degrees of freedom in @xmath
dimensional spacetime.