## 2.6 General comments on the Quantum Field Theory

Let us start our study of the correspondence between our new metrics
with their respective field theory dual. We will state some general
points that these field theories will fulfill.

In the case of the backgrounds corresponding to the compactifications
described in section 2.2.1 , our field theories are obtained by a
twisted KK-compactification on a two dimensional manifold—that can be
@xmath or @xmath . The original field theory is, as we mentioned, the
Klebanov-Witten quiver, that controls the high energy dynamics of our
system. The bosonic part of the global symmetries for this QFT in the UV
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.6.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, as we know the @xmath is enhanced to @xmath . The theory contains
two vector multiplets @xmath , for @xmath , together with four chiral
multiplets @xmath for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

These fields transform as vector, spinors and scalars under @xmath —that
is @xmath are singlets, the fermions transform in the @xmath and the
vectors in the @xmath . The transformation under the ’flavor’ quantum
numbers @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.6.49)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The backgrounds in section 2.2.1 , are describing the strong coupling
regime of the field theory above, in the case in which we compactify the
D3-branes on @xmath twisting the theory. This means, mixing the
R-symmetry @xmath with the @xmath isometry of @xmath . This twisting is
reflected in the metric fibration between the @xmath -direction (the
Reeb vector) and the @xmath . The fibration is implemented by a vector
field @xmath in eq. ( 2.2.1 ). The twisting mixes the R-symmetry of the
QFT, represented by @xmath in the dual description, with (part of) the
Lorentz group. In purely field theoretical terms, we are modifying the
covariant derivative of different fields that under the combined action
of the spin connection and the R-symmetry (on the curved part of the
space) will read @xmath .

In performing this twisting, the fields decompose under @xmath . The
decomposition is straightforward for the bosonic fields. For the
fermions, we have that @xmath decomposes as @xmath and similarly for the
@xmath spinors.

The twisting itself is the ’mixing’ between the @xmath charges of the
spinor and its R-symmetry charge. There is an analog operation for the
vector and scalar fields. Some fields are scalars under the diagonal
group in @xmath . Some are spinors and some are vectors. Only the
scalars under the diagonal group are massless. These determine the SUSY
content of the QFT. This particular example amounts to preserving two
supercharges. There are two massless vector multiplets and two massless
matter multiplets. The rest of the fields get a mass whose set by the
inverse size of the compact manifold. In other words, the field theory
at low energies is a two dimensional CFT (as indicated by the @xmath
factor), preserving @xmath SUSY and obtained by a twisted
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten CFT. The QFT is deformed in the
UV by a relevant operator of dimension two, as we can read from eq. (
2.2.9 ).

An alternative way to think about this QFT is as the one describing the
low energy excitations of a stack of @xmath D3-branes wrapping a
calibrated space @xmath inside a Calabi-Yau 4-fold.

The situation with the metrics in section 2.2.2 is more subtle. In that
case there is also a flow from the Klebanov-Witten quiver to a
two-dimensional CFT preserving (0,2) SUSY. The difference is that this
second QFT is not apparently obtained via a twisting procedure. As
emphasized by the authors of [ 113 ] , the partial breaking of SUSY is
due (from a five-dimensional supergravity perspective) to ’axion’ fields
depending on the torus directions. These axion fields are proportional
to a deformation parameter—that we called @xmath in eq. ( 2.2.22 ). The
deformation in the UV QFT is driven by an operator of dimension four
that was identified to be @xmath and a dimension six operator that
acquires a VEV, as discussed in [ 113 ] .

To understand the dual field theory to the IIA backgrounds obtained
after non-abelian T-duality and presented in section 2.3.1 involves more
intricacy. Indeed, it is at present unclear what is the analog field
theoretical operation of non-abelian T-duality. There are, nevertheless,
important hints. Indeed, the foundational paper of Sfetsos and Thompson
[ 16 ] , that sparked the interest of the uses of non-abelian T-duality
in quantum field theory duals, showed that if one starts with a
background of the form @xmath , a particular solution of the
Gaiotto-Maldacena system (after lifting to M-theory) is generated [ 103
] . This is hardly surprising, as the backgrounds of eleven-dimensional
supergravity with an @xmath factor and preserving @xmath SUSY in four
dimensions, have been classified. What is interesting is that the
solution generated by Sfetsos and Thompson appears as a zoom-in on the
particular class of solutions in [ 51 ] . This was extended in [ 43 ]
that computed the action of non-abelian T-duality on the end-point of
the flow from the @xmath conformal quiver with adjoints to the
Klebanov-Witten CFT. Again, not surprisingly, the backgrounds obtained
correspond to the @xmath version of the Gaiotto @xmath theories— these
were called Sicilian field theories by Benini, Tachikawa and Wecht in [
117 ] , see Fig. 2.1 . It is noticeable, that while the Sicilian
theories can be obtained by a twisted compactification of M5-branes on
@xmath , the case obtained using non-abelian T-duality corresponds only
to M5-branes compactified on @xmath and preserving minimal SUSY in four
dimensions. What we propose in this paper is that the twisted
compactification on @xmath of a Sicilian gauge theory can be studied by
using the backgrounds we discussed in section 2.3.1 and their M-theory
counterparts. We will elaborate more about the 2-d CFTs and their flows
in the coming sections.

In the following, we will calculate different observables of these QFT’s
by using the backgrounds as a ’definition’ of the 2d SCFT. The
backgrounds are smooth and thus the observables have trustable results.
Hence, we are defining a QFT by its observables, calculated in a
consistent way by the dual solutions. The hope is that these
calculations together with other efforts can help map the space of these
new families of CFTs. To the study of these observables we turn now.

### 2.7 Quantized charges

In this section, we will study the quantized charges on the string side.
This analysis appears in the field theory part of the chapter because
these charges will, as in the canonical case of @xmath , translate into
the ranks of the gauge theory local symmetry groups.

The NATD produced local solutions to the 10-dim SUGRA equations of
motion. Nevertheless, it is still not known how to obtain the global
properties of these new geometries. Some quantities associated to a
particular solution, like the Page charges below, are only well-defined
when the global properties of the background are known. Since we have
only a local description of our solution, we will propose very
reasonable global results for the Page charges, mostly based on physical
intuition.

Let us start by analyzing a quantity that is proposed to be periodic in
the string theory. We follow the ideas introduced in [ 118 ] and further
elaborated in [ 107 ] . To begin with, we focus on the NATD version of
the twisted solutions; described in section 2.3.1 . Let us define the
quantity,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the cycle @xmath is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As the topology of the NATD theory is not known, we propose that this
cycle is present in the geometry. This cycle will have a globally
defined volume form, which in a local description can be written as
@xmath . We then find,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again, we emphasize that this is a proposal made in [ 118 ] and used in
[ 107 ] . Moving further than @xmath along the variable @xmath can be
’compensated’ by performing a large gauge transformation on the @xmath
-field,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will make extensive use of this below.

Let us now focus on the conserved magnetic charges defined for our
backgrounds. We will start the analysis for the case of the solutions in
section 2.2.1 .

#### 2.7.1 Page charges for the twisted solutions

We will perform this study for the solutions before and after the NATD,
and we will obtain how the Page charges transform under the NATD
process. Page charges (in contrast to Maxwell charges) have proven
fundamental in understanding aspects of the dynamics of field
theories—see for example [ 119 ] .

In the following, we use as definition of Page charge,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.7.54)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

In particular, for D3-branes we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The topology of the internal space is @xmath . First, we consider the
cycle @xmath . Second, we can consider some cycles given by the product
of @xmath with a generator of @xmath . Notice that the @xmath is
realized as a @xmath fibration over an @xmath base. A smooth 3-manifold,
@xmath , that can be used to generate @xmath is provided by the circle
bundle restricted to the @xmath factor. We can also choose @xmath ,
defined to be the circle bundle restricted to the @xmath factor of the
base space. In summary, the relevant cycles are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.55)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The background fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are vanishing, and only
@xmath contributes. The specific components of @xmath in eq. ( 2.3.26 )
that have non vanishing pullback on these cycles are,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We explicitly see that it is a globally defined form, as all the
involved quantities ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) are well
defined globally. The associated Page charges of D3-branes for the
background around eq. ( 2.3.26 ) are,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the total volume of the two-manifold @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7
Notice that we use Vol for volume elements (differential forms) and
@xmath for the actual volumes of the manifolds (real numbers). As usual,
the first relation quantizes the size of the space,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have then defined three D3-charges. The one associated with @xmath is
the usual one appearing also in the @xmath case. The other two can be
thought as charges ’induced’ by the wrapping of the D3-branes on the
Riemann surface. The reader may wonder whether these charges are present
in the backgrounds found after NATD. We turn to this now.

The particular expressions for Page charges in type IIA are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.59)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We label the radius of the space of the geometry in eq. ( 2.3.29 ) by
@xmath , to distinguish it from @xmath , the quantized radius before the
NATD.

In order to properly define the cycles to be considered, we should know
the topology of this NATD solution. However, we have obtained only a
local expression for this solution, and we do not know the global
properties. As we explained above, we will present a proposal to define
the Page charges that would explain the transmutation of branes through
the NATD. We propose the relevant cycles to be, ⁸ ⁸ 8 Intuitively, we
can think that the branes transform under NATD as 3 consecutive
T-dualities. For example, in the first 5-cycle of eq. ( 2.7.55 ), the
NATD is performed along 3 of the coordinates, ( @xmath ), in such a way
that we end up with a 2-cycle, the first cycle in eq.( 2.7.60 ),
associated with D6-branes. In the second 5-cycle of eq.( 2.7.55 ) the
NATD only affects the @xmath -direction, so it disappears, and two more
directions are added in order to complete the 3 T-dualities, ending up
with a 6-cycle in eq.( 2.7.60 ), associated with D2-branes.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The associated charges are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.7.61)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

In the last expression, we performed the integral over the @xmath
-coordinate in the interval @xmath . These three charges are in
correspondence with the ones before the NATD in eq. ( 2.7.57 ). Indeed,
we can compute the quotients,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These quotients indicate a nice correspondence between charges before
and after the duality.

Using the first relation in eq. ( 2.7.61 ) we quantize the size @xmath
of the space after NATD to be @xmath .

A small puzzle is presented by the possible existence of charge for
D4-branes, as there would be no quantized number before the NATD to make
them correspond to. To solve this puzzle, we propose that there should
be a globally defined closed non-exact form that allows us to perform a
large gauge transformation for the @xmath , in such a way that all the
D4 Page charges vanish. In local coordinates, we have a gauge
transformation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

written in such a way that the integrand has at least one leg along a
non-compact coordinate,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence, any Page charge for D4-branes is vanishing. To be precise, the D2
charge @xmath must be computed after choosing this gauge, as it depends
on @xmath , but it turns out to be the same as calculated in eq. (
2.7.61 ).

The motion in the @xmath -coordinate, as we discussed above, can be
related to large gauge transformations of the @xmath -field. The large
transformation that ’compensates’ for motions in @xmath , namely @xmath
has the effect of changing the Page charges associated with D4-branes,
that were initially vanishing. Indeed, if we calculate for the following
four cycles,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the Page charge of D4-branes varies according to,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.66)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We can interpret these findings in the following way. Our QFT (after the
NATD) can be thought as living on the world-volume of a superposition of
D2- and D6-branes. Motions in the @xmath -coordinate induce charge of
D4-branes, which can be interpreted as new gauge groups appearing. This
suggest that we are working with a linear quiver, with many gauge
groups. Moving @xmath -units in @xmath generates or ’un-higgses’ new
gauge groups of rank @xmath and @xmath . Computing volumes or other
observables that involve integration on the @xmath -coordinate amounts
to working with a QFT with different gauge group, depending on the range
in @xmath we decide to integrate over. Notice that @xmath is not a
holographic coordinate. Motions in @xmath are not changing the energy in
the dual QFT. For the @xmath -fixed points the theory is conformal and
movements in @xmath do not change that.

In the paper [ 107 ] , the motion in the @xmath -coordinate was argued
to be related to a form of ’duality’ (a Seiberg-type of duality was
argued to take place, in analogy with the mechanism of the
Klebanov-Strassler duality cascade, but in a CFT context). That can not
be the whole story as other observables, like for example the number of
degrees of freedom in the QFT, change according to the range of the
@xmath -integration. Hence the motion in @xmath can not be just a
duality. We are proposing here that moving in the @xmath -coordinate
amounts to changing the quiver, adding gauge groups, represented by the
increasing D4 charge.

We will now present the same analysis we have performed above, but for
the case of the background in section 2.2.2 .

#### 2.7.2 Page charges for the Donos-Gauntlett solution

Part of the analysis that follows was carefully done in the original
work of [ 113 ] and here we will extend the study for the solution after
the NATD that we presented in section 2.3.2 . We will give an outline of
the results as the general structure is similar to the one displayed by
the twisted solutions of the previous section.

We focus on the original Donos-Gauntlett background first. We denote by
@xmath , @xmath the two radii of the torus (the cycles of the torus are
then of size @xmath and @xmath respectively) and consider five different
cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.7.67)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

The Page charges associated with D3-, D5- and NS5-branes are,

  -- -- -- -------- ----------
                    (2.7.68)
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ----------

After the NATD, we focus on the background around eqs. ( 2.3.2 ) (
2.3.33 ). We consider the following cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -------- -- ----------
        @xmath      (2.7.69)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- ----------

The correspondent Page charges defined on them (the @xmath -coordinate
is taken in the @xmath interval),

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.7.70)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

From the first relation we obtain, @xmath . Like in the case of the
twisted solutions, we can choose a gauge for the @xmath field

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.7.71)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

such that the Page charge of D4-branes, when computed on every possible
compact 4-cycle, is vanishing. Indeed, after the gauge transformation,
we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Any integral over compact manifolds is vanishing. Like in the case of
the twisted solutions, @xmath and @xmath should be recalculated after
choosing this gauge; but their value turns out to be unchanged.

We can apply the same string theory considerations on the quantity
@xmath that now is defined as an integral over the cycle,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then calculate,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we move further than @xmath along the variable @xmath , we can
compensate this by performing the large gauge transformation @xmath We
now consider the correspondent variation of Page charges for D4-branes,
that can be calculated using the following cycles,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to be,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.76)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The variation of the Page charges of D2-branes vanishes under this large
gauge transformation. For the Donos-Gauntlett solution we observe a
structure very similar to the one discussed for the twisted solutions.
Again, here we would propose that the NATD background ’un-higgses’ gauge
groups of rank @xmath as we move in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate.

We move now to the study of another important observable of our dual 2-d
and 4-d CFTs.

### 2.8 Central charges and c-theorem

In this section, we will study the central charge, an important
observable of the different strongly coupled QFTs that our backgrounds
in sections 2.2 to 2.5 are defining.

Let us start with a brief summary of the ideas behind this observable.
The RG-flow can be understood as the motion of the different couplings
of the QFT @xmath in terms of a parameter @xmath , such that for a given
operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence, the beta functions @xmath are the ’velocities’ of the motion
towards the IR. It is interesting to define a ’c-function’ @xmath with
the property that it decreases when flowing to low energies,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Such that at stationary points @xmath implies that @xmath and vice
versa. The intuition behind this quantity is that massless degrees of
freedom are lifted by relevant deformations, the flow to low energies
then coarse-grains away these lifted modes. This intuition is realized
in different situation: the two dimensional case, with Zamolodchikov’s
definition of @xmath [ 120 ] or Cardy’s conjecture for the ’a-theorem’ [
121 ] , proven by Komargodski and Schwimmer in [ 122 ] . There are
different versions of the c-theorem, varying in ’strength’ and
generality. See the paper [ 123 ] for a summary.

As we discussed, the c-function is properly defined only at the
conformal points of a QFT. Hence, we can define it properly in all of
our backgrounds only at the @xmath and @xmath fixed points. In those
cases the central charge is basically proportional to the volume of the
’internal manifold’ @xmath (the complement-space of @xmath or @xmath ).
Indeed, there exists a well-established formalism to calculate central
charges that uses the relation between this quantity and the Weyl
anomaly @xmath in the QFT when placed on a generic curved space. This
was first discovered in [ 124 ] (before the Maldacena conjecture was
formulated!) and a complete understanding was developed in [ 125 ] .
Indeed, for conformal field theories in two and four dimensions,
associated with @xmath and @xmath geometries respectively, we have ⁹ ⁹ 9
The central charges @xmath and @xmath are equal at the leading order in
an @xmath -expansion. This is the result captured by the Supergravity
approximation used in this paper. Also notice that the L’s entering in
this formulas are relative to an @xmath space expressed in the canonical
form.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.8.80)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the Riemann and Ricci tensors and
scalar of the boundary metric. The Newton constant in different
dimensions is calculated according to (we take @xmath as in the rest of
this paper),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For solutions presenting a flow between these fixed points (or
generically, an RG flow), a quantity that gives an idea of the number of
degrees of freedom can also be defined. This quantity measures an
’effective volume’ of the internal space, that is a volume that is
weighted together with the dilaton and other factors in the metric. To
define such a quantity one goes back to a proposal by Freedman, Gubser,
Pilch and Warner [ 126 ] —see also the paper [ 127 ] for earlier
attempts. Indeed, for any background (that should be considered to be a
solution of a D-dimensional supergravity, possibly connected with string
theory) of the form,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and assuming that the matter fields satisfy certain Energy conditions [
126 ] , it was proven using the Einstein equations that the quantity,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is monotonically increasing towards the UV [ 126 ] . This proposal was
extended by Klebanov, Kutasov and Murugan in the paper [ 128 ] , to
account for an RG-flow in a @xmath dimensional QFT, dual to a generic
metric and dilaton of the form,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In these cases and in cases where the functions @xmath depend also on
the internal coordinates @xmath , the formulas of [ 128 ] were extended
in [ 107 ] to be,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At conformal points, i.e. when calculated in @xmath backgrounds, this
gives a constant result, in agreement with eq. ( 2.8.79 ). For
backgrounds with a flow, the quantity in eq. ( 2.8.85 ) gives an idea of
the number of degrees of freedom that participate in the dynamics of the
QFT at a given energy.

In the following sections, we will quote the results for central charges
according to eq. ( 2.8.79 ) for the conformal field theories in two and
four dimensions. Following that, we will write the result that eq. (
2.8.85 ) gives for the flows between theories.

#### 2.8.1 Central charge at conformal points

As anticipated, we will quote here the results for eq. ( 2.8.79 ) for
the different @xmath and @xmath fixed points. We start with the twisted
solutions of section 2.2.1 . We will use that the volume of the @xmath
space is @xmath .

Twisted geometries

For the IR @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At the UV @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the result for the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After the NATD, we must consider the new radius of the space @xmath and
the volume of the new 5-dim compact space @xmath . The computations turn
out to be similar as the previous ones, and we obtain that the central
charges before and after NATD, for both the two and four dimensional
CFTs, are related by,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us comment on the quantity @xmath , that appears in the calculation
of the Page charges in section 2.7 —see for example, eq. ( 2.7.70 ) and
also in the computation of the entanglement entropy of section 2.9 .
Indeed, if we calculate, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We identify the integral with the
volume of the manifold spanned by the new coordinates. This becomes more
apparent if we use the expressions in the appendix, in different
coordinate systems.

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.8.89)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

We have performed the @xmath -integral in the interval @xmath . The
logic behind this choice was spelt out in section 2.7 , see below eq. (
2.7.66 ). The proposal is that moving in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate implies ’un-higgsing’ a gauge group, hence we would have a
linear quiver gauge theory. The central charge captures this un-higgsing
procedure, increasing according to how many groups we ’create’. What is
interesting is the @xmath behavior in eq. ( 2.8.89 ). Indeed, if @xmath
were associated with the rank of a gauge group, this scaling would be
precisely the one obtained in Gaiotto-like CFTs (also valid for the
@xmath ’Sicilian’ theories of [ 117 ] ). Indeed, the NATD procedure when
applied to the @xmath background creates metric and fluxes similar to
those characterizing the Sicilian CFTs. The backgrounds in sections 2.2
to 2.5 are dual to a compactification of the Klebanov Witten CFT and
(using the NATD background) the Sicilian CFT on a two space @xmath . The
two-dimensional IR fixed point of these flows is described by our
’twisted @xmath ’ and its NATD. The central charge of the Sicilian CFT
and its compactified version is presenting a behavior that goes like a
certain rank to a third power @xmath . This suggest that crossing @xmath
amounts to adding D4-branes and Neveu-Schwarz five branes and @xmath is
the number of branes that were added —see eqs. ( 2.7.66 ) and ( 2.7.76
)--- or crossed ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Thanks to Daniel Thompson for a discussion
about this. . Had we integrated on the interval @xmath , we would have
obtained a scaling like @xmath at leading order in @xmath .

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We study here the central charge for the Donos-Gauntlett background in
section 2.2.2 . For the @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal
compact manifold is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact manifold
@xmath , and the central charge results in,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The quotient of central charges before and after the NATD for the
Donos-Gauntlett QFT, are given by a similar expression to that in eq. (
2.8.88 ).

We move now to study a quantity that gives an idea of the degrees of
freedom along a flow.

#### 2.8.2 Central charge for flows across dimensions

In the previous section, we calculated the central charge for two and
four dimensional CFTs dual to the @xmath and @xmath fixed points of the
flow. In this section, we will use the developments in [ 126 ] and [ 128
] , to write a c-function along the flows between these fixed points. We
will find various subtleties,

-   When considered as a low energy two-dimensional CFT, the definition
    of the c-function evaluated on the flows will not detect the
    presence of the four dimensional CFT in the far UV.

-   We attempt to generalize the formula of [ 128 ] for anisotropic
    cases (that is for field theories that undergo a spontaneous
    compactification on @xmath ). This new definition will detect both
    the two dimensional and four dimensional conformal points, but will
    not necessarily be decreasing towards the IR. This is not in
    contradiction with ’c-theorems’ that assume Lorentz invariance.

We move into discussing these different points in our particular
examples. To start, we emphasize that the formulas in eqs.( 2.8.82 )-(
2.8.85 ), contain the same information. Indeed, the authors of [ 128 ]
present a ’spontaneous compactification’ of a higher dimensional
Supergravity (or String theory) to @xmath dimensions, see eq. ( 2.8.84
). Moving the reduced system to Einstein frame and observing that the
@xmath of the matter in the lower dimension satisfies certain positivity
conditions imposed in [ 126 ] , use of eq. ( 2.8.83 ) implies eq. (
2.8.85 ). Hence, we will apply eqs. ( 2.8.84 )-( 2.8.85 ) to our
different compactifications in sections 2.2 to 2.5 .

Twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions. For the purpose of the flows both
twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions present a similar qualitative
behavior. We start by considering the family of backgrounds in eq. (
2.2.1 ) as dual to field theories in @xmath dimensions. In this case the
quantities relevant for the calculation of the central charge are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.8.92)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

We calculate the quantity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the BPS equations describing these flows in eq. ( 2.2.6 ) we can
get an expression without derivatives. Specializing for the solution
with an @xmath in section 2.2.1 , we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can calculate this for the background we obtained in section 2.3.1 ,
by application of NATD. The result and procedure will be
straightforward, but we will pick a factor of the volume of the space
parametrized by the new coordinates, @xmath .

For the purposes of the RG-flow, the quotient of the central charges
will be the same as the quotient in eq. ( 2.8.89 ). This was indeed
observed in the past [ 43 ] , [ 107 ] and is just a consequence of the
invariance of the quantity @xmath under NATD.

Coming back to eq. ( 2.8.95 ), we find that in the far IR, represented
by @xmath , the central charge is constant. But in the far UV ( @xmath
), we obtain a result that is not characteristic of a CFT. Hence, this
suggest that the definition is only capturing the behavior of a 2-dim
QFT. In other words, the four dimensional QFT may be thought as a two
dimensional QFT, but with an infinite number of fields.

The absence of the four dimensional fixed point in our eq. ( 2.8.95 )
can be accounted if we generalize the prescription to calculate central
charges for an anisotropic 4-dim QFT. Holographically this implies
working with a background of the form, ¹² ¹² 12 A natural generalization
of eq. ( 2.8.96 ) is @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case we define,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.8.97)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

We can apply this generalized definition to the flow for the twisted
@xmath background of section 2.2.1 , and Donos-Gauntlett background of
section 2.2.2 (for more examples the reader is referred to appendix D of
[ 20 ] ). In this case, we consider them as dual to a field theory in
@xmath anisotropic dimensions (two of the dimensions are compactified on
a @xmath ). The quantities relevant for the calculation of the central
charge are,

  -- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath            (2.8.98)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- ----------

We calculate

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.8.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.8.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Focusing on the @xmath case, if we use the solution that describe this
flow—see eq. ( 2.2.8 ) we get an analytical expression,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.8.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that, by definition, this quantity gives the correct central
charge in the UV (a constant, characterizing the 4-d fixed point). In
the IR, the quantity turns out to be constant too, so it is capturing
the presence of a 2-d fixed point. Nevertheless, it is probably not an
appropriate candidate for a ’c-function between dimensions’ as it is not
necessarily increasing towards the UV. This is not in contradiction with
the logic of ’a-theorems’ and proofs like the ones in [ 126 ] or [ 122 ]
, as the metric does not respect Lorentz invariance. Hence, it is not
satisfying the assumptions of the theorems. For the Donos-Gauntlett case
analogous things happen. It would be very nice to try to apply the
recent ideas of [ 129 ] to this flow. Notice that this feature of a
’wrong monotonicity’ for the central charge was also observed—for
theories breaking Lorentz invariance in Higher Spin theories—see the
papers [ 130 ] .

Let us move now to study other observables defining the 2-d and 4-d
QFTs.

### 2.9 Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops

In this section, we will complement the work done above, by studying a
couple of fundamental observables in the QFTs defined by the backgrounds
in sections 2.2 to 2.5 .

Whilst at the conformal points the functional dependence of results is
determined by the symmetries, the interest will be in the coefficients
accompanying the dependence. Both observables interpolate smoothly
between the fixed points.

#### 2.9.1 Entanglement entropy

The aim of this section is to compute the entanglement entropy on a
strip, which extends along the direction @xmath , and study how this
observable transforms under NATD. The input backgrounds for our
calculations will be the Donos-Gauntlett and the @xmath flow as well as
their non-abelian T-duals. Since the procedure is the same in all of the
cases and due to the similarity of the geometries we will present the
results in a uniform way.

For the computation of the entanglement entropy one has to apply the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula [ 96 ] for non-conformal metrics [ 131 ] . This
prescription states that the holographic entanglement entropy between
the strip and its complement is given by the minimal-area static surface
that hangs inside the bulk, and whose boundary coincides with the
boundary of the strip. The general form of the entanglement entropy for
the non-conformal case is,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For the strip, we chose the embedding functions to be @xmath and @xmath
and then using the conservation of the Hamiltonian we arrive at an
expression for @xmath that makes the area minimal under that embedding.
With that we compute,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the form of the function @xmath depends on the geometry of the
background that we consider,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Above, @xmath is the radial position of the hanging surface tip and we
define @xmath . Also, with @xmath we denote the volume of the Riemann
surface @xmath . Notice that the form of the function @xmath is the same
before and after NATD. Moreover we consider,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The quantity @xmath is defined as,

  -- -- -- -----------
           (2.9.106)
  -- -- -- -----------

Before the NATD transformation @xmath comes from the 3-dimensional
submanifold that is spanned by the coordinates @xmath , while after the
NATD it comes from the submanifold that is spanned by the dual
coordinates @xmath . This implies that the entropies before and after
NATD are proportional all along the flow, for any strip length. A
discussion on possible values of the quantity @xmath can be found in the
quantized charges section 2.7 and in the discussion on central charges
in section 2.8 .

When computed by the Ryu-Takayanagi formula eq. ( 2.9.103 ) the
entanglement entropy is UV divergent. In order to solve this we compute
the regularized entanglement entropy ( @xmath ) by subtracting the
divergent part of the integrand of eq. ( 2.9.103 ). The regularized
entanglement entropy is given by,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the last integral is an indefinite integral with the result being
evaluated at @xmath and

  -- -- -- -----------
           (2.9.108)
  -- -- -- -----------

From the formulas ( 2.9.105 ), ( 2.9.106 ) and ( 2.9.107 ) it is obvious
that the regularized entanglement entropies before and after the NATD
transformation differ by the factor

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In the formula above we denoted by @xmath the value of the entanglement
entropy after the NATD transformation. As discussed below eq. ( 2.8.95
), the quantity @xmath is invariant under NATD, and this explains why
the ratio ( 2.9.109 ) is constant along the flow.

At this point let us normalize the regularized entanglement entropy by
defining the quantity,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In what follows we present the behavior of @xmath in the UV and the IR
for the geometries of interest. We express the results in terms of the
width of the strip @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The UV/IR behavior written in eqs ( 2.9.113 ), ( 2.9.116 ), ( 2.9.119 )
and ( 2.9.121 ) below, are just consequences of the fact that in far UV
and far IR the dual QFT is conformal. The functional forms are
universal, so our main interest is the constant appearing in them, and
also as a cross-check of numerical results.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted geometries

In the case of the twisted @xmath geometry we find that the width of the
strip is,

  -- -- -- -----------
           (2.9.112)
  -- -- -- -----------

Here in the integration we changed the variable @xmath by @xmath . From
the calculation of the normalized entropy @xmath we observe that in the
UV this behaves like @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.113)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we also included subleading and next-to subleading terms.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Similarly in the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we find that the
width of the strip in terms of @xmath (considering also a subheading
term) is,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.115)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Here as well we end up with a @xmath behavior, a logarithmic subleading
contribution and a constant @xmath for the regularized entropy,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.116)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.117)
  -- -------- -- -----------

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometries

The calculation for the IR limit is more tricky. The origin of the
subtlety is that the integrals we have to evaluate now run all along the
flow and we do not know the analytical properties of the integrands. In
order to address this issue we split the integration into the intervals
@xmath and @xmath choosing @xmath to be in the deep IR but always
greater than @xmath .

Following this prescription in the calculation, for the width of the
strip we find,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.118)
  -- -------- -- -----------

If we do the same analysis when we calculate the normalized entropy we
find,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.119)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The logarithmic dependence of the leading term on @xmath is the expected
for a @xmath theory.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We close this section presenting the corresponding results for the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry. As in the case of the twisted geometries we
split the integrations in the same way. Then for the width of the strip
we find,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.120)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The normalized entropy displays again a logarithmic behavior in terms of
the width of the strip,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.121)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the constant @xmath has the value,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.122)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The results for the entanglement entropy are shown in Fig. 2.2 . We will
now perform a similar analysis for Wilson loops.

#### 2.9.2 Wilson loop

In this section we calculate the potential energy as a function of the
separation in the @xmath direction (denoted as @xmath ) for two
non-dynamical sources added to the QFT [ 132 ] . In holography this
observable can be represented by a hanging string whose ends are
separated by a distance @xmath along the @xmath direction. In our
calculations we consider an embedding of the form @xmath for the string.
Such an embedding gives rise to the following induced metric on the
string,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.123)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is defined in ( 2.9.105 ). It is obvious that the above
induced metric is the same for all of the geometries that we have
discussed in this chapter so far (even for the duals). For this reason
we believe that it is not necessary to make any distinction with respect
to these geometries for the moment. Moreover, this means that the
observable is ’uncharged’ under NATD and thus it has the same functional
form when computed in the initial and dualized geometries. The interest
will be in the numerical coefficients our calculation will give.

The Nambu-Goto lagrangian density for the string takes the form,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.124)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath stands for the induced metric ( 2.9.123 ). The conservation
of the Hamiltonian implies that,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.125)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the value of the function @xmath at the tip of the
hanging string @xmath . We can solve the last equation for @xmath and
use the result to calculate the distance between the endpoints of the
string. If we do this we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.126)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The Nambu-Goto action now reads

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.127)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . The integral in eq. ( 2.9.127 ) is divergent since we are
considering quarks of infinite mass sitting at the endpoints of the
string. We can regularize this integral by subtracting the mass of the
two quarks and dividing by @xmath as it is shown below

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.128)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This formula gives us the quark-antiquark energy. In order to calculate
the same observable starting with the NATD geometries one must take into
account that the radius @xmath is different from that of the original
geometries. In fact both results are related in the following way

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.129)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In the last expression the hats refer to the dual quantities.

At this point we will explore the UV and IR limits of the
quark-antiquark energy both for the twisted and the Donos-Gauntlett
geometries.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted and Donos Gauntlett geometry

First we focus on the twisted solution where the Riemann surface is the
hyperbolic space, i.e. @xmath . In section 2.2.1 we saw that in this
case the function @xmath behaves like @xmath . Taking this into account
we can compute the distance between the quarks from the formula (
2.9.126 ). The result of this is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.130)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Solving this equation for @xmath we can substitute into the result
coming from the formula ( 2.9.128 ). This will give the quark-antiquark
energy in terms of @xmath which in our case is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.131)
  -- -------- -- -----------

as expected for a CFT. The main point of interest in the previous
formula is in the numerical coefficient.

Similar considerations for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry give
the same results as in the twisted case above. This is because the
asymptotic behavior of the function @xmath in the UV is the same in both
cases.

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometry

Again in the IR region we address again the same difficulty that we
found in the computation of the entanglement entropy. We use the same
trick to overcome it, that is we split the integrations into the
intervals @xmath and @xmath where @xmath has value in the deep IR but
always greater than @xmath .

In section 2.2.1 we saw that in the case where @xmath , the IR behavior
of the function @xmath is @xmath . Applying this into the formula (
2.9.126 ) we obtain the following result,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.132)
  -- -------- -- -----------

As before we solve the previous result for @xmath and we substitute it
into the expression that we find from the calculation of the
quark-antiquark potential. This way we express the energy as a function
of the distance between the quarks,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.133)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Repeating the same steps for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we
find that the distance between the quarks is,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.134)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, expressing the energy in terms of the distance @xmath we find
again a dependence proportional to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.9.135)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us point out that the behavior in eqs ( 2.9.131 ), ( 2.9.133 ) and (
2.9.135 ) are just consequences of the fact that far in the UV and far
in the IR the QFT is conformal.

The results for the quark-antiquark potential are shown in Fig. 2.3 .

### 2.10 Discussion

We started by studying backgrounds dual to two-dimensional SUSY CFTs.
The 2-d CFTs were obtained by compactification of the four-dimensional
Klebanov-Witten CFT on a torus or on a compact hyperbolic plane. The 2-d
CFT preserves (0,2) SUSY.

On those type IIB backgrounds we performed a NATD transformation, using
an @xmath -isometry of the ’internal space’ (or, equivalently, a global
symmetry of the dual CFT). As a result, we constructed new, smooth and
SUSY preserving backgrounds in type IIA and 11 supergravity with an
@xmath fixed point. A further T-duality was used to construct new,
smooth and SUSY type IIB background whose IR is of the form @xmath and
all fluxes are active.

We analyzed the dual QFT by computing its observables, using the smooth
backgrounds mentioned above. By studying the Page charges, we observed
that there is a correspondence between the branes of the starting type
IIB solution and those of the type IIA solution after NATD.

The behavior of the central charge in the original CFT (the
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten theory to 2-d) is @xmath , while
after the NATD goes like @xmath . This new (cubic) dependence suggest a
relation with long linear quivers, which would imply that @xmath is
measuring the number of D4- and NS5-branes. The picture that emerges is
that of a 2-d CFT living on the intersection of D2- , D6- and
NS5-branes, with induced D4 charge every time an NS-brane is crossed.
Quantized charges support this interpretation.

Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops had the expected universal
dependence on @xmath (the quark-antiquark separation or the length of
strip separating the two regions) at the fixed points. The interest of
the expressions is on the coefficients, not determined by conformal
invariance. Interestingly, along the flow the observables smoothly
interpolate between the IR and the UV behaviors, which are fixed points
of different dimensionality. Both for the entanglement entropy and the
Wilson loops we found that the quotient of their values before and after
NATD is constant along the flow, as it is expected.

It would be interesting to connect these studies with previous
calculations done for @xmath , either at the sigma model or the
supergravity level. We are presenting new backgrounds, hence new 2-d
CFTs on which studies done in the past could be interesting to revisit.
It would be also interesting to make more precise the QFT dual to these
backgrounds. The key point needed for this purpose is to understand the
global properties of the supergravity background after the NATD.
Besides, it could be interesting to check whether our solutions fall
within the existent classifications of, for example [ 116 ] , [ 133 ] .
Probably, for this purpose the global properties of the solution are
needed. Another interesting point would be to further study new
observables that select (or explore) the values of @xmath argued in this
work to be special values of the @xmath -coordinate, in the line of [
134 ]

## Appendix 2.A Appendix

#### 2.a.1 SUSY analysis

##### SUSY preserved by the twisted solutions

In this appendix we write explicitly the variations of the dilatino and
gravitino for the ansatz (2.1-2.4), for the 3 cases @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The SUSY transformations for the dilatino @xmath and the
gravitino @xmath for type IIB supergravity in string frame are [ 36 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.1)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , are the Pauli matrices. Let us consider the @xmath case
in detail (the @xmath case is obtained analogously) . Recall that the
vielbein is written in ( 2.2.5 ).

The dilatino variation vanishes identically, as the fields involved are
vanishing. The @xmath component of the gravitino reads,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First, we use the chiral projection of type IIB,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we define @xmath . We also impose the following projections
(Kähler projections),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, expression ( 2.A.2 ) simplifies to,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now impose the usual projection for the D3-brane,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and also a further projection related to the presence of the twisting,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, imposing that expression ( 2.A.5 ) vanishes we obtain,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the component @xmath of the gravitino equation, we obtain that it is
zero when we impose the projections and equation ( 2.A.8 ). For the
component @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.A.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Combining projections ( 2.A.4 ) and ( 2.A.7 ) we get @xmath . Then, (
2.A.9 ) gives the condition,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath , after imposing the projections and equation ( 2.A.10 ) we
arrive at,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

There are two contributions to this term, one coming from the curvature
of the @xmath (through the spin connection) and another coming from the
twisting @xmath . That is, here we explicitly see that the twisting is
introduced to compensate the presence of the curvature, in such a way
that some SUSY can be still preserved. Then, we impose,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath , the variation is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the condition @xmath , we obtain a differential equation for @xmath
. Solving for it we arrive at the following form for the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is spinor which is independent of the coordinate @xmath .
For @xmath the variations vanish as long as,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, for @xmath the graviton variation vanishes if,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Summarizing, the variations of the dilatino and gravitino vanish if we
impose the following projections on the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the BPS equations ( 2.2.6 ), together with the condition @xmath .
For the case of the 2-torus, if we focus on the @xmath component,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we see that there is one term depending on @xmath , due to the twisting.
Contrary to the @xmath and @xmath cases, here there is no curvature term
that could cancel it. This will force @xmath , obtaining @xmath , which
does not permit an @xmath solution.

Finally, after all this analysis we deduce that the Killing spinor does
not depend explicitly on the coordinates @xmath on which we perform the
NATD transformation. In fact it only has a dependence on the coordinate
@xmath .

##### SUSY preserved by the NATD solutions

In the above subsection we calculated the amount of SUSY that is
preserved by the type IIB supergravity solutions of the section 2.2.1 by
examining the dilatino and the gravitino variations. Here we compute the
portion of SUSY that is preserved by a supergravity solution after a
NATD transformation following the argument of [ 16 ] , which has been
proven in [ 44 ] . According to this, one just has to check the
vanishing of the Lie-Lorentz (or Kosmann) derivative [ 45 ] of the
Killing spinor along the Killing vector that generates the isometry of
the NATD transformation. More concretely, suppose that we want to
transform a supergravity solution by performing a NATD transformation
with respect to some isometry of the background that is generated by the
Killing vector @xmath . Then there is a simple criterion which states
that if the Lie-Lorentz derivative of the Killing spinor along @xmath
vanishes, then the transformed solution preserves the same amount of
SUSY as the original solution. In the opposite scenario one has to
impose more projection conditions on the Killing spinor in order to make
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanish. Thus in that case the dual background
preserves less supersymmetry than the original one.

We recall that given a Killing vector @xmath the Lie-Lorentz derivative
on a spinor @xmath along @xmath maps the spinor @xmath to another spinor
and is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . For further details about the Lie-Lorentz derivative we
urge the interested reader to consult [ 135 ] .

In this chapter we constructed type IIA supergravity solutions by
applying a NATD transformation with respect to the @xmath isometry of
the original backgrounds that corresponds to the directions @xmath . The
non-vanishing components of the associated Killing vectors are,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In what follows we will compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the
three Killing vectors @xmath using the geometries of the sections 2.2.1
and 2.2.2 . It turns out that in all cases the Lie-Lorentz derivative
vanishes without the requirement of imposing further projections on the
Killing spinor. This means that the new solutions that we found using
the technique of NATD preserve the same SUSY as the original solutions.

Let us now compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vector (
2.A.20 ) for the twisted geometries that are described by the formulas (
2.2.1 )-( 2.2.5 ). In the previous section, which deals with the
supersymmetry of the starting solutions, we mentioned that the Killing
spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath . This means
that the first term in ( 2.A.19 ) reduces to,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence for each of the three Killing vectors we find,

  -- -- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath            (2.A.22)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ----------

For convenience we have defined the rotated @xmath -matrices,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now compute the 1-forms that are dual to the Killing vectors.
What one has to do is to lower the index of the Killing vectors ( 2.A.20
) using the metric ( 2.2.1 ) which gives the following result,

  -- -- -- -------- ----------
                    (2.A.24)
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ----------

The second term of ( 2.A.19 ) can be computed by acting with the
exterior derivative on the above 1-forms and contracting the result with
@xmath -matrices. Notice that in order to compare with ( 2.A.22 ) one
has to express the components of @xmath using the flat frame ( 2.2.5 ).
Finally for the second term of ( 2.A.19 ) we find,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.A.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which means that the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vectors
@xmath vanishes.

In the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry ( 2.2.19 ) we notice that
all the necessary expressions are quite similar to those computed in the
previous subsection. This is because the only significant difference
between the line element of the twisted geometries and that of the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry is just a fiber term. As in the previous case,
the Killing spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath .
This implies that the derivative term @xmath in eq. ( 2.A.19 ) has no
contribution to the result. Then the first term of eq. ( 2.A.19 ), for
each of the three Killing vectors, can be easily obtained from eq. (
2.A.22 ) by setting @xmath . Similarly, if we set @xmath into eq. (
2.A.24 ) we find the 1-forms @xmath for the Donos-Gauntlett case. Once
we know these 1-forms we can follow the same prescription as in the
previous subsection and compute the second term of ( 2.A.19 ) for each
Killing vector. It happens again that this term, when computed for every
Killing vector, is related to the first term by a minus sign and thus
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanishes without imposing further projections
on the Killing spinor.

## Chapter 3 Unquenched massive flavored ABJM

### 3.1 Introduction

In section 1.3.1 we introduced the ABJM model, which is an @xmath
supersymmetric @xmath gauge theory with Chern-Simons levels @xmath and
@xmath , coupled to matter fields which transform in the bifundamental
representations @xmath and @xmath of the gauge group. When @xmath and
@xmath are large the ABJM theory admits a gravity dual in type IIA
supergravity in ten dimensions. The corresponding background is a
geometry of the form @xmath with fluxes.

The ABJM model constitutes one of the most important examples of the
AdS/CFT correspondence in which the high amount of supersymmetry allows
to perform a large amount of checks and computations. Nevertheless, in
its original formulation it only has fields in the bifundamental
representation of the gauge group, and for condensed matter physics
purposes it would be interesting to generalize it to a theory also with
fundamental matter, i.e. , with fields transforming in the @xmath and
@xmath representations of the gauge group. In section 1.4.2 it was
explained how to add fundamental matter to ABJM in the quenched
approximation. Recall that in the supergravity description these flavors
were added by considering D6-branes extended along the @xmath directions
and wrapping a three-dimensional submanifold of @xmath .

In order to go beyond the quenched approximation, one must be able to
solve the supergravity equations of motion including the backreaction
induced by the source terms generated by the flavor branes. The sources
modify the Bianchi identities satisfied by the forms and the Einstein
equations satisfied by the metric. These equations with sources are, in
general, very difficult to solve, since they contain Dirac @xmath
-functions whose support is the worldvolume of the branes. In order to
bypass this difficulty we will follow the smearing approach, explained
in section 1.4.1 . When the branes are introduced in this way there are
no @xmath -function sources in the equations of motion and they become
more tractable. This approach is valid in the so-called Veneziano limit
[ 73 ] , in which both @xmath and @xmath are large and their ratio
@xmath is fixed.

A holographic dual to ABJM with unquenched massless flavors in the
Veneziano limit was found in [ 76 ] . In this setup the flavor branes
fill the @xmath and are smeared in the internal @xmath space in such a
way that @xmath supersymmetry is preserved. Notice, that since the
flavor branes are not coincident, the flavor symmetry is @xmath rather
than @xmath . A remarkable feature of the solution found in [ 76 ] is
its simplicity and the fact that the ten-dimensional geometry is of the
form @xmath , where @xmath is a compact six-dimensional manifold whose
metric is a squashed version of the unflavored Fubini-Study metric of
@xmath . The radii and squashing factors of this metric depend
non-linearly on the flavor deformation parameter @xmath , where @xmath
is the ’t Hooft coupling of the theory. Moreover, the dilaton is also
constant and, since the metric contains an @xmath factor, the background
is the gravity dual of a three-dimensional conformal field theory with
flavor. Actually, it was checked in perturbation theory in [ 136 ] that
the ABJM theory has conformal fixed points even after the addition of
flavor. This solution captures rather well many of the effects due to
loops of the fundamentals in several observables [ 76 ] . Its
generalization at non-zero temperature in [ 137 ] leads to
thermodynamics which passes several non-trivial tests required to a
flavored black hole.

Contrary to other backgrounds with unquenched flavors, the supergravity
solutions dual to ABJM with smeared sources are free of pathologies,
both at the IR and the UV. This fact offers us a unique opportunity to
study different flavor effects holographically in a well-controlled
setup. In this chapter, we will study such effects when massive flavors
are considered. The addition of massive flavors breaks conformal
invariance explicitly and, therefore, the corresponding dual geometry
should not contain an Anti-de Sitter factor anymore. Actually, for
massive flavors the quark mass is an additional parameter at our
disposal which we can vary and see what is the effect on the geometry
and observables. Indeed, let @xmath denote the quark mass. In the IR
limit in which @xmath is very large we expect the quarks to be
integrated out and their effects to disappear from the different
observable quantities. Thus, in the IR limit we expect to find a
geometry which reduces to the unflavored ABJM background. On the
contrary, when @xmath , we are in the UV regime and we should recover
the deformed Anti-de Sitter background of [ 76 ] . The important point
to stress here is that the quark mass triggers a non-trivial
renormalization group flow between two fixed points and that we can vary
@xmath to enhance or suppress the effects due to the loops of the
fundamentals.

To find the supergravity solutions along the flow, we will adopt an
ansatz with brane sources in which the metric and forms are squashed as
in [ 76 ] . By imposing the preservation of @xmath supersymmetry, the
different functions of the ansatz must satisfy a system of first-order
BPS equations, which reduce to a single second-order master equation.
The full background can be reconstructed from the solution to the master
equation.

The flavor branes corresponding to massive flavors do not extend over
the full range of the holographic coordinate. Indeed, their tip should
lie at a finite distance (related to the quark mass) from the IR end of
the geometry. Moreover, in the asymptotic UV region, the geometry we are
looking for should reduce to the one in [ 76 ] , since the quarks should
be effectively massless in that region. Therefore, we have to solve the
BPS equations without sources at the IR and match this solution with
another one in which the D6-brane charge is non-vanishing and such that
it reduces to the massless flavored solution of [ 76 ] in the deep UV.
Amazingly, we have been able to find an analytic solution in the region
without sources which contains a free parameter which can be tuned in
such a way that the background reduces to the massless flavored geometry
in the asymptotic UV. This semi-analytic solution interpolates between
two different conformal @xmath geometries and contains the quark mass
and the number of flavors as control parameters.

With the supergravity dual at our disposal, we can study the holographic
flow for different observables. The general picture we get from this
analysis is the following. Let @xmath be a length scale characterizing
the observable. Then, the relevant parameter to explore the flow is the
dimensionless quantity @xmath . When @xmath is very large (small) the
observable is dominated by the IR unflavored (UV massless flavored)
conformal geometry, whereas for intermediate values of @xmath we move
away from the fixed points. We will put a special emphasis on the study
of the holographic entanglement entropy, following the prescription of [
96 ] . In particular, we study the refined entanglement entropy for a
disk proposed in [ 138 ] , which can be used as a central function for
the F-theorem [ 139 ] . We check the monotonicity of the refined entropy
along the flow (see [ 140 ] for a general proof of this monotonic
character in three-dimensional theories). Other observables we analyze
are the Wilson loop and quark-antiquark potential, the two-point
functions of high-dimension bulk operators, and the mass spectrum of
quark-antiquark bound states.

The rest of this chapter is divided into two parts. The first part
starts in section 3.2 with a brief review of the ABJM solution. In
section 3.3 we introduce the squashed ansatz, write the master equation
for the BPS geometries with sources, and classify its solutions
according to their UV behavior. In section 3.4 we write the analytic
solution of the unflavored system that was mentioned above while, in
section 3.5 we construct solutions which interpolate between an
unflavored IR region and a UV domain with D6-brane sources. The
backgrounds corresponding to ABJM flavors with a given mass are studied
in section 3.6 .

In the second part of the chapter we study the different observables. In
section 3.7 we analyze the holographic entanglement entropy for a disk.
section 3.8 is devoted to the calculation of the quark-antiquark
potential from the Wilson loop. In section 3.9 we study the two-point
functions of bulk operators with high mass, while the meson spectrum is
obtained in section 3.10 . Section 3.11 contains a summary of our
results and some conclusions. The chapter is completed with several
appendices with detailed calculations and extensions of the results of
the main text.

### 3.2 Review of the ABJM solution

The ABJM theory was reviewed in detail in section 1.3.1 , and in this
section we will fix the notation for the expression of the metric,
dilaton and forms in local coordinates. The ten-dimensional metric of
the ABJM solution in string frame is given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the @xmath and @xmath metrics.
The former, in Poincaré coordinates, is given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric in 2+1 dimensions. In ( 3.2.1 )
@xmath is the radius of the @xmath part of the metric and is given, in
string units, by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath correspond, in the gauge theory dual, to the
rank of the gauge groups and the Chern-Simons level, respectively. The
ABJM background contains a constant dilaton, which can be written in
terms of @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Apart from the metric and the dilaton written above, the ABJM solution
of type IIA supergravity contains a RR two-form @xmath and a RR
four-form @xmath , whose expressions can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Kähler form of @xmath and @xmath is the volume
element of the @xmath metric ( 3.2.2 ). It follows from ( 3.2.5 ) that
@xmath and @xmath are closed forms ( i.e. , @xmath ).

The metric of the @xmath manifold in ( 3.2.1 ) is the canonical
Fubini-Study metric. Following the approach of [ 76 ] , we will regard
@xmath as an @xmath -bundle over @xmath , where the fibration is
constructed by using the self-dual @xmath instanton on the four-sphere.
This representation of @xmath is the one obtained when it is constructed
as the twistor space of the four-sphere. As in [ 76 ] , this @xmath -
@xmath representation will allow us to deform the ABJM background by
squashing appropriately the metric and forms, while keeping some amount
of supersymmetry. More explicitly, we will write @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the standard metric for the unit four-sphere, @xmath (
@xmath ) are Cartesian coordinates that parameterize the unit two-sphere
( @xmath ) and @xmath are the components of the non-abelian one-form
connection corresponding to the @xmath instanton. Let us now introduce a
specific system of coordinates to represent the metric ( 3.2.6 ) and the
two-form @xmath . First of all, let @xmath ( @xmath ) be a set of @xmath
left-invariant one-forms satisfying @xmath . Together with a new
coordinate @xmath , the @xmath ’s can be used to parameterize the metric
of the four-sphere @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a non-compact coordinate. The @xmath instanton one-forms
@xmath can be written in these coordinates as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us next parameterize the @xmath coordinates of the unit @xmath by
two angles @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, it is straightforward to demonstrate that the @xmath part of the
Fubini-Study metric can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the following one-forms:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the @xmath metric can be written in terms of the one-forms
defined above as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will now write the expression of @xmath in such a way that the @xmath
- @xmath split structure is manifest. Accordingly, we define three new
one-forms @xmath @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the @xmath are just the @xmath rotated by the two angles
@xmath and @xmath . In terms of the forms defined in ( 3.2.13 ) the line
element of the four-sphere is obtained by substituting @xmath in ( 3.2.7
). Let us next define the one-forms @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in terms of which the metric of the four-sphere is @xmath . Moreover,
the RR two-form @xmath in ( 3.2.5 ) can be written in terms of the
one-forms defined in ( 3.2.11 ) and ( 3.2.14 ) as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution of type IIA supergravity reviewed above is a good gravity
dual of the @xmath ABJM field theory when the @xmath radius @xmath is
large in string units and when the string coupling constant @xmath is
small. From ( 3.2.3 ) and ( 3.2.4 ) it is straightforward to prove that
these conditions are satisfied if @xmath and @xmath are in the range
@xmath .

### 3.3 Squashed solutions

Let us consider the deformations of the ABJM background which preserve
the @xmath - @xmath splitting. These deformed backgrounds will solve the
equations of motion of type IIA supergravity (with sources) and will
preserve at least two supercharges. We will argue below that some of
these backgrounds are dual to Chern-Simons matter theories with
fundamental massive flavors.

The general ansatz for the ten-dimensional metric of our solutions in
string frame takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the warp factor @xmath and the functions @xmath and @xmath depend
on the holographic coordinate @xmath . Notice that @xmath and @xmath
determine the sizes of the @xmath and @xmath within the internal
manifold. Actually, their difference @xmath determines the squashing of
the @xmath and will play an important role in characterizing our
solutions. We will measure this squashing by means of the function
@xmath , defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, the ABJM solution has @xmath . A departure from this value
would signal a non-trivial deformation of the metric. Similarly, the RR
two- and four-forms will be given by:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath , @xmath are new functions. The
background is also endowed with a dilaton @xmath . As compared with the
ABJM value ( 3.2.15 ), the expression of @xmath in our ansatz contains
the function @xmath which generically introduces an asymmetry between
the @xmath and @xmath terms. Moreover, when @xmath the two-form @xmath
is no longer closed and the corresponding Bianchi indentity is violated.
Indeed, one can check that:

  -- -- -- ----------
           
           
           (3.3.20)
  -- -- -- ----------

The violation of the Bianchi identity of @xmath means that we have
D6-brane sources in our model. Indeed, since @xmath , if @xmath then the
Maxwell equation of @xmath contains a source term, which is due to the
presence of D6-branes since the latter are electrically charged with
respect to @xmath . The charge distribution of the D6-brane sources is
determined by the function @xmath , which we will call the profile
function.

The function @xmath of the RR four-form can be related to the other
functions of the ansatz by using its equation of motion @xmath and the
flux quantization condition for the integral of @xmath over the internal
manifold. The result is [ 76 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the integer @xmath is identified with the ranks of the gauge
groups in the gauge theory dual ( i.e. , with the number of colors).

It is convenient to introduce a new radial variable @xmath , related to
@xmath through the differential equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From now on, all functions of the holographic variable are considered as
functions of @xmath , unless otherwise specified. The ten-dimensional
metric in this new variable takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It was shown in [ 76 ] that the background given by the ansatz written
above preserves @xmath supersymmetry in three dimensions if the
functions satisfy a system of first-order differential equations. It
turns out that this BPS system can be reduced to a unique second-order
differential equation for a particular combination of the functions of
the ansatz. The details of this reduction are given in appendix 3.A.1 .
Here we will just present the final result of this analysis. First of
all, let us define the function @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the BPS system can be reduced to the following second-order
non-linear differential equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will refer to ( 3.3.25 ) as the master equation and to @xmath as the
master function. Interestingly, the BPS equations do not constrain the
profile function @xmath . Therefore, we can choose @xmath (which will
fix the type of supersymmetric sources of our system) and afterwards we
can solve ( 3.3.25 ) for @xmath . Given @xmath and @xmath one can obtain
the other functions that appear in the metric. Indeed, as proved in
appendix 3.A.1 , @xmath and @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the warp factor @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant that determines the behavior of @xmath as
@xmath ( @xmath if we impose that @xmath as @xmath ). Finally, the
dilaton is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the expression of @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.3.26 ) it follows that
the squashing function @xmath can be written in terms of the master
function @xmath and its derivative as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.3.1 Classification of solutions

Let us study the behavior of the solutions of the master equation in the
UV region @xmath . This analysis will allow us to have a classification
of the different solutions. We will assume that the profile function
@xmath reaches a constant value as @xmath , and we will denote:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us restrict ourselves to the case in which @xmath . We will assume
that @xmath behaves for large @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. It is easy to check that this
type of behavior is consistent only when the exponent @xmath or, in
other words, when @xmath grows at least as a linear function of @xmath
when @xmath .

We will also characterize the different solutions by the asymptotic
value of the squashing function @xmath , which determines the
deformation of the internal manifold in the UV. Let us denote

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows from ( 3.3.29 ) that the asymptotic value of the squashing
function and that of the profile function are closely related. Actually,
this relation depends on whether the exponent @xmath in ( 3.3.31 ) is
strictly greater or equal to one. Indeed, plugging the asymptotic
behavior ( 3.3.31 ) in ( 3.3.29 ) one immediately proves that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This result indicates that we have to study separately the cases @xmath
and @xmath . As we show in the next two subsections these two different
asymptotics correspond to two qualitatively different types of
solutions.

##### The asymptotic @xmath cone

Let us assume that the master function behaves as in ( 3.3.31 ) for some
@xmath . By plugging this asymptotic form in the master equation (
3.3.25 ) and keeping the leading terms as @xmath , one readily verifies
that the coefficient @xmath is not constrained and that the exponent
@xmath takes the value:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, it follows from ( 3.3.33 ) that the asymptotic squashing is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us evaluate the asymptotic form of all the functions of the metric.
From ( 3.3.26 ), we get, at leading order:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant of integration. Moreover, since @xmath , the
asymptotic value of the function @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now evaluate the warp factor @xmath from ( 3.3.27 ). Clearly, we
have to compute the integral:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which vanishes when @xmath . Therefore, by choosing the constant @xmath
in ( 3.3.27 ) to be non-vanishing we can neglect the integral ( 3.3.38 )
and, since @xmath , then the warp factor @xmath becomes also a constant
when @xmath . To clarify the nature of the asymptotic metric, let us
change variables, from @xmath to a new radial variable @xmath , defined
as @xmath . Then, after some constant rescalings of the coordinates the
metric becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The metric ( 3.3.40 ) is a Ricci flat cone with @xmath holonomy, whose
principal orbits at fixed @xmath are @xmath manifolds with a squashed
Einstein metric. In the asymptotic region of large @xmath the line
element ( 3.3.40 ) coincides with the metric of the resolved Ricci flat
cone found in [ 141 ] , which was constructed from the bundle of
self-dual two-forms over @xmath and is topologically @xmath (see [ 142 ]
for applications of this manifold to the study of the dynamics of
M-theory).

##### The asymptotic @xmath metric

Let us now explore the second possibility for the exponent @xmath in (
3.3.31 ), namely @xmath . In this case the coefficient @xmath cannot be
arbitrary. Indeed, by analyzing the master equation as @xmath we find
that @xmath and @xmath must be related as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, @xmath should be related to the asymptotic squashing
@xmath as in ( 3.3.33 ), which we now write as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By plugging ( 3.3.42 ) into ( 3.3.41 ) we arrive at the following
quadratic relation between @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using this equation we can re-express @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, we can solve ( 3.3.43 ) for @xmath and obtain the following
two possible asymptotic squashings in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, there are two possible branches in this case, corresponding to the
two signs in ( 3.3.45 ). In this chapter we will only consider the
@xmath case, since this is the one which has the same asymptotics as the
ABJM solution when there are no D6-brane sources. Indeed, ( 3.3.45 )
gives @xmath when @xmath , which means that the internal manifold in the
deep UV is just the un-squashed @xmath (when @xmath there are no
D6-brane sources in the UV, see ( 3.3.20 )).

Let us now study in detail the asymptotic metric in the UV corresponding
to the @xmath squashing @xmath (which from now on we simply denote as
@xmath ). By substituting @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.3.26 ) and performing
the integral, we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant of integration. Using ( 3.3.42 ) this
expression can be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The remaining functions of the metric can be found in a similar way. We
get for @xmath and @xmath the following asymptotic expressions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us write the above expressions in terms of the original @xmath
variable, which can be related to @xmath by integrating the equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For large @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the functions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath can be written in terms
of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of the asymptotic values @xmath and @xmath , @xmath can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using these results we find that the asymptotic metric takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have rescaled the Minkowski coordinates as @xmath . The metric
( 3.3.55 ) corresponds to the product of @xmath space with radius @xmath
and a squashed @xmath . The parameter @xmath will play an important role
in the following. Its interpretation is rather clear from ( 3.3.55 ): it
represents the relative squashing of the @xmath part of the asymptotic
metric with respect to the @xmath part.

It is now straightforward to show that in the UV the dilaton reaches a
constant value @xmath , related to @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the RR four-form approaches the value:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the volume element of @xmath .

Interestingly, when the profile function @xmath is constant and equal to
@xmath , the metric, dilaton, and forms written above solve the BPS
equations not only in the UV, but also in the full domain of the
holographic coordinate. Equivalently, @xmath is an exact solution to the
master equation ( 3.3.25 ) if @xmath is constant and equal to @xmath and
@xmath is given by ( 3.3.42 ). Actually, when @xmath one can check that
@xmath and the asymptotic background becomes the ABJM solution ( @xmath
for this case). Moreover, when @xmath the background corresponds ¹ ¹ 1
Notice that the expression for @xmath written in ( 3.3.48 ) is
equivalent to the one obtained in [ 76 ] , namely:

@xmath

In order to check this equivalence it is convenient to use the following
relation between @xmath and @xmath : @xmath to the one found in [ 76 ]
for the ABJM model with unquenched massless flavors, if one identifies
@xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the number of flavors.

The main objective of this chapter is the construction of solutions
which interpolate between the @xmath ABJM background in the IR and the
@xmath asymptotics with @xmath in the UV. Equivalently, we are looking
for backgrounds such that the squashing function @xmath varies from the
value @xmath when @xmath to @xmath for @xmath . These backgrounds
naturally correspond to gravity duals of Chern-Simons matter models with
massive unquenched flavors. In the next section we present a
one-parameter family of analytic unflavored solutions which coincide
with the ABJM background in the deep IR and that have a squashing
function @xmath which grows as we move towards the UV. In sections 3.5
and 3.6 we show that these running solutions can be used to construct
the gravity duals to massive flavor that we are looking for.

### 3.4 The unflavored system

In this section we will consider the particular case in which the
profile is @xmath . In this case @xmath and there are no flavor sources.
It turns out that one can find a particular analytic solution of the BPS
system written in appendix 3.A.1 . This solution was found in [ 76 ] in
a power series expansion around the IR. Amazingly, this series can be
summed exactly and a closed analytic form can be written for all
functions. Let us first write them in the coordinate @xmath . The
functions @xmath and @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant. For @xmath this solution is ABJM without
flavor ( i.e. , @xmath with fluxes), while for @xmath it is a running
background which reduces to ABJM in the IR, @xmath . The squashing
function @xmath can be immediately obtained from ( 3.4.58 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath the squashing function @xmath interpolates between the ABJM
value @xmath in the IR and the UV value:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The warp factor for this solution is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.4.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant which has to be fixed by adjusting the
behavior of the metric in the UV. Finally, the dilaton can be related to
the warp factor as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now re-express this running analytic solution in terms of the
variable @xmath , related to @xmath by ( 3.3.22 ), which in the present
case becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation can be easily integrated:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant of integration which parameterizes the
freedom from passing to the @xmath variable. By solving ( 3.4.64 ) for
@xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to write the functions @xmath and @xmath in terms
of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.4.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the squashing function is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The warp factor @xmath in terms of the @xmath variable is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (3.4.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By choosing appropriately the constant @xmath in ( 3.4.68 ) this running
solution behaves as the @xmath -cone in the UV region @xmath . The
dilaton as a function of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Working in the variable @xmath , it is very interesting to find the
function @xmath . For the solution described above, @xmath can be found
by plugging the different functions in the definition ( 3.3.24 ). We
find:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can readily check that the function written in ( 3.4.70 ) solves the
master equation ( 3.3.25 ) for @xmath . For large @xmath , the function
@xmath behaves as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which corresponds to an exponent @xmath in ( 3.3.31 ). This is
consistent with the asymptotic value @xmath of the squashing found
above.

Let us finally point out that we have checked explicitly that the
geometry discussed in this section is free of curvature singularities.

### 3.5 Interpolating solutions

Let us now construct solutions to the BPS equations which interpolate
between an IR region in which there are no D6-brane sources ( i.e. ,
with @xmath ) and a UV region in which @xmath and, therefore, the
Bianchi identity of @xmath is violated. In the @xmath variable the
profile @xmath will be such that @xmath for @xmath , while @xmath for
@xmath . In the region @xmath our interpolating solutions will reduce to
the unflavored running solution of section 3.4 for some value of the
constant @xmath . In order to match this solution with the one in the
region @xmath it is convenient to work in the @xmath coordinate ( 3.4.64
). The point @xmath will correspond to some @xmath . Notice, however,
that we have some freedom in performing the @xmath change of variables.
This freedom is parameterized by the constant @xmath in ( 3.4.64 ). We
will fix this freedom by requiring that @xmath , i.e. , that the
transition between the unflavored and flavored region takes place at the
point @xmath . Then, ( 3.4.64 ) immediately implies that @xmath is given
in terms of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will use ( 3.5.72 ) to eliminate the constant @xmath in favor of
@xmath and @xmath . Actually, if we define @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

then @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this running solution the squashing factor @xmath is equal to one in
the deep IR at @xmath . When @xmath the function @xmath grows
monotonically until it reaches a certain value @xmath at @xmath , which
is related to the parameter @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the region @xmath we have to solve the master equation ( 3.3.25 )
with @xmath and initial conditions given by the values of @xmath and
@xmath attained by the unflavored running solution at @xmath . These
values depend on the parameter @xmath . They can be straightforwardly
found by taking @xmath in the function ( 3.4.70 ) and in its derivative.
We find:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.76)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now write the different functions of these interpolating
solutions in the two regions @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath we have to
rewrite ( 3.4.66 ) after eliminating the constant @xmath by using (
3.5.74 ) (which implies that @xmath ). For the functions @xmath , @xmath
, and the dilaton @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.5.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the function written in ( 3.4.68 ) for @xmath . By using
the general equations of section 3.3 , the solution for @xmath can be
written in terms of @xmath , which can be obtained by numerical
integration of the master equation with initial conditions ( 3.5.76 ).
This defines a solution in the full range of @xmath for every @xmath and
@xmath . Notice that ( 3.3.26 ), ( 3.3.27 ), and ( 3.3.28 ) contain
arbitrary multiplicative constants, which we will fix by imposing
continuity of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath at @xmath . We get for @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.5.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The warp factor @xmath for @xmath is given by ( 3.3.27 ), where the
integration constant @xmath is related to the constant @xmath of (
3.4.68 ) by the following matching condition at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For a given profile function @xmath , the solution described above
depends on the parameter @xmath , which determines @xmath for @xmath
through ( 3.4.70 ) and sets the initial conditions ( 3.5.76 ) needed to
integrate the master equation in the @xmath region. The solution @xmath
obtained numerically in this way grows generically as @xmath for large
@xmath which, according to our analysis in section 3.3.1 , gives rise to
the geometry of the @xmath -cone in the UV. We are, actually, interested
in obtaining solutions with the @xmath asymptotics discussed in section
3.3.1 , for a set of profiles that correspond to flavor D6-branes with a
non-zero quark mass. In order to get these geometries we have to
fine-tune the parameter @xmath to some precise value which depends on
the number of flavors. This analysis is presented in the next section.

### 3.6 Massive flavor

We now apply the formalism developed so far to find supergravity
backgrounds representing massive flavors in ABJM. These solutions will
depend on a deformation parameter @xmath , related to the total number
of flavors @xmath and the Chern-Simons level @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the factor @xmath is introduced for convenience and @xmath is just
@xmath with @xmath being the ’t Hooft coupling. The profile @xmath ,
which corresponds to a set of smeared flavor D6-branes ending at @xmath
, has been found in [ 76 ] . The main technique employed in [ 76 ] was
the comparison between the smeared brane action for the distribution of
flavor branes and the action for a fiducial embedding in a background of
the type studied here. This fiducial embedding was determined by using
kappa symmetry. With our present conventions, ² ² 2 The variable @xmath
used in section 8 of [ 76 ] is related to @xmath by @xmath . assuming as
above that @xmath corresponds to @xmath , the function @xmath is given
by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function. It follows from ( 3.6.81 )
that the asymptotic value @xmath of the profile is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We want to find interpolating solutions of the type studied in section
3.5 which have the AdS asymptotic behavior in the UV corresponding to
the value of @xmath written in ( 3.6.82 ). These solutions have an
asymptotic squashing (corresponding to @xmath in ( 3.3.45 )) given in
terms of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows from ( 3.6.83 ) that the asymptotic squashing @xmath grows
with the deformation parameter @xmath . Indeed, @xmath for @xmath ,
whereas for @xmath the squashing reaches its maximum value: @xmath . By
using the relation between @xmath and @xmath (eq. ( 3.3.48 )) we also
conclude that @xmath when @xmath .

To find the solution for @xmath we have to solve numerically the BPS
system in this region. The most efficient way to proceed is by looking
at the master equation for @xmath with the initial conditions ( 3.5.76
). For a generic value of @xmath the numerical solution either gives
rise to negative values of @xmath (which is unphysical for @xmath , see
the definition ( 3.3.24 )) or behaves in the UV as @xmath , which
corresponds to the @xmath -cone asymptotics with @xmath discussed in
section 3.3.1 . Only when @xmath is fine-tuned to some particular value
(which depends on @xmath ) we get in the UV that @xmath and that @xmath
is given by ( 3.6.83 ). To determine this critical value of @xmath we
have to perform a numerical shooting for every value of @xmath . In what
follows we understand that @xmath is the function of the deformation
parameter which results of this shooting. The function @xmath is plotted
in Fig. 3.1 , where we notice that @xmath and, therefore, we recover the
unflavored ABJM background when the deformation parameter vanishes. In
the opposite limit @xmath , the function @xmath grows as @xmath .
Actually, @xmath can be accurately represented by a function of the
type:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath . In Fig. 3.2 we plot the function @xmath and the
squashing function @xmath for some selected values of @xmath .

Interestingly, we have found an analytical solution for small flavor
parameter @xmath . We present the analytical solution up to order @xmath
in appendix 3.A.7 . Along this chapter, we will present the results
using the numerical solution, which is valid for any value of @xmath ,
but a similar analysis could be done analytically for small flavor.

From the function @xmath we can obtain @xmath and @xmath by performing
the integrals in ( 3.5.78 ). The whole metric is determined if @xmath is
known. We will compute @xmath from ( 3.3.27 ) with @xmath , which
corresponds to requiring that @xmath in the UV. In the @xmath region the
warp factor @xmath is given by ( 3.4.68 ), with the constant @xmath
determined by the matching condition ( 3.5.79 ). The limit on the
left-hand side of ( 3.5.79 ) can be determined explicitly from ( 3.4.68
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereas @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that @xmath (the value of the @xmath coordinate at the tip of the
flavor branes) appears as a free parameter in eqs. ( 3.5.77 ) and (
3.5.78 ). Actually, @xmath can be easily related to the mass @xmath of
the quarks which deform the geometry. Indeed, by computing the
Nambu-Goto action of a fundamental string stretching along the
holographic direction between @xmath and @xmath at fixed value of all
the other spacelike coordinates in the geometry ( 3.3.16 ), we get that
@xmath and @xmath are linearly related as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Regge slope (which we will take to be equal to one
in most of our equations). Equivalently, we can relate @xmath to the
constant @xmath appearing in the solution in the @xmath region:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the function obtained by the shooting and only depends
on the deformation parameter @xmath .

We have computed the curvature invariants for the flavored metric and we
have checked that the geometry is regular both in the IR ( @xmath ) and
UV ( @xmath ). However, the curvature has a finite discontinuity at
@xmath , as can be directly concluded by inspecting Einstein’s equations
(see appendix 3.A.1 ). This “threshold” singularity occurs at the point
where the sources are added and could be avoided by smoothing the
introduction of brane sources with an additional smearing (see the last
article in [ 143 ] for a similar analysis in other background).

#### 3.6.1 UV asymptotics

The full background in the @xmath region must be found by numerical
integration and shooting, as described above. However, in the UV region
@xmath one can solve the master equation ( 3.3.25 ) in power series for
large @xmath . Indeed, one can find a solution where @xmath is
represented as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficients @xmath can be obtained recursively. The
coefficient @xmath of the leading term was written in ( 3.3.42 ). The
next two coefficients are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that a linear behavior of @xmath with @xmath corresponds to a
conformal @xmath background, whereas the deviations from conformality
are encoded in the non-linear corrections.

From the result written above one can immediately obtain the asymptotic
behavior of the squashing function for large @xmath . Indeed, let us use
in the expression of @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath (eq. ( 3.3.29
)) the following large @xmath expansion:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the asymptotic value of the squashing (see ( 3.6.83 ))
and @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is related to @xmath and @xmath by ( 3.3.48 ) and ( 3.6.83
). Similarly, we can find analytically the first corrections to the UV
conformal behavior. The details of these calculations are given in
appendix 3.A.2 . In this section we just present the final results.
First of all, let us define the constant @xmath (depending on the
deformation @xmath ) as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then the functions @xmath and @xmath can be expanded for large @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.6.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, the UV expansion of the warp factor @xmath and the dilaton is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.6.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with the coefficients @xmath and @xmath given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.6.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is also interesting to write the previous expansions in terms of the
@xmath variable. Again, the details are worked out in appendix 3.A.2 and
the final result is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.6.99)
                 (3.6.100)
     @xmath      (3.6.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are related
to the ones in ( 3.6.96 ) and ( 3.6.98 ) as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.6.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Recalling (see ( 3.6.87 )) that @xmath , it is clear from ( 3.6.101 )
that the deviation from conformality is controlled by the quark mass and
that the parameter @xmath determines the power of the first mass
corrections. In our holographic context this is quite natural if one
takes into account that @xmath determines the dimension @xmath of the
quark-antiquark bilinear operator in the theory with dynamical quarks (
@xmath , see [ 76 , 137 ] and below). The coefficients of these mass
corrections depend on the constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath (whose analytic expressions we know from eqs. ( 3.6.96 ) and (
3.6.98 )), as well as on the constant @xmath , which must be determined
numerically. @xmath as a function of the deformation parameter is
plotted in Fig. 3.3 . From this plot we notice that @xmath interpolates
continuously between @xmath for @xmath and some positive constant value
at large @xmath .

### 3.7 Holographic entanglement entropy

In a quantum theory the entanglement entropy @xmath between a spatial
region @xmath and its complement is defined as the entropy seen by an
observer in @xmath which has no access to the degrees of freedom living
in the complement of @xmath . It can be computed as the von Neumann
entropy for the reduced density matrix obtained by taking the trace over
the degrees of freedom of the complement of @xmath . For quantum field
theories admitting a gravity dual, Ryu and Takayanagi proposed in [ 96 ]
a simple prescription to compute @xmath from the corresponding
supergravity background. The holographic entanglement entropy between
@xmath and its complement in the proposal of [ 96 ] is obtained by
finding the eight-dimensional spatial surface @xmath whose boundary
coincides with the boundary of @xmath and is such that it minimizes the
functional:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the @xmath ’s are a system of eight coordinates of @xmath , @xmath
is the ten-dimensional Newton constant ( @xmath in our units) and @xmath
is the induced metric on @xmath in the string frame. The functional
@xmath evaluated on the minimal surface @xmath is precisely the
entanglement entropy between the region @xmath and its complement.

In our case @xmath is a region of the @xmath -plane. In this section we
will study in detail the case in which the region @xmath is a disk with
radius @xmath as depicted in Fig. 3.4 (see appendix 3.A.3 for the
analysis of the entanglement entropy of a strip in the @xmath -plane).
In order to deal with the disk case it is convenient to choose a system
of polar coordinates for the plane:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We will describe the eight-dimensional fixed time surface @xmath by a
function @xmath with @xmath being the radial coordinate of the boundary
plane and @xmath the holographic coordinate of the bulk. The
eight-dimensional induced metric is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath denotes the derivative with respect to the holographic
coordinate @xmath and the function @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us next define a new function @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, the entanglement entropy as a function of @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the volume of the internal manifold and @xmath is the
@xmath coordinate of the turning point of @xmath . The Euler-Lagrange
equation of motion derived from the entropy functional ( 3.7.108 ) is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that the integrand in ( 3.7.108 ) depends on the independent
variable @xmath and we therefore cannot find a first-integral for the
second-order differential equation ( 3.7.109 ). Thus, we have to deal
directly with ( 3.7.109 ), which must be solved with the following
boundary conditions at the tip of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice also that the radius @xmath of the disk at the boundary is just
the UV limit of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The integral ( 3.7.108 ) for @xmath diverges due to the contribution of
the UV region of large @xmath . In order to characterize this divergence
and to extract the finite part, let us study the behavior of the
integrand in ( 3.7.108 ) as @xmath . From the definitions of the
functions @xmath and @xmath and the UV behavior written in ( 3.6.95 )
and ( 3.6.97 ), it follows that @xmath and @xmath display a power-like
behavior as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.113)
  -- -------- -- -----------

By taking the @xmath values of @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath )
inside the integral in ( 3.7.108 ), as well as the asymptotic form of
@xmath and @xmath (eq. ( 3.7.112 )), we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the maximum value of the holographic coordinate @xmath
(which acts as a UV regulator). After performing the integral, we
obtain:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.115)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us rewrite ( 3.7.115 ) in terms of physically relevant quantities.
First of all, we notice that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.116)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the free energy ³ ³ 3 When the field theory is
formulated on a three-sphere, its free energy is defined as:

@xmath (3.7.117)

where @xmath is the Euclidean path integral. For a CFT whose gravity
dual is of the form @xmath , the holographic calculation of @xmath gives
[ 144 ] :

@xmath (3.7.118)

where @xmath is the @xmath radius and @xmath is the effective
four-dimensional Newton’s constant. of the massless flavored theory on
the three-sphere:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.119)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the function @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.120)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In ( 3.7.120 ) @xmath and @xmath is written in ( 3.6.83 ) in terms of
the deformation parameter. For the unflavored ABJM theory the free
energy is given by ( 3.7.119 ) with @xmath . This formula displays the
famous @xmath behavior. The function @xmath encodes the corrections to
this behavior due to the smeared massless flavors. It was first computed
in [ 76 ] , where it was shown that it is remarkably close to the value
found in [ 80 ] for localized embeddings. The function @xmath is a
monotonic function of the deformation parameter which grows as @xmath
for large values of @xmath .

Using ( 3.7.116 ) and the fact that, in the deep UV region of large
@xmath , @xmath (see ( 3.A.53 )), we can rewrite @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.121)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We notice in ( 3.7.121 ) that @xmath diverges linearly with @xmath . The
coefficient of this divergent term is linear in the disk radius @xmath
and in @xmath . The latter is a measure of the effective number of
degrees of freedom of the flavored theory in the high-energy UV limit in
which the flavors can be considered to be massless. The appearance of
@xmath in ( 3.7.121 ) is thus quite natural.

The separation between the divergent and finite parts of @xmath has
ambiguities. In order to solve these ambiguities, Liu and Mezei proposed
in [ 138 ] to consider the function @xmath , defined as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.122)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It was argued in [ 138 ] that @xmath is finite and a monotonic function
of @xmath which provides a measure of the number of degrees of freedom
of a system at a scale @xmath .

In a 3d CFT the entanglement entropy for a disk of radius @xmath has the
form:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.123)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a UV divergent non-universal part and @xmath is finite
and independent of @xmath . It was shown in [ 145 ] that the finite part
@xmath is equal to the free energy of the theory on @xmath . Notice that
@xmath when @xmath is of the form ( 3.7.123 ). Therefore, for a
conformal fixed point the function @xmath is constant and equal to the
free energy on the three-sphere of the corresponding CFT. In the next
subsection we will obtain the UV and IR values of @xmath and we will
show that they coincide with the free energies on @xmath of the massless
flavored theory and of the unflavored ABJM model, respectively.

It is interesting to point out that the entanglement entropy of a disk
in a (2+1)-dimensional system at large @xmath can also be written in the
form ( 3.7.123 ), if one neglects terms which vanish in the @xmath
limit. In a gapped system, the @xmath -independent part @xmath of the
right-hand side of ( 3.7.123 ) is the so-called topological entanglement
entropy [ 146 , 147 ] and serves to characterize topologically ordered
many-body states which contain non-local entanglement due to non-local
correlations (examples of such states are the Laughlin states of the
fractional quantum Hall effect or the @xmath fractionalized states). The
topological entanglement entropy @xmath is related to the so-called
total quantum dimension @xmath of the system as @xmath . In general
@xmath (or @xmath ) signals a topological order (for example @xmath for
the quantum Hall system with filling fraction @xmath , with @xmath an
odd integer).

For our system, we can obtain the embedding function @xmath by numerical
integration of the differential equation ( 3.7.109 ) and then we can get
the functions @xmath and @xmath by using ( 3.7.108 ) and the definition
of @xmath in ( 3.7.122 ). The results for the latter are plotted as a
function of @xmath in Fig. 3.5 . We notice that @xmath is a
monotonically decreasing function that interpolates smoothly between the
two limiting values at @xmath and @xmath . The UV limit of @xmath at
small @xmath equals the free energy ( 3.7.119 ) of the massless flavored
theory, whereas for large @xmath the function @xmath approaches the free
energy of the unflavored ABJM model ( i.e. , the value in ( 3.7.119 )
with @xmath ). This behavior is in agreement with the general
expectation in [ 138 , 140 ] and corresponds to a smooth decoupling of
the massive flavors as their mass @xmath is increased continuously.

We will study the UV and IR limits of @xmath analytically in the next
two subsections. Some details of these calculations are deferred to
appendix 3.A.3 , where we also study the entanglement entropy for the
strip geometry.

#### 3.7.1 UV limit

In order to study the UV limit of the disk entanglement entropy, let us
write the Euler-Lagrange equation ( 3.7.109 ) when @xmath and @xmath are
given by their asymptotic values ( 3.7.112 ):

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.124)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This equation can be solved exactly by the function:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.125)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which clearly satisfies the initial conditions ( 3.7.110 ), with the
following value of the turning point coordinate @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.126)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Since @xmath , it follows from ( 3.7.126 ) that @xmath . Therefore, the
turning point coordinate @xmath is large if @xmath or @xmath are small.
In this case it would be justified to use the asymptotic UV values of
the functions @xmath and @xmath , since the minimal surface @xmath lies
entirely in the large @xmath region. Notice also that ( 3.7.125 ) can be
written in terms of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.127)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In order to calculate the entropy in this UV limit it is very useful to
use the following relation satisfied by the function @xmath written in (
3.7.125 ):

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.128)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Making use of ( 3.7.128 ) in ( 3.7.108 ), we find the following
expression for the entanglement entropy:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.129)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The divergent part of this integral is due to its upper limit and is
just given by ( 3.7.121 ). The finite part of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.130)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where, in the second step, we used ( 3.7.126 ) to eliminate @xmath .
Notice that the right-hand side of ( 3.7.130 ) is independent of the
disk radius @xmath . Moreover, by using ( 3.7.113 ) and ( 3.7.116 ) we
find that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.131)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore, in this UV limit, the dependence on @xmath of the
entanglement entropy takes the form ( 3.7.123 ), where @xmath is just
the free energy of the massless flavored theory on the three-sphere. It
follows trivially from this form of @xmath and the definition ( 3.7.122
) that @xmath and therefore:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.132)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It is also possible to compute analytically the first correction to (
3.7.132 ) for small values of @xmath . The details of this calculation
are given in appendix 3.A.3 . Here we will just present the final
result, which can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.133)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a constant coefficient depending on the deformation
parameter (see eq. ( 3.A.82 )) and @xmath is the dimension of the
quark-antiquark bilinear operator in the UV flavored theory (this
dimension was found in section 7.3 of [ 76 ] from the analysis of the
fluctuations of the flavor branes, see also [ 137 ] ). It is interesting
to point out that ( 3.7.133 ) is the behavior expected [ 138 ] for a
flow caused by a source deformation with a relevant operator of
dimension @xmath . Moreover, one can verify that @xmath is negative for
all values of the deformation parameter @xmath , which confirms that the
UV fixed point is a local maximum of @xmath .

#### 3.7.2 IR limit

Let us now analyze the IR limit of the entanglement entropy @xmath and
of the function @xmath . This limit occurs when the 8d surface @xmath
penetrates deeply into the geometry and, therefore, when the coordinate
@xmath of the turning point is small ( @xmath ). This happens when
either the disk radius @xmath or the quark mass @xmath are large.
Looking at the embedding function @xmath obtained by numerical
integration of ( 3.7.109 ) one notices that, when @xmath is small, the
function @xmath is approximately constant and equal to its asymptotic
value @xmath in the region @xmath (see Fig. 3.6 ). Therefore, the
dependence of @xmath on the holographic coordinate @xmath is determined
by the integral of ( 3.7.109 ) in the region @xmath , where the
background is given by the unflavored running solution. Actually, when
@xmath is small it is a good approximation to consider ( 3.7.109 ) for
the unflavored background, i.e. , when the constants @xmath , with
@xmath fixed and given by @xmath . In this limit the different functions
of the background are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.134)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows that @xmath and @xmath , as defined in ( 3.7.106 ) and (
3.7.107 ), are then given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.135)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where, in the last step, we have defined the constants @xmath and @xmath
, and @xmath is the constant dilaton corresponding to the unflavored
background,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.136)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now elaborate on the expression ( 3.7.108 ) for the entanglement
entropy. We split the integration interval of the variable @xmath as
@xmath and take into account that one can put @xmath in the region
@xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.137)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The second term in ( 3.7.137 ) is linear in @xmath and will not
contribute to @xmath . To evaluate the first integral in ( 3.7.137 ) we
must determine the embedding function @xmath by integrating ( 3.7.109 )
when @xmath and @xmath are given by their IR values ( 3.7.135 ). The
resulting equation is just the same as ( 3.7.124 ) with @xmath and
@xmath substituted by @xmath and @xmath and @xmath . Then, the function
@xmath can be written as in ( 3.7.125 ),

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.138)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a constant. By requiring that @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.139)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows from ( 3.7.138 ) that the coordinate @xmath of the turning
point is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.140)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that when @xmath (and @xmath ) or @xmath is large one can neglect
the @xmath in the denominator of ( 3.7.140 ) and then @xmath , which is
a small number. Moreover, by using the explicit form ( 3.7.138 ) of
@xmath in this IR region, we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.141)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the first integral in ( 3.7.137 ) can be explicitly evaluated:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.142)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that, at leading order @xmath and, thus, the first term in (
3.7.142 ) does not contribute to @xmath . Then, the IR limit of @xmath
is determined by the second contribution in ( 3.7.142 ) and given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.143)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Moreover, from the values of @xmath and @xmath written in ( 3.7.135 ) we
get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.144)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the free energy on the three-sphere of the unflavored
ABJM theory:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.145)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows that the IR limit of the @xmath function is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.7.146)
  -- -------- -- -----------

as expected in the deep IR limit in which the flavors become infinitely
massive and can therefore be integrated out. The corrections to the
result ( 3.7.146 ) near the IR fixed point could be obtained by applying
the techniques recently introduced in [ 148 ] . We will not attempt to
perform this calculation here.

### 3.8 Wilson loops and the quark-antiquark potential

In this section we evaluate the expectation values of the Wilson loop
and the corresponding quark-antiquark potential for our model. We will
employ the standard holographic prescription of refs. [ 132 , 149 ] , in
which one considers a fundamental string hanging from the UV boundary.
Then, one computes the regularized Nambu-Goto action for this
configuration, from which the @xmath potential energy can be extracted.
In a theory with dynamical flavors this potential energy contains
information about the screening of external charges by the virtual
quarks popping out from the vacuum. In our case we expect having a
non-trivial flow connecting two conformal behaviors as we move from the
UV regime of small @xmath separation (in units of the quark mass @xmath
) to the IR regime of large @xmath distance. We will verify below that
this expectation is indeed fulfilled by our model.

Let us denote by @xmath the Minkowski coordinates and consider a
fundamental string for which we take @xmath as its worldvolume
coordinates. If the embedding is characterized by a function @xmath ,
with @xmath being the holographic coordinate, the induced metric is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.147)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath denotes the derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath .
The Nambu-Goto lagrangian density takes the form:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.148)
  -- -------- -- -----------

As @xmath does not depend on @xmath , we have the following conservation
law:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.149)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore, if @xmath denotes the turning point of the string, we have
the first integral of the equations of motion:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.150)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . Then @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.151)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the two signs correspond to the two branches of the hanging
string. The @xmath separation @xmath in the @xmath direction is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.152)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In order to compute the potential energy of the @xmath pair, let us
evaluate the on-shell action. By using the first integral ( 3.8.150 ) it
is straightforward to check that the on-shell value of the Nambu-Goto
lagrangian density is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.153)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore, the on-shell action becomes:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.154)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . The integral ( 3.8.154 ) is divergent and must be
regularized as in [ 132 , 149 ] by subtracting the action of two
straight strings stretched between the origin and the UV boundary, which
corresponds to subtracting the (infinite) quark masses in the static
limit. After applying this procedure we arrive at the following
expression for the regulated on-shell action:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.155)
  -- -------- -- -----------

from which we get the @xmath potential energy:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.156)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the @xmath coordinate of the turning point:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.157)
  -- -------- -- -----------

From ( 3.8.152 ) and ( 3.8.156 ) we have computed numerically the
potential energy @xmath as a function of the @xmath distance @xmath .
The result of this numerical calculation is shown in Fig. 3.7 . As
mentioned above, we expect to have a potential energy which interpolates
between the two conformal behaviors with @xmath at the UV and IR.
Actually, in the limiting cases in which @xmath is small or large the
function @xmath can be calculated analytically (see appendix 3.A.4 ). In
both cases @xmath , but with different coefficients. Indeed, in the UV
limit @xmath , the @xmath potential can be approximated as: ⁴ ⁴ 4 Also,
the first correction to the UV conformal behavior ( 3.8.158 ) is
computed in appendix 3.A.4 .

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.158)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the ’t Hooft coupling and @xmath is the so-called
screening function:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.159)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that @xmath encodes all the dependence of the right-hand side of
( 3.8.158 ) on the number of flavors. Actually, the potential ( 3.8.158
) is just the one corresponding to having massless flavors (which was
first computed for this model in [ 76 ] ), as expected in the
high-energy UV regime in which all masses can be effectively neglected.
The function @xmath characterizes the corrections of the static @xmath
potential due to the screening produced by the unquenched massless
flavors ( @xmath for @xmath , whereas @xmath decreases as @xmath for
@xmath large). In Fig. 3.7 we compare the leading UV result ( 3.8.158 )
with the numerical calculation in the small @xmath region.

Similarly, one can compute analytically the @xmath potential in the
region where @xmath is large. At leading order the result is (see
appendix 3.A.4 ):

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.8.160)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In Fig. 3.7 we compare the analytic expression ( 3.8.160 ) to the
numerical result in the large distance region. Notice that the
difference between ( 3.8.158 ) and ( 3.8.160 ) is that the screening
function @xmath is absent in ( 3.8.160 ). Therefore, in the deep IR the
flavor effects on the @xmath potential disappear, which is consistent
with the intuition that massive flavors are integrated out at low
energies.

### 3.9 Two-point functions of high dimension operators

In this section we study the two-point functions of bulk operators with
high dimension. The form of these correlators can be obtained
semiclassically by analyzing the geodesics of massive particles in the
dual geometry [ 150 , 151 , 152 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.161)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the mass of the bulk field dual to @xmath . We are
assuming that @xmath is large in order to apply a saddle point
approximation in the calculation of the correlator. In ( 3.9.161 )
@xmath is a regularized length along a spacetime geodesic connecting the
boundary points @xmath and @xmath . To find these geodesics, let us
write the Einstein frame metric of our geometry as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.162)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, the induced metric for a curve parametrized as @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.163)
  -- -------- -- -----------

with @xmath and @xmath is the function defined in ( 3.7.106 ).
Therefore, the action of a particle of mass @xmath whose worldline is
the curve @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.164)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The geodesics we are looking for are solutions of the Euler-Lagrange
equation derived from the action ( 3.9.164 ). This equation has a first
integral which is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.165)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath being the @xmath coordinate of the
turning point, i.e. , the minimum value of @xmath along the geodesic. It
follows from ( 3.9.165 ) that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.166)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The spatial separation @xmath of the two points in the correlator can be
obtained by integrating @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.167)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Moreover, the length of the geodesic can be obtained by integrating
@xmath over the worldline,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.168)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This integral is divergent. In order to regularize it, let us study the
UV behavior of the integrand. For large @xmath , the functions @xmath
and @xmath behave as in ( 3.6.97 ) and ( 3.7.112 ), respectively. Thus,
at leading order for large @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.169)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In the UV region @xmath , the integrand in @xmath behaves approximately
as @xmath , which produces a logarithmic UV divergence when it is
integrated. In order to tackle this divergence, let us regulate the
integral by extending it up to some cutoff @xmath and renormalize the
geodesic length by subtracting the divergent part. Accordingly, we
define the renormalized geodesic length as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.170)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a constant to be fixed by choosing a suitable
normalization condition for the correlator.

Our background interpolates between two limiting @xmath geometries, at
the UV and IR, with different radii. For an equal-time two-point
function @xmath the UV and IR limits should correspond to the cases in
which @xmath is small or large, respectively. At the two endpoints of
the flow, the theory is conformal invariant and the two-point correlator
behaves as a power law in @xmath . We can use this fact to fix the
normalization constant @xmath in ( 3.9.170 ). Actually, we will assume
that the field @xmath is canonically normalized in the short-distance
@xmath limit and, therefore, the UV limit of the two-point correlator
is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.171)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the @xmath and @xmath factors have been introduced for
convenience. In ( 3.9.171 ) @xmath is the conformal dimension of the
operator @xmath in the UV CFT, which for the dual of a bulk field of
mass @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.172)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we have taken into account that @xmath is large and that @xmath is
the @xmath radius of the UV massless flavored geometry in the Einstein
frame. It is shown in appendix 3.A.5 that, indeed, the correlators
derived from ( 3.9.170 ) display the canonical form ( 3.9.171 ) if the
constant @xmath is chosen appropriately (see ( 3.A.140 )). In appendix
3.A.5 we have also computed the first deviation from the conformal UV
behavior. In this case the numerator on the right-hand side of ( 3.9.171
) is not one but a function @xmath such that @xmath . We show in
appendix 3.A.5 that @xmath for small @xmath . The explicit form of the
first correction to the non-conformal behavior can be computed
analytically from the mass corrections of section 3.6.1 and appendix
3.A.2 (see eqs. ( 3.A.151 )-( 3.A.153 )).

When the distance @xmath is large the theory reaches a new conformal
point. Accordingly, the two-point function should behave again as a
power law. Notice, however, that the conformal dimension @xmath in the
IR of an operator dual to a particle of mass @xmath is different from
the UV value ( 3.9.172 ). Indeed, in the IR the conformal dimension
@xmath for an operator @xmath of mass @xmath is the one corresponding to
the unflavored ABJM theory,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.173)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are given, respectively, in ( 3.2.3 ) and (
3.2.4 ). Actually, one can check that @xmath and that @xmath for large
values of the deformation parameter @xmath . The calculation of the
two-point function in the IR limit of large @xmath is performed in
detail in appendix 3.A.5 , with the result:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.9.174)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a constant whose analytic expression is written in (
3.A.167 ). Notice that @xmath due to our choice of the constant @xmath
in ( 3.9.170 ), which corresponds to imposing the canonical
normalization ( 3.9.171 ) to the two-point function in the UV regime.

The results obtained by the numerical evaluation of the integral (
3.9.170 ) interpolate smoothly between the conformal behaviors ( 3.9.171
) and ( 3.9.174 ). This is shown in Fig. 3.8 , where we plot @xmath as a
function of @xmath . For small values of @xmath the curve asymptotes to
the ratio @xmath of conformal dimensions, in agreement with ( 3.9.171 ),
whereas for large @xmath we recover the IR behavior ( 3.9.174 ).

### 3.10 Meson spectrum

Let us now test the flow encoded in our geometry by analyzing the mass
spectrum of @xmath bound states. We will loosely refer to these bound
states as mesons, although our background is not confining and quarkonia
would be a more appropriate name for them. To carry out our analysis we
will introduce additional external quarks, with a mass @xmath not
necessarily equal to the mass @xmath of the quarks which backreact on
the geometry. To distinguish between the two types of flavors we will
call valence quarks to the additional ones, whereas the unquenched
@xmath dynamical flavors of the geometry will be referred to as sea
quarks. The ratio @xmath of the masses of the two types of quarks will
be an important quantity in what follows. Indeed, @xmath is the natural
parameter for the holographic renormalization group trajectory. When
@xmath is large (small) we expect to reach a UV (IR) conformal fixed
point, whereas for intermediate values of this mass ratio the theory
should flow in such a way that the screening effects produced by the sea
quarks decrease as we move towards the IR.

Within the context of the gauge/gravity duality, the valence quarks can
be introduced by adding an additional flavor D6-brane, which will be
treated as a probe in the backreacted geometry. The mesonic mass
spectrum can be obtained from the normalizable fluctuations of the
D6-brane probe. The way in which the D6-brane probe is embedded in the
ten-dimensional geometry preserving the supersymmetry of the background
can be determined by using kappa symmetry. For fixed values of the
Minkowski and holographic coordinates, the D6-brane extends over a cycle
inside the @xmath which has two directions along the @xmath base and one
direction along the @xmath fiber. In order to specify further this
configuration, let us parameterize the @xmath left invariant one-forms
@xmath of the four-sphere metric ( 3.2.7 ) in terms of three angles
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10.175)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Then, our D6-brane probe will be
extended along the Minkowski directions and embedded in the geometry in
such a way that the angles @xmath and @xmath are constant and that the
angle @xmath of the @xmath fiber depends on the holographic variable
@xmath . The pullbacks (denoted by a hat) of the left-invariant @xmath
one-forms ( 3.10.175 ) are @xmath and @xmath . The kappa symmetric
configurations are those for which the function @xmath satisfies the
first order BPS equation [ 76 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.176)
  -- -------- -- ------------

which can be integrated as:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.177)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Here @xmath is the minimum value of the variable @xmath for the
embedding, i.e. , the value of @xmath for the tip of the brane. This
minimum value of the coordinate @xmath for the embedding is related to
the mass @xmath of the valence quarks introduced by the flavor probe.
Indeed, by computing the Nambu-Goto action of a fundamental string
stretched in the holographic direction between @xmath and @xmath we
obtain @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.178)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In the following we will take the Regge slope @xmath . Moreover, to
simplify the description of the embedding, let us introduce the angular
coordinate @xmath , defined as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.179)
  -- -------- -- ------------

and let us define new angles @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.180)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the angle in ( 3.2.9 ). One can check that the ranges of
the new angular variables are @xmath , @xmath . We will take the
following set of worldvolume coordinates for the D6-brane:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.181)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, it is straightforward to verify that the induced metric on the
D6-brane worldvolume takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.182)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We will restrict ourselves to study a particular set of fluctuations of
the D6-brane probe, namely the fluctuations of the worldvolume gauge
field @xmath . The equation for these fluctuations is:

  -- -- -- ------------
           (3.10.183)
  -- -- -- ------------

where @xmath is the induced metric ( 3.10.182 ). More concretely, we
will study this equation for the following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.184)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is a constant polarization vector and @xmath denote the
components along the angular directions. These modes are dual to the
vector mesons of the theory, with @xmath being the momentum of the meson
( @xmath , with @xmath being the mass of the meson). The non-vanishing
components of the field strength @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.185)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The fluctuation equation ( 3.10.183 ) is trivially satisfied when @xmath
, whereas for @xmath it is satisfied if the polarization is transverse:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.186)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Moreover, by taking @xmath in ( 3.10.183 ) we arrive at the following
differential equation for the radial function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.187)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The mass levels correspond to the values of @xmath for which there are
normalizable solutions of ( 3.10.187 ). They can be obtained numerically
by the shooting technique. One gets in this way a discrete spectrum
depending on a quantization number @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ). The
numerical results for the first three levels are shown in Fig. 3.9 as
functions of the mass ratio @xmath . One notices in these results that
the meson masses increase as we move from the IR ( @xmath ) to the UV (
@xmath ). This non-trivial flow is due to the vacuum polarization
effects of the sea quarks, which are enhanced as we move towards the UV
and the sea quarks become effectively massless. This is the expected
behavior of bound state masses for a theory in the Coulomb phase, since
the screening effects reduce effectively the strength of the
quark-antiquark force.

One can get a very accurate description of the flow by applying the WKB
approximation. The detailed calculation is presented in appendix 3.A.6 .
The WKB formula for the mass spectrum is:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.188)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the following integral:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.189)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The WKB mass levels ( 3.10.188 ) are compared with those obtained by the
shooting technique in Fig. 3.9 . We notice from these plots that the
estimate ( 3.10.188 ) describes rather well the numerical results along
the flow. Moreover, we can use the UV and IR limits of the functions
@xmath and @xmath to obtain the asymptotic form of the WKB spectrum at
the endpoints of the flow. This analysis is performed in detail in
appendix 3.A.6 (see eqs. ( 3.A.182 ) and ( 3.A.188 )). As expected, in
the deep IR the mass levels coincide with those of the unflavored ABJM
model. In this latter model the mass spectrum of vector mesons can be
computed analytically since the fluctuation equation can be solved in
terms of hypergeometric functions [ 153 , 154 ] . When @xmath the meson
masses coincide with those obtained for the massless flavored model of [
76 ] .

We can use the WKB formulas ( 3.A.182 ) and ( 3.A.188 ) for the spectrum
at the endpoints of the renormalization group flow to estimate the
variation generated in the meson masses by changing the sea quark mass
@xmath and switching on and off gradually the screening effects. It is
interesting to point out that, within the WKB approximation, the ratio
of these masses only depends on the number of flavors, and is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (3.10.190)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the screening function defined in ( 3.8.159 ). As
expected, when @xmath the right-hand side of ( 3.10.190 ) is equal to
one, i.e. , there is no variation of the masses along the flow. On the
contrary, when @xmath the UV/IR mass ratio in ( 3.10.190 ) is always
greater than one, which means that the masses grow as we move towards
the UV and the screening effects become more important. In appendix
3.A.6 we have expanded ( 3.10.190 ) for low values of the deformation
parameter @xmath (see ( 3.A.189 )). Moreover, for large @xmath the UV/IR
mass ratio grows as @xmath (see ( 3.A.190 ) for the explicit formula).

### 3.11 Discussion

In this chapter we obtained a holographic dual to Chern-Simons matter
theory with unquenched flavor in the strongly-coupled Veneziano limit.
The flavor degrees of freedom were added by a set of D6-branes smeared
along the internal directions, which backreacted on the geometry by
squashing it, while preserving @xmath supersymmetry. We considered
massive flavors and found a non-trivial holographic renormalization
group flow connecting two scale-invariant fixed points: the unflavored
ABJM theory at the IR and the massless flavored model at the UV.

The quark mass @xmath played an important role as a control parameter of
the solution. By increasing @xmath our solutions became closer to the
unflavored ABJM model and we smoothly connected the unquenched flavored
model to the ABJM theory without fundamentals. After this soft
introduction of flavor no pathological behavior was found. Indeed, our
backgrounds had good IR and UV behaviors, contrary to what happens to
other models with unquenched flavor [ 74 ] . This made the ABJM model
especially adequate to analyze the effects of unquenched fundamental
matter in a holographic setup.

We analyzed different flavor effects in our model. In general, the
screening effects due to loops of fundamentals were controlled by the
relative value of the quark mass @xmath with respect to the
characteristic length scale @xmath of the observable. If @xmath was
small, which corresponds to the UV regime, the flavor effects were
important, whereas they were suppressed if @xmath is large, i.e. , at
the IR. Among the different observables that we analyzed, the
holographic entanglement entropy for a disk was specially appropriate
since it counts precisely the effective number of degrees of freedom
which are relevant at the length scale given by the radius of the disk.
By using the refined entanglement entropy @xmath introduced in [ 138 ] ,
we explicitly obtained the running of @xmath and verified the reduction
of the number of degrees at the IR that was mentioned above. The other
observables studied also supported this picture.

The results obtained in this chapter can be generalized in several
directions. One possible generalization could be the construction of a
black hole for the unquenched massive flavor. Such a background could
serve to study the meson melting phase transition which occurs when the
tip of the brane approaches the horizon. This system was studied in [
137 ] , in the case in which the massive flavors are quenched and the
corresponding flavor brane is a probe. Another possibility would be
trying to find a gravity dual of a theory in which the sum of the two
Chern-Simons levels is non-vanishing. According to [ 63 ] we should find
a flavored solution of type IIA supergravity with non-zero Romans mass.

Moreover, to make contact with any condensed matter physics system, one
is forced to consider non-vanishing components of the gauge field in the
background or at the probe level. As an initial step in this direction,
in chapter 4 we consider a probe D6-brane with electric field, magnetic
field, charge density, currents and internal flux, in the ABJM
background, and a gravity dual of a fractional quantum Hall system is
constructed. Also, by adding only charge density to the probe D6-brane
worldvolume, quantum phase transitions are studied in chapter 5 . A
possible generalization of the studies performed in chapters 4 and 5
would be to consider the same probe D6-brane configuration with
worldvolume gauge fields embedded in the background obtained in this
chapter. A further generalization, and much more complicated, would be
to consider the backreaction of the D6-branes with worldvolume gauge
fields turned on.

## Appendix 3.A Appendices

#### 3.a.1 BPS equations

In this appendix we will derive the master equation ( 3.3.25 ), as well
as the equations that allow to construct the metric and dilaton from the
master function @xmath ( i.e. , ( 3.3.26 ), ( 3.3.27 ), and ( 3.3.28 )).

Let us begin by writing the BPS equations that guarantee the
preservation of @xmath SUSY. They can be written in terms of the
function @xmath introduced in [ 76 ] , which is defined as the following
combination of the dilaton and the warp factor:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, it was proved in [ 76 ] that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are
solutions to the following system of first-order differential equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, the warp factor @xmath can be recovered from @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath through:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an integration constant. Given @xmath and @xmath , the
dilaton @xmath is obtained from ( 3.A.1 ). The function @xmath of the RR
four-form can be related to the other functions of the background by
using ( 3.3.21 ). Alternatively, @xmath can be obtained from the BPS
system as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In terms of the @xmath variable defined in ( 3.3.22 ), the BPS system (
3.A.2 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to reduce this system, let us define as in [ 76 ] the functions
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, one can easily show that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the system:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas @xmath can be obtained from @xmath and @xmath by integrating the
equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us next define the master function @xmath as in ( 3.3.24 ). One
immediately verifies that, in terms of the functions @xmath and @xmath ,
this definition is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.A.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By computing the derivative of ( 3.A.9 ) and using the BPS system (
3.A.7 ), one can easily prove that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From ( 3.A.10 ) one immediately finds:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the prime denotes derivative with respect to @xmath . Moreover,
from the BPS system we can calculate the derivative of @xmath and write
the result as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Plugging ( 3.A.11 ) into ( 3.A.12 ), we arrive at the following
second-order equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be straightforwardly shown to be equivalent to the master
equation ( 3.3.25 ).

Let us see now how one can reconstruct the full solution from the
knowledge of the function @xmath . First of all, we notice that from the
expression of @xmath in ( 3.A.9 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By combining this expression with ( 3.A.11 ) we obtain @xmath and @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By noticing that @xmath we arrive at the representation of the squashing
function @xmath written in ( 3.3.29 ). Moreover, by using this result in
( 3.A.8 ), we obtain the differential equation satisfied by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which allows to obtain @xmath once @xmath is known. The result of this
integration is just the expression written in ( 3.3.26 ). Moreover,
taking into account the expression of the squashing factor @xmath we get
precisely the expression of @xmath written in ( 3.3.26 ).

Let us now compute @xmath by using @xmath and ( 3.A.11 ). We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, after using ( 3.3.26 ), we arrive at:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By using this result and ( 3.3.26 ) in ( 3.A.3 ), we get that the warp
factor can be written as in ( 3.3.27 ). The expression ( 3.3.28 ) for
the dilaton is just a consequence of the definition of @xmath in ( 3.A.1
) and of ( 3.A.18 ).

##### Equations of motion

Let us now verify that the first-order BPS system ( 3.A.2 ) implies the
second-order equations of motion for the different fields. Let us work
in Einstein frame and write the total action as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the action of type IIA supergravity is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the source contribution is the DBI+WZ action for the set of smeared
D6-branes. Let us write this last action as in [ 76 ] . First of all, we
introduce a charge distribution three-form @xmath . Then, the DBI+WZ
action is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the DBI term has been written in terms of the so-called
calibration form (denoted by @xmath ), whose pullback to the worldvolume
is equal to the induced volume form for the supersymmetric embeddings.
The expression of @xmath has been written in [ 76 ] . Let us reproduce
it here for completeness:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath ’s are the one-forms of the basis corresponding to the
forms ( 3.2.11 ) and ( 3.2.14 ) (see [ 76 ] for further details). Notice
that the equation of motion for @xmath derived from ( 3.A.19 ) is just
@xmath . Therefore, the @xmath for our ansatz can be read from the
right-hand side of ( 3.3.20 ).

The Maxwell equations for the forms @xmath and @xmath derived from (
3.A.19 ) are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the equation for the dilaton is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can verify that, for our ansatz, ( 3.A.23 ) and ( 3.A.24 ) are a
consequence of the BPS equations ( 3.A.2 ). To carry out this
verification we need to know the radial derivatives of @xmath and @xmath
(which are not written in ( 3.A.2 )). The derivative of @xmath can be
related to the derivative of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The radial derivative of the dilaton can be put in terms of the
derivative of @xmath and @xmath by using ( 3.A.1 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It remains to check Einstein equations, which read:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the stress-energy tensor for the flavor branes, which is
defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to write the explicit expression for @xmath derived from the
definition ( 3.A.28 ), let us introduce the following operation for any
two @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, by computing explicitly the derivative of the action ( 3.A.21 )
with respect to the metric, one can check that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is now straightforward to compute explicitly the different components
of this tensor. Written in flat components in the basis in which the
calibration form has the form ( 3.A.22 ), we get: ⁵ ⁵ 5 As compared to
the case studied in [ 76 ] , now we have terms proportional to @xmath
that were absent for massless flavors.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.A.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By using these values one can verify that, the Einstein equations (
3.A.27 ) are indeed satisfied as a consequence of the first-order system
( 3.A.2 ). Notice that, for the massive flavored background of section
3.6 , @xmath (and, therefore, @xmath ) has a finite discontinuity at
@xmath . It follows from ( 3.A.27 ) that the Ricci tensor @xmath has
also a finite jump at this point.

#### 3.a.2 Mass corrections in the UV

In this appendix we show how to obtain the first corrections to the
conformal behavior of the metric and the dilaton from the UV asymptotic
expansion of the master function @xmath written in ( 3.6.89 ). First we
notice that the ratio @xmath can be written in terms of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

leading to a useful identity:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Inserting the unit written in this way in the integral appearing in the
expression of @xmath in ( 3.5.78 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the following constant integral (depending on @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using these results, we can immediately write:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The function @xmath can be easily expanded for large @xmath . At first
non-trivial order we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using that, for large @xmath ,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.A.39)
  -- -- -- ----------

we easily arrive at the expansion of @xmath written in ( 3.6.95 ). Let
us next find the large @xmath expansion for @xmath , which can be
obtained by using the expansion of @xmath and @xmath in the relation
@xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficient @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to demonstrate that ( 3.A.41 ) coincides with the
value of @xmath written in ( 3.6.96 ).

Let us now analyze the UV expansion of @xmath . First, we evaluate the
integral appearing in ( 3.3.27 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By combining this result with the expansions ( 3.6.95 ) and ( 3.6.91 )
we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the UV AdS radius ( 3.3.54 ) and the coefficient @xmath
is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can readily check that the prefactor in ( 3.A.43 ) coincides with
the one in ( 3.6.97 ) and that the coefficient @xmath written in (
3.A.44 ) is the same as the one in ( 3.6.98 ).

Let us now obtain the UV expansion of the function @xmath , defined in (
3.A.1 ), which can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The UV expansion of this expression is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficient @xmath can be written in terms of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By using the value of @xmath in ( 3.6.96 ), we can find a more explicit
expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us next obtain the expansion of @xmath by using @xmath . We get:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.A.49)
  -- -- -- ----------

where the prefactor is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and can be shown to be the same as the asymptotic value of the dilaton
written in ( 3.3.56 ). The coefficient @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has been written more explicitly in ( 3.6.98 ).

Finally, let us write these results in terms of the @xmath variable. At
next-to-leading order, the relation between the coordinates @xmath and
@xmath is obtained by integrating the differential equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This relation can be inverted as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By plugging the expansion ( 3.A.54 ) into ( 3.6.95 ) and ( 3.6.97 ) one
easily arrives at ( 3.6.101 ) and ( 3.6.102 ).

#### 3.a.3 More on the entanglement entropy

Let us study analytically the entanglement entropy and the @xmath
function near the UV fixed point at @xmath . We shall represent @xmath
in terms of a local functional @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will use this representation to compute the first-order variation of
@xmath when the background functions @xmath and @xmath and the embedding
function @xmath are varied around their UV values:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the function written in ( 3.7.125 ).
At first order the corrections @xmath and @xmath can be parameterized
as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The constants @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.A.57 ) can be related to the ones
characterizing the behavior of the background at the UV:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is useful to define the following combination of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The perturbation of the profile @xmath is the correction, at
first-order, of the solution of ( 3.7.109 ) which satisfies @xmath . By
computing the first variation of ( 3.7.109 ) we find that @xmath is
solution to the following second-order inhomogeneous differential
equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
                 
                 (3.A.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

More explicitly, after using the UV values of @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , the differential equation ( 3.A.60 ) can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us next calculate the first-order variation of the entanglement
entropy. From ( 3.A.55 ) we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the explicit form of @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and it follows that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the lower limit contribution to the last term in ( 3.A.62 )
vanishes. Let us now study the contribution to this term of the @xmath
limit. We will now check that @xmath decreases as @xmath in such a way
that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, the upper limit of the last term in ( 3.A.62 ) also vanishes. To
prove ( 3.A.66 ) we have to integrate the differential equation ( 3.A.61
) and extract the large @xmath behavior of the solution. Amazingly, (
3.A.61 ) can be integrated analytically. Its general solution can be
written as the sum of two terms:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a particular solution of the equation and @xmath is a
general solution of the homogeneous part of ( 3.A.61 ). We have found a
particular solution @xmath , which can be written in terms of
hypergeometric functions and is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are only interested in the behavior of @xmath for large @xmath . It
is straightforward to prove that, for large @xmath , @xmath can be
approximated as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, as @xmath for large @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The general solution of the homogeneous differential equation which
vanishes as @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. For large @xmath the function in
( 3.A.71 ) behaves as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, eq. ( 3.A.66 ) holds and the last term in ( 3.A.62 ) does not
contribute to @xmath , as claimed above. Let us now calculate the other
two contributions. First of all, the term due to the variation of @xmath
is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, after using ( 3.7.126 ) to eliminate @xmath , becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.76)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, after eliminating @xmath , gives:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the constant defined in ( 3.A.59 ). Using the definition
( 3.7.122 ), it follows that the change in the function @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking into account ( 3.7.113 ) and ( 3.7.116 ) this expression can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, we can write the @xmath function near the UV fixed point as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the constant coefficient @xmath can be read from ( 3.A.80 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 3.A.81 ) coincides with ( 3.7.133 ) when the former is written in
terms of the dimension @xmath of the quark-antiquark bilinear operator
in the massless flavored theory. Moreover, as @xmath is always positive,
the sign of @xmath depends on the sign of the coefficient @xmath . We
have checked that @xmath is negative for all values of the deformation
parameter @xmath , in agreement with the expectation that @xmath is
maximized at the UV fixed point.

##### Entanglement entropy on the strip

Let us now evaluate the entanglement entropy in the case in which the
region @xmath is the strip @xmath of width @xmath in the @xmath -plane
(see Fig. 3.10 ). In this case we consider a constant time surface
@xmath , whose embedding in the ten-dimensional space is determined by a
function @xmath . The induced metric on @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the derivative of the holographic coordinate @xmath
with respect to the cartesian coordinate @xmath and the function @xmath
has been defined in ( 3.7.106 ). The entropy functional for the strip of
width @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the volume of the internal manifold, whose value was
given after ( 3.7.108 ), @xmath is the function defined in ( 3.7.107 ),
and @xmath is the length of the strip. As the integrand in @xmath does
not depend on the coordinate @xmath , the corresponding Euler-Lagrange
equation admits the following first integral:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or, more explicitly,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is the holographic coordinate of the turning
point. It follows from this last expression that @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the width of the strip is given by the integral:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the entropy @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integral ( 3.A.89 ) for @xmath is divergent in the UV. Indeed, from
the behavior of the functions @xmath and @xmath at large @xmath (eqs. (
3.7.112 ) and ( 3.7.113 )), it follows that, when @xmath , the integrand
in ( 3.A.89 ) behaves as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath therefore diverges as @xmath , where @xmath is the upper
limit of the integral, which can be regarded as a UV cutoff. More
explicitly, one can rearrange the integral in ( 3.A.89 ) as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the divergent term is explicitly shown. We now define the rescaled
functions @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the finite term in @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas the divergent term takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have evaluated numerically the right-hand side of ( 3.A.93 ) as a
function of the strip width @xmath . The result is displayed in Fig.
3.11 . One notices from these results that @xmath is negative and
diverges as @xmath for small @xmath , where @xmath is a constant.
Actually, for small @xmath the surface @xmath is in the UV region of the
geometry and one can evaluate the entropy analytically in this limit.
This is the subject of the next subsection, where we show that the
constant @xmath is proportional to the free energy on the three-sphere
of the massless flavored theory (see eq. ( 3.A.105 ) below). The
analytical UV calculation is compared to the numerical results in Fig.
3.11 .

##### UV limit

In order to study the UV limit it is convenient to change variables in
the integrals ( 3.A.88 ) and ( 3.A.93 ). Let us introduce a new variable
@xmath , related to @xmath as @xmath . Then, @xmath can be represented
as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now obtain the expressions of @xmath and @xmath in the limit in
which @xmath . In this case the argument of the functions @xmath and
@xmath in the integrals is always large and one can take @xmath , @xmath
. We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the following integral:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 3.A.98 ) in ( 3.A.97 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.A.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similarly, the finite part of the entropy is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the integral:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.101)
  -- -- -- -----------

Plugging ( 3.A.101 ) into ( 3.A.100 ), we arrive at:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Eliminating @xmath in favor of @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

However, from the definition of @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.7.113 ) it
follows that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the free energy of the massless flavored theory on the
three sphere (see ( 3.7.119 )). It follows that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which is the result we were looking for. From the comparison of Fig.
3.11 to the numerical results we conclude that ( 3.A.105 ) is a good
description of the entropy in the small @xmath region. Notice that the
coefficient of @xmath on the right-hand side of ( 3.A.105 ) is
determined by the free energy of the massless flavored theory. This is
expected on general grounds in the UV region, since the masses of the
quarks can be neglected in the high-energy regime.

##### IR limit

Let us now evaluate @xmath in the regime in which @xmath is large. In
this case the surface @xmath penetrates deeply in the bulk and its tip
is near the origin ( i.e. , @xmath is small). We will proceed as in
section 3.7.2 and split the interval @xmath in the integrals ( 3.A.88 )
and ( 3.A.93 ) as @xmath , where @xmath is considered small enough so
that one can use the unflavored background functions in the interval
@xmath . Moreover, when @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and one can neglect
the terms containing @xmath in the integrals. Then, the strip width
@xmath can be approximated as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

When, @xmath and @xmath we can extend the first integral in ( 3.A.106 )
up to @xmath and neglect the contribution of the second integral (which
is proportional to @xmath ). Then, @xmath can be approximately written
as:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.107)
  -- -- -- -----------

and, as expected, a small value of @xmath leads to a large value of
@xmath . Similarly, we can perform the same type of manipulations in the
expression ( 3.A.93 ) of @xmath . We find:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Performing the first integral in ( 3.A.108 ) in the limit @xmath for
fixed @xmath , we arrive at:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.109)
  -- -- -- -----------

where @xmath is the constant:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We can now eliminate in ( 3.A.109 ) the turning point @xmath in favor of
@xmath by using ( 3.A.107 ). We find:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we have written the result in terms of @xmath . The first term in
( 3.A.111 ) is just the strip entanglement entropy for the unflavored
theory. The constant @xmath represents the asymptotic value of @xmath as
@xmath . One can approximate this constant by taking @xmath in ( 3.A.110
). After using ( 3.7.116 ) to relate @xmath and @xmath to @xmath , we
arrive at:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

#### 3.a.4 Asymptotic quark-antiquark potential

The purpose of this appendix is to obtain the analytic expressions for
the @xmath potential energy in the UV and IR limit. We will start by
calculating the leading and subleading UV potential.

##### UV potential

Let us find the approximate value of the @xmath potential in the case in
which the distance @xmath is small and the hanging string only explores
the UV of the geometry. This is equivalent to considering the limit in
which the turning point @xmath is large. It is then more convenient to
perform a change of variables in the integrals ( 3.8.152 ) and ( 3.8.156
) and write @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.113)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

We want to compute the leading value of @xmath , as well as the first
deviation from the conformal behavior. For this reason we will make use
of the asymptotic expressions of the different functions of the metric
derived in section 3.6.1 .

Let us begin by computing the integrals in ( 3.A.113 ) in a power series
expansion for large @xmath . From ( 3.6.95 ) and ( 3.6.97 ) we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are given in ( 3.6.96 ) and ( 3.6.98 ) and
@xmath has been defined in ( 3.6.94 ). Then, it follows that:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.115)
  -- -- -- -----------

Using these results we obtain the following expansion of the @xmath
separation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.116)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the integral ( 3.A.98 ), and @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
                 (3.A.117)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the following ratio of Euler Gamma functions:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.118)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Using these results we arrive at:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.119)
  -- -- -- -----------

Let us now compute the @xmath energy at leading and next-to-leading
order in the UV (large @xmath or small @xmath ). First, we need the
expansion:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.120)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, it is easy to verify that @xmath can be expanded as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.121)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the integral ( 3.A.101 ) and @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.122)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To compute @xmath we also need @xmath as a function of @xmath . It
follows from ( 3.A.53 ) that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.123)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, one can check that:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.124)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us write @xmath as a function of the @xmath separation @xmath . For
this purpose we have to eliminate @xmath in favor of @xmath . By
inverting ( 3.A.119 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.125)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Using this result, we get the following dependence of @xmath with the
distance @xmath

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.126)
  -- -- -- -----------

where we have represented this relation in terms of the rescaled
quantities @xmath and @xmath . Notice that the leading term (the first
term on the right-hand side of ( 3.A.126 )) is given by the potential of
the massless flavored background, as expected.

##### IR potential

We now estimate the @xmath potential for large separations. In this case
we will content ourselves to compute the leading order contribution. For
large @xmath separations the hanging fundamental string penetrates
deeply in the geometry, which is equivalent to saying that @xmath is
small. We will follow an approach similar to the one in sections 3.7.2
and 3.A.3 and we will split the @xmath interval of the integrals (
3.8.152 ) and ( 3.8.156 ) as @xmath with @xmath being small. We will
assume that @xmath is small enough so that the background functions are
well approximated by ( 3.7.134 ) in the interval @xmath . Then, we can
estimate the integral ( 3.8.152 ) for @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.127)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the unflavored @xmath radius ( 3.2.3 ) and we have used
the fact that for @xmath we have that @xmath when @xmath and, therefore,
in this interval we can neglect @xmath in the square root of the
denominator of the integrand in ( 3.8.152 ). The first integral in (
3.A.127 ) can be done analytically, yielding the result:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.128)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For small @xmath , at leading order, we get from ( 3.A.128 ):

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.129)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which confirms that @xmath is large when @xmath is small. We can make
similar approximations in the integral ( 3.8.156 ) with the result:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.130)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Performing explicitly the integral, we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.131)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which, at leading order, becomes:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.132)
  -- -- -- -----------

Eliminating @xmath by using ( 3.A.129 ) we arrive at the estimate (
3.8.160 ).

#### 3.a.5 Asymptotics of the two-point functions

In this appendix we study the renormalized geodesic distance, and the
corresponding two-point function of bulk operators with large conformal
dimensions, in the UV limit of small separation @xmath and in the IR
regime in which @xmath . In the former case, our study will serve to fix
the normalization constant @xmath of ( 3.9.170 ), as well as the
analytic form of the correlator near the UV fixed point. This is the
case we analyze first in the next subsection.

##### UV behavior

We will now obtain the form of the correlator in the UV limit in which
the turning point @xmath is large and the geodesic does not penetrate
much into the bulk of the geometry. In order to study this limiting
case, it is convenient to perform a change of variables in the integral
( 3.9.167 ) and write it as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.133)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Similarly, the renormalized geodesic length can be represented as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.134)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . When @xmath is large the argument of the functions in the
integrals ( 3.A.133 ) and ( 3.A.134 ) is large and one can use the UV
asymptotic expressions ( 3.6.97 ) and ( 3.7.112 ). Therefore, we can
approximate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.135)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The integral in ( 3.A.135 ) just gives @xmath and, thus, we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.136)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows that, when @xmath is large @xmath is small. Thus the UV limit
we are studying corresponds to @xmath . Similarly, the UV limit of
@xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.137)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The integral in this last equation is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.138)
  -- -------- -- -----------

On the other hand, the UV conformal dimension @xmath of a bulk field of
mass @xmath has been written in ( 3.9.172 ). Taking these facts into
account, we can write:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.139)
  -- -------- -- -----------

If the operator @xmath is canonically normalized in the short-distance
@xmath limit, the coefficient in the numerator of ( 3.A.139 ) should be
chosen to be one as in ( 3.9.171 ). Therefore, it follows that the
constant @xmath is fixed to

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.140)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now evaluate the first correction of the two-point correlator
around the UV fixed point. Let us expand the function @xmath for large
@xmath as in ( 3.A.56 ) and ( 3.A.57 ). Then, for large @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.141)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . Similarly:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.142)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows that the separation @xmath of the two points of the
correlator can be written as:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.143)
  -- -- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the following integrals:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.144)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us invert the relation ( 3.A.143 ) at first order and write @xmath
as a function of @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.145)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a constant given by:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.146)
  -- -- -- -----------

Moreover, the renormalized geodesic length at first order takes the
form:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.147)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the integral defined in ( 3.A.144 ) and @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.148)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now write @xmath in terms of @xmath . By using ( 3.A.145 ) to
eliminate @xmath in terms of @xmath we arrive at:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.149)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the coefficient @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.150)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore, the two-point correlator near the UV fixed point can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.151)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the function @xmath parameterizes the deviation from the conformal
behavior near the UV fixed point and is given, at first order, by

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.152)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the new constant @xmath is just:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.153)
  -- -------- -- -----------

##### IR behavior

Let us now analyze the two-point functions in the IR limit, which
corresponds to taking @xmath . In this case the geodesic penetrates
deeply in the bulk. We will proceed similarly to what we did in section
3.A.4 for the @xmath potential in the IR. Accordingly, we split the
interval @xmath as @xmath for some @xmath small. Near the turning point,
i.e. , when @xmath , we can approximate the functions @xmath and @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.154)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the AdS radius of the unflavored ABJM solution and
@xmath and @xmath are the parameters of the unflavored running solution.
It follows that, in this IR region, the function @xmath behaves as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.155)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Moreover, the dilaton @xmath is constant and given by the ABJM value
@xmath written in ( 3.2.4 ).

Suppose that we have chosen some @xmath . Let us then split the integral
( 3.9.167 ) for @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.156)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath should be sent to @xmath at the end of the calculation. Let
us approximate the first integral in ( 3.A.156 ) by taking the functions
in the deep IR, as in ( 3.A.154 ). We obtain:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.157)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For small @xmath we can approximate this integral as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.158)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To evaluate @xmath approximately we notice that @xmath and, therefore,
it is large for @xmath . Then, we can neglect the one inside the square
root and approximate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.159)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Since the integral in ( 3.A.159 ) converges and is independent of @xmath
, it follows that @xmath and, therefore, it can be neglected with
respect to the large value of @xmath . Thus, we take

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.160)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that it follows from this equation that @xmath is large if @xmath
is small, as it should be in the IR regime. Let us next perform a
similar analysis for the renormalized geodesic length @xmath . First, we
consider the IR integral:

  -- -------- -- -----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.161)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To evaluate the UV integral we proceed similarly to what we did for the
integral for @xmath and, in this case, we only keep the one inside the
square root. Then:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.162)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.A.163)
  -- -- -- -----------

where @xmath is the conformal dimension of the operator @xmath in the IR
conformal point, given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.164)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which is just ( 3.9.173 ). Let us next define the following quantities:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.165)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, after using the relation ( 3.A.160 ) to eliminate @xmath in favor
of @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.166)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, it follows that the IR limit @xmath of the two-point correlator is
as in ( 3.9.174 ), where @xmath is the normalization constant given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.167)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It turns out that, in the expression of the integrals in ( 3.A.165 ) we
can take the limits @xmath (in @xmath ) and @xmath (in @xmath ).
Actually, it can be easily proved that, after taking these limits,
@xmath and @xmath can be recast as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.168)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Notice that the form of the correlator is consistent with the fact that
the conformal symmetry is recovered in the IR limit @xmath . The
non-canonical normalization factor @xmath is due to the fact that we
chose to renormalize @xmath in such a way that the correlator is
canonically normalized in the opposite UV limit @xmath .

#### 3.a.6 WKB mass levels

Consider the following differential equation for the function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.169)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath takes values in the range @xmath , @xmath is the mass
parameter and @xmath and @xmath are two arbitrary functions that are
independent of @xmath . We will assume that near @xmath these functions
behave as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.A.170)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are constants. By a of
suitable change of variables, the differential equation ( 3.A.169 ) can
be converted into a Schrödinger equation, which only admits a discrete
set of normalizable solutions for a set of values of @xmath
parameterized by a quantum number @xmath . The mass levels for large
values of @xmath can be evaluated in the WKB approximation [ 155 ] ,
with the result:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.171)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the integral:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.172)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In our case, the functions @xmath and @xmath which correspond to the
fluctuation equation ( 3.10.187 ) are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.173)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and it is immediate to extract the exponents @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.174)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Using these values one immediately finds that the WKB mass levels are
given by ( 3.10.188 ).

##### Asymptotic spectra

Let us now evaluate analytically the meson spectrum in the two limiting
cases in which the sea quark mass @xmath is small or large compared to
the valence quark mass @xmath . Notice that @xmath (see eqs. ( 3.5.77 )
and ( 3.5.78 )). Therefore, ( 3.10.178 ) can be regarded as giving the
relation @xmath as a function of @xmath .

Let us consider first the case in which @xmath is small. Clearly, when
@xmath for fixed @xmath one necessarily must have @xmath large.
Actually, integrating ( 3.10.178 ) by using the asymptotic expression of
@xmath written in ( 3.6.95 ) at leading order, we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.175)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the constant @xmath has been defined in ( 3.6.94 ). Thus, when
@xmath for fixed @xmath the @xmath coordinate of the tip of the flavor
brane increases as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.176)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now evaluate @xmath when @xmath is large. First of all we perform
a change of variables in the integral ( 3.10.189 ) and rewrite @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.177)
  -- -------- -- -----------

If @xmath is large, the argument of the functions @xmath and @xmath in (
3.A.177 ) is large and we can use their UV asymptotic expressions (
3.6.95 ) and ( 3.6.97 ) to evaluate them. At leading order, we get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.178)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the value of the @xmath coordinate corresponding to
@xmath . Therefore, for @xmath for fixed @xmath the @xmath is
approximately

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.179)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Using this result in ( 3.10.188 ) we get the following mass spectrum in
the UV limit:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.180)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us write this result in terms of physical quantities. Recall that
@xmath and @xmath are related to the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath and to the
valence quark mass @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.181)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the screening function written in ( 3.8.159 ). Then, for
large @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.182)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we have taken @xmath . Eq. ( 3.A.182 ) is exactly the WKB mass
spectrum one gets for vector mesons in the massless flavored background
of ref. [ 76 ] .

Let us next consider the limit in which @xmath is small. Since @xmath ,
it follows from ( 3.10.178 ) that @xmath must be small. Actually, we can
estimate the relation between @xmath and @xmath by extracting from (
3.4.66 ) and ( 3.5.77 ) the approximate expression of @xmath near @xmath
. We get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.183)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.184)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and it follows that, for fixed @xmath and large @xmath , the coordinate
of the tip of the flavor brane behaves as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.185)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Thus, for large sea quark mass @xmath and thus the dynamics of the
fluctuating flavor brane is dominated by the IR, where the solution
corresponds to the running solution of the unflavored system. In this
case, we have at leading order near @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.186)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where, in the last step, we used that @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.187)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and, after evaluating the integral ( 3.A.177 ) and writing the result in
terms of the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath and the valence quark mass @xmath
, we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.188)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which is exactly the mass spectrum of vector mesons in the unflavored
ABJM model [ 154 ] . By combining ( 3.A.182 ) and ( 3.A.188 ) we obtain
the UV/IR mass relation written in ( 3.10.190 ). It is now
straightforward to obtain this ratio for small and large values of the
deformation parameter. Indeed, for small @xmath one can expand @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.189)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Moreover, in the opposite limit in which @xmath is very large, we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.190)
  -- -------- -- -----------

#### 3.a.7 Analytical expansion in flavor

In this appendix we will construct an analytic solution to ( 3.3.25 ) in
a power series expansion in the flavor deformation parameter @xmath . We
start by writing an ansatz for @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.191)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we cut the series at level @xmath up to which point we will write
down explicit results in the following. In ( 3.A.191 ), we chose @xmath
, such that for @xmath we recover the ABJM theory by construction.
Expanding the master equation ( 3.3.25 ) in @xmath yields, at first
order,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.192)
  -- -------- -- -----------

A general solution is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.193)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are integration constants. We wish to match with
massless flavored ABJM in the UV, so we set @xmath , because the leading
term in the UV should go as @xmath . The second constant @xmath is fixed
by demanding continuity at the boundary of the cavity, that is, at
@xmath . For that purpose, we will consider the running solution (
3.4.70 ) inside the cavity and expand it in @xmath . Recall that @xmath
depends on @xmath , for which we write an expansion:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.194)
  -- -------- -- -----------

By expanding ( 3.4.70 ) we find

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.195)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Now, imposing continuity of @xmath and its first derivative at @xmath ,
we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.196)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Thus, the exact solution to the master equation at first order in @xmath
reads:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.197)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It is straightforward to repeat the iterative procedure for higher
@xmath orders. The expression for @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.198)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and that for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.199)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.200)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.201)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.A.202)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The metric functions can then be explicitly solved for. We will write
them down in the second order of the expansion parameter @xmath . The
constants are fixed to make the functions continuous across the boundary
of the cavity @xmath corresponding to @xmath . We only present the
solutions in terms of @xmath -variable, the transformation to the
original coordinate is readily obtained through the relationship @xmath
below ( 3.A.213 ).

The squashing functions read:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.203)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.204)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The relative squashing between the spheres reads:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.205)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In order to compute @xmath outside the cavity we use expression ( 3.3.27
), and @xmath is fixed to zero. Furthermore, to match it with the
corresponding function inside the cavity ( 3.4.68 ), we impose the
matching condition ( 3.5.79 ) . This condition fixes @xmath to be:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.206)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the function @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 (3.A.207)
     @xmath      (3.A.208)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The dilaton reads:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 (3.A.209)
     @xmath      (3.A.210)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the expression for the function @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 (3.A.211)
     @xmath      (3.A.212)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In order to transform the above formulas to the canonical radial
coordinate @xmath , let us write down the relation to @xmath .
Integrating equation ( 3.3.22 ) by using ( 3.A.204 ) and fixing the
integration constant by imposing the condition @xmath , the relation
between the holographic coordinates @xmath and @xmath outside the cavity
can be computed. Expanding expression ( 3.4.65 ) in @xmath we obtain the
corresponding relation inside the cavity:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.A.213)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Finally, introducing ( 3.6.81 ) in expression ( 3.3.19 ) we obtain the
expansion for the @xmath form, and using ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 ) in
expression ( 3.3.18 ), and expanding to second order in @xmath , we
obtain the expression for the @xmath form.

## Chapter 4 Holographic fractional Hall effect

### 4.1 Introduction

Since its discovery more than thirty years ago, the QHE has been the
subject of intense research. Nevertheless, some aspects of the FQHE
involve strongly-coupled dynamics and are still not fully understood.
The holographic AdS/CFT duality has proven to be a powerful tool in the
study of quantum matter in the strongly-coupled regime, since it
provides answers to difficult field theory questions by using classical
gravitational theories in higher dimensions. Therefore, it is quite
natural to explore the possibility of constructing holographic models of
the (F)QHE and to extract properties that are very difficult to obtain
via weakly-coupled many-body field theory.

In recent years, two types of holographic models of the QHE have been
proposed. The first class consists of bottom-up models in
Einstein-Maxwell-axio-dilaton theories [ 156 , 157 , 158 , 159 , 160 ] .
These models are endowed with an @xmath duality and, as a consequence,
they capture some observed features of QH physics. However, it is very
difficult to engineer these types of models to have a mass gap; [ 161 ]
is so far the only example of a gapped model in this class.

The second approach to holographically realize the QHE makes use of
top-down D-brane constructions [ 162 , 163 , 164 ] , in which a
(2+1)-dimensional gauge theory with fermions in the fundamental
representation is modeled by a suitable D @xmath -D @xmath brane
intersection. The limit in which the D @xmath -brane is treated as a
probe in the D @xmath -brane background corresponds in the field theory
dual to the so-called quenched approximation in which loops of
fundamental fermions are neglected. In this approach, the worldvolume
theory of the probe brane encodes the physics of the fermions.
Generically, the probe brane crosses the horizon, yielding a black hole
embedding, which is dual to a gapless metallic state. The quantum Hall
state is realized holographically as a Minkowski embedding, in which the
brane ends smoothly above the black hole horizon. The distance from the
horizon at which the probe caps off determines the mass gap.

In this chapter, we want to engineer quantum Hall states in the flavored
ABJM theory. Such Hall states are only possible if parity is broken,
which can be accomplished by turning on an appropriate internal flux on
the D6-brane worldvolume. However, treating the backreaction of this
internal flux is quite challenging. For now, we will start with a single
quenched massive quark in the background of @xmath unquenched massless
quarks, a system analyzed in [ 165 , 137 ] . We then will turn on a
parity-breaking internal flux on the worldvolume of this probe D6-brane.

In the presence of this internal flux, the Wess-Zumino term of the probe
action contains the term @xmath , where @xmath is the pullback of the RR
potential one-form. In the ABJM background @xmath has only internal
components. Therefore, after integrating over the internal directions,
we are left with an axionic term @xmath along @xmath , which indeed
breaks parity and corresponds to a Chern-Simons term on the boundary.

Even in the probe limit, choosing a consistent ansatz for this internal
flux, which must also be quantized appropriately, is not obvious. We
can, however, take a cue from the ABJ model [ 62 ] , i.e. , the @xmath
Chern-Simons matter theory, which can be engineered in string theory by
adding fractional D2-branes to the ABJM setup. The corresponding gravity
dual can be obtained from the ABJM solution by turning on a flat
Neveu-Schwarz @xmath field proportional to the Kähler form of @xmath .
The pullback of this parity-breaking @xmath on a probe D6-brane can
alternately be viewed as a worldvolume gauge field flux. Inspired by
this example, we will generalize this ABJ solution into an ansatz for
the case with no background @xmath field and only a probe worldvolume
flux, but with backreacted massless flavors.

Equipped with this ansatz for the internal gauge flux, we will show
that, indeed, there are quantum Hall states in this setup. From the QH
perspective, one can regard the effects of the massless, backreacted
quarks as representing intrinsic disorder due to the quantum
fluctuations of the massive quark. We will compute the contribution of
these fluctuations to the conductivities in the form of an integral
extended in the holographic direction, from the tip of the brane to the
@xmath boundary.

Surprisingly, we will find a very special family of explicit,
supersymmetric, gapped QH solutions at zero temperature. These BPS
solutions have nonzero charge density and equal electric and magnetic
fields, and we can compute the Hall conductivity, including the effects
of quark loops, analytically.

The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In section 4.2 we
review the ABJM background with flavor at finite temperature. Then, in
section 4.3 , we consider the embedding of a probe D6-brane with
internal flux. We first present in section 4.3.1 the ansatz for the
internal components of the worldvolume gauge field that will be used
throughout the chapter and discuss the corresponding flux quantization
condition. In section 4.3.2 we generalize these results to nonvanishing
background electric and magnetic fields, as well as to nonzero charge
density and currents. We compute the corresponding longitudinal and
transverse conductivities in section 4.4 . In section 4.5 we analyze the
residual @xmath boost invariance of our system at zero temperature. An
analytic supersymmetric solution of the equations of motion at zero
temperature is presented in section 4.6 . Section 4.7 is devoted to the
analysis of quark-antiquark bound states, i.e. , mesons. In particular,
we study the effect of the broken parity on the mass spectrum. In
section 4.8 we discuss our results.

The chapter is completed with several appendices 4.A where we provide
details of our background geometry and discuss the quantization
condition of the worldvolume flux obtained by comparison with the ABJ
solution. We also include a detailed analysis of the equations of motion
of the probe and kappa symmetry. Besides, we include the equations
governing the fluctuations of the probe , where we also estimate the
meson masses using a WKB approximation.

### 4.2 The flavored ABJM black hole

In this section we will review, following [ 76 , 165 , 137 ] , the
background geometry corresponding to the ABJM model with unquenched
massless flavors in the smeared approximation at finite temperature.
Additional details of this supergravity solution are given in appendix
4.A.1 . The ten-dimensional metric, in string frame, has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the radius of curvature, @xmath is the metric of a
planar black hole in the four-dimensional Anti-de Sitter space, given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is the metric of the compact internal six-dimensional
manifold. The blackening factor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the horizon radius @xmath is related to the temperature @xmath by
@xmath . The internal metric @xmath in ( 4.2.1 ) is a deformation of the
Fubini-Study metric of @xmath , realized as an @xmath -bundle over
@xmath . Let @xmath be the standard metric for the unit round
four-sphere and let @xmath ( @xmath ) be three Cartesian coordinates
parameterizing the unit two-sphere ( @xmath ). Then, @xmath can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the components of the non-abelian one-form connection
corresponding to an @xmath instanton. In appendix 4.A.1 we give a more
explicit representation of the @xmath line element in terms of
alternative coordinates.

The parameters @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.2.4 ) are constant squashing
factors which encode the effect of the massless flavors in the
backreacted metric. Indeed, when @xmath the metric ( 4.2.4 ) is just the
canonical Fubini-Study metric of the @xmath manifold with radius @xmath
in the so-called twistor representation. In this case ( 4.2.1 ) is the
metric of the unflavored ABJM model at nonzero temperature. When the
effect of the delocalized D6-brane sources is taken into account, the
resulting metric is deformed as in ( 4.2.4 ). It was shown in [ 76 ]
that at zero temperature the particular deformation written in ( 4.2.4 )
preserves @xmath SUSY.

The parameter @xmath in ( 4.2.4 ) represents the relative squashing of
the @xmath part of the metric with respect to the @xmath part due to the
flavor, while @xmath parameterizes an internal deformation which
preserves the @xmath - @xmath split of the twistor representation of
@xmath . The explicit expressions for the coefficients @xmath and @xmath
found in [ 76 ] are given in ( 3.6.83 ) and ( 3.3.48 ) respectively,
where we drop the subindex @xmath for simplicity in the rest of the
thesis. Recall that @xmath is given by ( 3.6.80 ) and @xmath is given by
( 3.6.82 ). As functions of @xmath , the squashing parameters @xmath and
@xmath are monotonically increasing functions, which approach the values
@xmath and @xmath as @xmath . Recall that another way to encode the loop
effects of the massless sea quarks is the screening factor @xmath ,
defined in ( 3.8.159 ). Without flavors, @xmath , and as @xmath , @xmath
. The @xmath radius @xmath can then expressed in terms of @xmath and the
screening factor:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The complete solution of type IIA supergravity with sources is endowed
with RR two- and four-forms @xmath and @xmath , as well as with a
constant dilaton @xmath (whose value depends on @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath ). Their explicit expressions are given in the appendix 4.A.1 .

### 4.3 D6-brane probes with flux

We are interested in the dynamics of a massive quark holographically
dual to a probe D6-brane with internal flux in the flavored ABJM
background. The D6-brane extends along @xmath and the three Minkowski
directions and, wraps on the internal manifold a three-cycle
topologically equivalent to @xmath . This three-cycle will be
parameterized by three angles @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , and will be
characterized by an embedding function @xmath . With this embedding, the
D6-brane then has an induced metric given by (for details see appendix
4.A.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.6)
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath determines the profile of the probe
brane. Notice that the second line in ( 4.3.6 ) is the line element of a
squashed @xmath .

For a supersymmetric configuration at zero temperature, it is possible
to use kappa symmetry to find an explicit solution for @xmath (see the
analysis in [ 76 ] and in appendix 4.A.3 ). But, in general we will have
to numerically solve the equations of motion to find @xmath .

The thermodynamic properties of D6-branes embedded in this way were
studied in detail in [ 137 ] . Here we will generalize some of these
results by including worldvolume gauge fields. In particular, we will
turn on a nontrivial flux on the internal cycle. In the rest of this
section we will determine the form of this internal worldvolume flux
which gives rise to a consistent solution of the brane equations of
motion.

#### 4.3.1 Internal flux

Since we are primarily interested in gapped, QH states, let us focus on
Minkowski (MN) embeddings of the probe, in which the brane ends smoothly
at a radial position @xmath above the horizon, i.e. , @xmath . The
D6-brane can cap off smoothly if, at the tip of the brane @xmath , the
angle @xmath reaches its minimal value @xmath where an @xmath shrinks to
zero. At the tip, the last term of ( 4.3.6 ) vanishes and the induced
metric takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . From ( 4.3.7 ), we see that at the tip of the brane the
coordinates @xmath and @xmath span a non-collapsing @xmath . As in other
probe-brane QH models [ 162 , 163 ] , we want to turn on a flux of the
worldvolume gauge field @xmath on this non-shrinking sphere.

Of course, this flux must be quantized appropriately. We will adopt the
following quantization condition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that, compared with the ordinary flux quantization condition of
the worldvolume gauge field, we are considering in ( 4.3.8 ) @xmath
fractional units of flux. In appendix 4.A.1 we verify that ( 4.3.8 ) is
the correct prescription for the flux quantization by studying the
background without massless flavors, i.e. , @xmath . In this case one
can induce an internal @xmath flux through @xmath by switching on a flat
Neveu-Schwarz @xmath field proportional to the Kähler form of @xmath .
Then, the quantization condition ( 4.3.8 ) follows from the fractional
holonomy of @xmath along the @xmath cycle of @xmath . In this setup the
integer @xmath is the number of fractional D2-branes and this
configuration is dual to the ABJ model [ 62 ] with gauge group @xmath .
We also check in appendix 4.A.1 that @xmath can be identified with the
Page charge for fractional D2-branes.

Let us now write a concrete ansatz for the internal gauge field @xmath .
We will represent @xmath in terms of a potential one-form @xmath given
by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath factor is introduced for convenience and @xmath is a
function of the radial coordinate which determines the varying flux on
the @xmath two-sphere. The field strength @xmath corresponding to (
4.3.9 ) is simply:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which restricted to @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the value of the flux function at the tip. It follows
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the condition ( 4.3.8 ) quantizes the values of @xmath in the
following way:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us denote the value of the flux function at the tip as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To write the quantization condition ( 4.3.13 ) in terms of physical
quantities, recall that the @xmath radius @xmath can be written as in (
4.2.5 ). Plugging this into ( 4.3.13 ), we find the following
quantization condition for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the ansatz ( 4.3.10 ) for the internal flux, we can try to find a
solution for a MN embedding of the probe D6-brane. In appendix 4.A.2 we
check that ( 4.3.10 ), together with embedding ansatz corresponding to
the induced metric ( 4.3.6 ), is a consistent truncation of the
equations of motion of the probe.

At zero temperature, we have found an analytic solution for @xmath and
the flux function @xmath which preserves two of the four supercharges of
the @xmath superconformal background. The explicit calculations are
performed in appendix 4.A.3 with the use of kappa symmetry. Here we just
quote the result for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

However, to realize the quantum Hall states we are interested in, we
need to generalize our ansatz for the gauge field to include electric
and magnetic fields, as well as the components dual to the charge
density and current. We analyze this more general set up in the next
subsection.

#### 4.3.2 Background fields and currents

If we want a more general ansatz that includes background electric and
magnetic fields and the associated charged current, we need to consider
other components of the worldvolume gauge field. In the standard way, a
magnetic field @xmath and an electric field @xmath are added by turning
on the radial zero modes of @xmath and @xmath . The charge density is
holographically related to @xmath , the longitudinal and Hall currents
come from @xmath and @xmath . We therefore take the worldvolume gauge
field to have the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can continue to use the induced metric ansatz given by ( 4.3.6 ),
characterized by the embedding function @xmath .

Interestingly, due to our choice in ( 4.3.18 ) of the internal
components of the gauge field, the dependence of the action on the
internal angles of the @xmath cycle factorizes and consequently, we can
consistently take the functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath to depend only on the radial variable. After integrating over the
internal angles @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , the DBI action of the
D6-brane for our ansatz can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the DBI lagrangian density @xmath can be compactly written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the D6-brane tension and the quantity @xmath is defined
to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.21)
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The Wess-Zumino term of the action is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the pullbacks to the
D6-brane of the RR gauge fields. All of these terms, except for @xmath ,
give non-vanishing contributions to the equations of motion. ¹ ¹ 1 One
subtlety is that when the backreaction of the flavors is included, the
RR field strength @xmath is not closed, implying that there is no
well-defined RR potential @xmath . However, the equations of motion
derived from (3.17) only contain @xmath and therefore can be generalized
to the unquenched case; see appendix 4.A.2 for details.

In the holographic setup, the charge density is encoded in the bulk by
the radial electric displacement field @xmath , which is given by the
derivative of the DBI lagrangian density with respect to the radial
component of the physical electric field. From the ansatz ( 4.3.18 ),
and taking into account the physical gauge field @xmath , we find:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will set @xmath from now on. In order to write @xmath in a compact
fashion, let us define a function @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, one can show that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the screening factor defined in ( 3.8.159 ) and @xmath
is the function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The total charge density is obtained by taking the boundary value of
@xmath , which is proportional to:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similarly, the physical currents along the @xmath and @xmath directions
are given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can readily prove that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath turns out to be:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The equations of motion for the probe are worked out in detail in
appendix 4.A.2 . In particular, @xmath is constant in @xmath (see (
4.A.56 )) and represents the longitudinal current parallel to the
electric field. On the other hand, @xmath depends on the holographic
variable. The transverse current @xmath is obtained as the value of
@xmath at the UV boundary @xmath which, according to ( 4.3.28 ), is
determined from the limit:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The radial dependence of @xmath and @xmath is determined by the @xmath
and @xmath equations of motion, ( 4.A.55 ) and ( 4.A.57 ). With the
definitions introduced above, they can be simply written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the unflavored case @xmath , these two equations ( 4.3.33 ) and (
4.3.34 ) can be integrated once because their right-hand side is
proportional to @xmath . Indeed, for the unflavored background @xmath
and @xmath are cyclic and can be eliminated by performing the
appropriate Legendre transformation.

This is not the case, however, when @xmath . We can formally integrate (
4.3.33 ) and ( 4.3.34 ), defining the integral @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.35)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have integrated by parts to obtain the second line. Clearly,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and equations ( 4.3.33 ) and ( 4.3.34 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath and @xmath are no longer cyclic, we need a new strategy to
solve the equations of motion. Interestingly, there is still one
conserved quantity associated with the equations of motion for @xmath
and @xmath . Eq. ( 4.A.60 ) can be recast as the radial independence of
the quantity:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Indeed, the equation @xmath follows immediately from ( 4.3.33 ) and (
4.3.34 ). This implies that @xmath can be written in terms of quantities
evaluated at the boundary:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can now try to write @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in terms of the
embedding function @xmath and the flux function @xmath . Let us work
this out in detail. First, we notice that one can invert Eqs. ( 4.3.26 )
and ( 4.3.31 ) and write @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that ( 4.3.41 ) are not actually solutions for @xmath and @xmath
since @xmath on the right-hand side is written in terms of these same
fields. However, one can write an expression of @xmath in terms of
@xmath and @xmath . Let us define @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, after some calculation, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, we have for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The right-hand sides of ( 4.3.44 ) contain the radial functions @xmath
and @xmath , which in turn can be written as in ( 4.3.38 ) in terms of
the constants @xmath and @xmath , and the integral @xmath defined in (
4.3.35 ).

In principle, we could use ( 4.3.44 ) to eliminate @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath from the equations of motion and to reduce the system to an
effective problem for the functions @xmath and @xmath . However, when
@xmath , the functions @xmath and @xmath depend non-locally on @xmath
and @xmath and the corresponding reduced equations of motion would be a
system of integro-differential equations for @xmath and @xmath , which
does not seem to be very easy to solve in practice. In the case in which
there are no flavors backreacting on the geometry, i.e. , when @xmath ,
the integral @xmath is just @xmath and we can write @xmath and @xmath
simply as @xmath and @xmath . Thus, in this quenched case one can
eliminate the gauge fields @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and reduce the
problem to a system of two coupled, second-order differential equations
for @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.3.3 Minkowski embeddings

Having obtained the equations of motion for the D6-brane probe, the next
step is to try to solve them. Although, as we will discuss in section
4.6 , there are special analytic BPS solutions, in general we will have
to resort to numerics.

Probe brane solutions are categorized into two classes by their IR
behavior. The generic solution is a black hole embedding, in which the
brane falls into the horizon; these correspond holographically to
gapless, compressible states. In certain special circumstances, the
brane can end smoothly at some @xmath when a wrapped cycle shrinks to
zero size; these are Minkowski (MN) embeddings. MN solutions with broken
parity correspond to gapped, quantum Hall states.

As discussed above in section 4.3.1 , for a D6-brane probe in the
flavored ABJM background, MN embeddings occur when @xmath for some
@xmath . In order to have a physical, finite-energy solution, the
embedding @xmath and the worldvolume gauge field @xmath must be regular
at the tip; that is, the induced metric ( 4.3.6 ) must be smooth, and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath must all be finite. Given that the
function @xmath ( 4.3.43 ) vanishes at the tip of the brane, the
regularity of @xmath and @xmath at the tip, combined with ( 4.3.26 ) and
( 4.3.31 ), implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can interpret this condition to mean that there are no sources at the
tip, which is physically sensible as the D6-brane could not support such
a source. Suppose that @xmath ; this radial displacement field would
have to be sourced, for example, by fundamental strings stretching from
the horizon. Due to the shrinking cycle, the effective radial tension of
the D6-brane vanishes at the tip, so these strings would then pull the
D6-brane into the horizon, resulting in a black hole embedding.

The filling fraction @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the physical magnetic field @xmath is related to @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Combining ( 4.3.45 ) with ( 4.3.38 ) gives @xmath , and the filling
fraction for MN solutions is therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or, more explicitly using ( 4.3.36 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the quantization integer and @xmath is minus the flow
function at the tip (see ( 4.3.14 )). Note that, ( 4.3.49 ) shows
explicitly that, for a QH state with nonzero charge density, a nonzero
flux is required. Moreover, @xmath is the sum of two contributions. The
first term in ( 4.3.49 ) is proportional to the flux at the tip. The
second term is only nonzero in the unquenched case @xmath and contains
an integral from the tip to the boundary. In terms of @xmath and @xmath
, @xmath takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows that @xmath is a half-integer in the quenched case but gets
corrections due to the massless sea quark loops in the unquenched
Veneziano limit.

Numerically integrating the equations of motion, we have verified that
there are MN solutions obeying the tip regularity conditions ( 4.3.45 ).
At this point, we will be content with evidence for MN solutions with
nonzero charge density @xmath and magnetic field @xmath . We will defer
a more thorough study of the possible MN solutions to the future.

### 4.4 Conductivities

We are interested in analyzing the longitudinal and transverse
conductivity of our configurations. In order to relate these quantities
with the variables we have employed, let us point out that the physical
electric field @xmath is related to the quantity @xmath used above as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The longitudinal and transverse conductivities @xmath and @xmath are
defined in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The conductivities can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the next two subsections we obtain formulas for @xmath and @xmath for
the two types of embeddings (Minkowski and black hole) of the D6-brane
probe.

#### 4.4.1 Quantum Hall states

Let us now suppose that we have a Minkowski (MN) embedding. To compute
the conductivities, we will adapt the method of [ 162 , 163 ] but with
some new twists. In particular, we use the invariance of @xmath under
the the holographic flow. The conductivity comes directly from the
condition ( 4.3.45 ) that there are no charge sources at the tip @xmath
. Since @xmath in ( 4.3.30 ) must be equal to zero,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, ( 4.3.45 ) implies that @xmath vanishes at @xmath and,
since it is radially invariant, @xmath at all values of @xmath . From (
4.3.40 ), we see that this is equivalent to @xmath ; the Hall
conductivity is then:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From ( 4.3.48 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is exactly what one would expect for a QH state.

#### 4.4.2 Gapless states

Let us now consider black hole embeddings, in which the D6-brane crosses
the horizon at @xmath . These embeddings correspond to gapless states.
To compute the conductivity, we employ the pseudohorizon argument of [
166 ] to Eq. ( 4.3.44 ). Let @xmath be the position of the
pseudohorizon, which is determined by the conditions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It follows that the currents in
@xmath - and @xmath -directions are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.4.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the previous expression involves the value of the integral
@xmath extended between the @xmath and the boundary. Therefore, the
conductivities are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

For small electric field, @xmath is close to the horizon radius @xmath .
At first order in @xmath we can estimate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With this result we can write @xmath approximately as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Applying these results to ( 4.4.59 ), we obtain the linear
conductivities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is defined in ( 4.3.36 ).

These conductivities are analogous to the conductivities found in the
metallic phases of other similar probe brane models, for example [ 167 ,
162 , 163 ] . One important difference is that here, the unquenched sea
quarks reduce the conductivity by the screening factor @xmath .

The longitudinal conductivity ( 4.4.62 ) receives contributions from two
sources: the first term under the square root is due to the charge
density at the horizon @xmath , and the other term can be interpreted as
being due to thermal pair production. At vanishing magnetic field and
nonzero charge density, @xmath diverges as @xmath . Charge carriers can
only scatter off the thermal bath, and at zero temperature, momentum
conservation implies an infinite DC conductivity. For nonzero @xmath ,
@xmath vanishes in the zero-temperature limit, as implied by Lorentz
invariance.

The Hall conductivity ( 4.4.63 ) is the sum of two terms, which appear
to correspond to the contributions of two types of charge carriers: the
charges at the horizon @xmath , which are sensitive to the heat bath and
contribute to @xmath , and the charges @xmath , which are smeared
radially along the D6-brane and do not interact with the dissipative
heat bath at all. In the limit where @xmath , i.e. , @xmath , the Hall
conductivity smoothly approach the results found above for the MN
embedding ( 4.4.56 ). Varying the @xmath from zero to @xmath and
plotting the conductivity on the @xmath -plane is expected to reproduce
the behavior, seen also in [ 163 ] , qualitatively similar to the
semi-circle law experimentally observed in QH systems [ 168 ] .

### 4.5 Boost invariance at zero temperature

At zero temperature and before adding an electric field, the system is
Lorentz invariant. In probe brane constructions, the zero-temperature
limit of a black hole embedding is often problematic. However, Minkowski
embeddings are perfectly well defined in the zero-temperature limit
since the brane never reaches the black hole horizon. One important
feature of this model and others in its class [ 162 , 163 , 164 ] , is
that MN embeddings can occur at nonzero charge density.

Turning on an electric field in the @xmath -direction breaks rotation
invariance, and the full Lorentz symmetry is reduced to a
(1+1)-dimensional subgroup: boosts in the @xmath -direction form a set
of @xmath transformations which rotate the electromagnetic field and the
currents. When @xmath , the equations of motion studied in section 4.3.2
and appendix 4.A.2 are not modified under these transformations.

In terms of the boundary variables, a boost with rapidity @xmath acts as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the symmetric matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The transverse conductivity @xmath is invariant under the boost because
it is determined only by the flux ( 4.4.56 ).

The boundary electromagnetic fields and currents are packaged
holographically in the bulk worldvolume field strength @xmath . From the
transformation properties of @xmath due to a boost in the bulk, one can
reproduce the transformation ( 4.5.64 ) of @xmath and @xmath and see
that the radial components of @xmath transform as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

therefore, the symmetry acts contravariantly on @xmath . Using Eqs. (
4.3.26 ) and ( 4.3.31 ), one can demonstrate that the functions @xmath
and @xmath also rotate via @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which matches, for @xmath , the transformation ( 4.5.64 ) of @xmath and
@xmath . One can also check that the quantity @xmath defined in ( 4.3.39
) is invariant.

Apart from the boosts, the equations of motion are also invariant under
the two types of discrete operations, which are the elements of @xmath
not connected to the identity. The first of these operations is the
electric field inversion @xmath , which acts as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Under @xmath , the function @xmath changes its sign, i.e. , @xmath
behaves as a pseudoscalar. However, the conductivity @xmath is left
invariant. Similarly, the equations of motion are invariant under a
magnetic field inversion @xmath , defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Under this transformation, @xmath again changes its sign and @xmath is
again invariant.

We can use the @xmath symmetry to classify the different configurations
in terms of the sign of the following quadratic forms

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which are left invariant by the @xmath transformations. We will call
solutions with @xmath “electric-like” , and those with @xmath
“magnetic-like”. We can also have solutions with @xmath , which we call
“null” solutions. Notice that an electric-like (magnetic-like) solution
can be connected continuously to a solution with @xmath ( @xmath ) and,
an electric-like solution cannot be transformed into a magnetic-like
one. We could similarly classify the solutions according to the sign of
@xmath and @xmath .

For MN embeddings, however, @xmath and @xmath are not independent but
are rather proportional to @xmath . The regularity at the tip ( 4.3.45 )
implies @xmath . From these relations, we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the next section we will find an analytic solution to the equations
of motion for which the three @xmath invariants vanish. Intuitively, one
would think that these null solutions have a large degree of symmetry.
In particular, they are related to the @xmath solution by the infinite
boost @xmath . Indeed, we will prove that these are BPS solutions
preserving a fraction of the supersymmetry of the background.

### 4.6 The BPS solution

In this section we find a simple, exact MN solution of the
zero-temperature equations of motion ( 4.A.55 )-( 4.A.59 ). This
solution preserves one supercharge, or one quarter of the supersymmetry
of the background. Accordingly, we will refer to this solution as the
BPS solution.

Let us first consider the probe D6-brane in the absence of electric and
magnetic fields and with @xmath . At zero temperature, we found a SUSY
solution in section 4.3.1 for which the embedding function @xmath and
the flux function @xmath satisfy the system of first-order BPS equations
( 4.A.76 ) and ( 4.A.84 ) derived in appendix 4.A.3 :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now generalize this supersymmetric solution to include electric and
magnetic fields, as well as charge density and current, provided they
satisfy a BPS condition:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In addition, we take @xmath . Notice that, since @xmath , ( 4.6.73 )
implies ( 4.A.60 ) is trivially satisfied with the constant on the
right-hand side equal to zero. Moreover, the equations of motion for
@xmath ( 4.A.55 ) and @xmath ( 4.A.57 ) become equivalent. The quantity
@xmath defined in ( 4.3.21 ) greatly simplifies and satisfies:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we saw in section 4.4.1 , for MN embeddings @xmath . Combining this
fact with ( 4.6.73 ), yields @xmath , and in particular, @xmath .

Using these results it is straightforward to verify that the equations (
4.A.59 ) and ( 4.A.58 ) for @xmath and @xmath become:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (4.6.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that these equations are just the same as in the @xmath case. One
can also check that the second-order equations ( 4.6.75 ) are satisfied
if the first-order ones in ( 4.6.72 ) are fulfilled. So, the solutions
for @xmath and @xmath are just as in section 4.3.1 (see ( 4.3.16 ) and (
4.3.17 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It remains to solve for @xmath . Its equation of motion ( 4.A.55 )
simplifies to:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Plugging in the solutions ( 4.6.76 ) for @xmath and ( 4.6.77 ) for
@xmath , it is now straightforward to integrate ( 4.6.78 ). Using the
relation @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The regularity condition of @xmath at the tip of the brane fixes a
relation between @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the first equality of ( 4.3.48 ), the filling fraction @xmath for
this SUSY solution is then:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we found in ( 4.3.49 ) for general MN solutions, the filling fraction
is proportional to the internal flux. In addition, ( 4.6.81 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is anomalous dimension of the quark mass (see [ 76 , 165 ]
). Notice that @xmath depends on @xmath and controls the coefficient of
the contribution of the quarks loops to @xmath .

For the BPS solution, the integral @xmath can be explicitly performed
using the expressions ( 4.6.76 ) and ( 4.6.77 ) for @xmath and @xmath .
In particular,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a cross-check, we can compute the filling fraction using the second
equality in ( 4.3.48 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which using the relation @xmath (see ( 3.3.48 )) matches ( 4.6.81 ).

We can also use the integrated formula for @xmath to write explicit
expressions for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that, in particular, @xmath . Notice that the non-constant terms in
@xmath and @xmath behave as @xmath , with no flavor corrections, which
is probably a consequence of the non-anomalous dimensions of these
currents.

#### 4.6.1 Nonzero temperature generalization

Let us now consider the system at @xmath ( i.e. , when @xmath ). It is
possible to find a truncation of the general system of equations which
defines a solution that can be regarded as the @xmath generalization of
the BPS system studied above. This truncation occurs when the following
relations are satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that Eq. ( 4.A.60 ) continues to be trivially satisfied.
Moreover, Eqs. ( 4.A.55 ) and ( 4.A.57 ) still reduce to a single
equation which is now:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and where @xmath takes the value:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The equations for the flux function @xmath and the embedding function
@xmath can likewise be straightforwardly derived from the probe action.

### 4.7 Spectrum of mesons

The addition of flux in the internal directions induces the breaking of
parity symmetry in the Minkowski worldvolume directions. In this section
we explore the effect of this parity violation on the mass spectrum of
quark-antiquark bound states which, in an abuse of language, we will
refer to as mesons. The standard method to find the meson spectrum in
the holographic correspondence is to analyze the normalizable
fluctuations of the worldvolume gauge and scalar fields of the flavor
brane. ² ² 2 See [ 153 , 154 , 169 ] for the calculation of the meson
spectrum in the unflavored ABJM model. Here we will restrict ourselves
to analyzing the fluctuations of the gauge field @xmath around the
zero-temperature supersymmetric configuration with only the internal
components of @xmath are switched on. Accordingly, let us take the
worldvolume gauge field as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is assumed to be small and the unperturbed gauge potential
is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath being the flux function for the SUSY embedding ( 4.6.77 ).
We will also assume that the embedding function @xmath does not
fluctuate and is given by ( 4.6.76 ). We will denote by @xmath the
first-order correction to the worldvolume field strength ( i.e. , @xmath
). We will assume that @xmath has only components along the @xmath
directions. Its components are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the indices @xmath and @xmath run over the @xmath directions. One
can verify that these modes are a consistent truncation of the full set
of fluctuations of the probe. In appendix 4.A.4 we obtain the equations
of motion for @xmath by computing the first variation of the equations
of motion for the probe. These equations can be written as the
Euler-Lagrange equations for the following second-order effective
lagrangian density:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the indices in @xmath are raised with the inverse of the open
string metric @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the dual field @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the lagrangian density ( 4.7.92 ) is that of axion
electrodynamics in @xmath , with the axion depending on the holographic
direction, showing explicitly the breaking of parity in @xmath when the
flux is turned on. The equation of motion derived from @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the function written in ( 4.A.102 ). To solve ( 4.7.95 )
let us first choose the gauge in which @xmath , and let us separate
variables in the remaining components of @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant polarization vector. The gauge condition
@xmath , together with ( 4.7.95 ), imposes the following transversality
condition on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

When they are normalizable, these fluctuations are dual to vector
mesons, whose mass @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to find the equation for @xmath , let us choose, without loss
of generality, the Minkowski momentun @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

i.e. , we choose our coordinates in such a way that the momentum is
oriented along the @xmath -direction. Notice that the mass is just
@xmath . The polarization transverse to ( 4.7.99 ) is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are undetermined. Let us next consider the
following complex combinations of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, as shown in appendix 4.A.4 , we can solve the fluctuation equation
( 4.7.95 ) by taking @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath provided the
radial function in the ansatz ( 4.7.96 ) satisfies the following
ordinary differential equation:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the second-order differential operator defined in (
4.A.102 ) and @xmath ( @xmath ) is the radial function for the solution
with @xmath ( @xmath ). Notice that the @xmath and @xmath modes are two
helicity states which correspond to two different circular polarizations
of the vector meson in the @xmath plane. They are exchanged by the
parity transformation @xmath , as is obvious from their definition (
4.7.101 ).

To find the mass spectrum of the mesons we must determine the values of
@xmath for which there exists a normalizable solution to ( 4.7.102 ). In
general this must be done numerically by using the shooting technique,
although, we can make analytic estimates using the WKB approximation,
which we describe in detail in appendix 4.A.4 . The result is a tower of
solutions with increasing masses which depend on the flux. These masses
depend on the location of the tip @xmath , which can be related to the
mass of the quarks @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In Fig. 4.1 we illustrate the dependence on the flux of the mass of the
lightest state, for the quenched background with @xmath . The spectra of
the two helicity states are different. The mass splitting obviously
vanishes at @xmath and changes with the amount of flux.

For @xmath it is possible to compute analytically the meson mass
splitting at first order in @xmath . Indeed, the fluctuation equation at
first order in @xmath for the unflavored background is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For @xmath , Eq. ( 4.7.104 ) can be solved analytically in terms of
hypergeometric functions. Let @xmath be the normalizable regular
solutions of ( 4.7.104 ) for @xmath ; they are given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The corresponding mass levels are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now solve ( 4.7.104 ) at first order in @xmath . We write:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the two signs are in correspondence with the ones in ( 4.7.104 ).
The mass levels associated to @xmath will be denoted by @xmath . The
lightest regular normalizable modes at first order in @xmath are given
by:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (4.7.108)
  -- -- -- -----------

with @xmath being an integration constant. The masses for these modes
are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In Fig. 4.1 we plot these first-order results and we compare them with
the numerical calculations. The first-order correction in the flux can
similarly be obtained for the modes with @xmath , and the general form
for the mass splitting is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows from this expression that the first-order mass splitting
becomes @xmath as @xmath .

As shown in Fig. 4.1 , the mass averaged over the two helicities is well
approximated by the WKB method:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us write the WKB estimate of this helicity average in the unflavored
background. By using the values of the WKB masses written in appendix
4.A.4 , we have:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.7.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

### 4.8 Discussion

In this chapter, we initiated a study of D6-brane probes with
parity-breaking flux in the ABJM background with unquenched massless
flavors. Minkowski embeddings of these probe branes holographically
described massive fermions in quantum Hall states. The filling fraction
was a half-integer in the quenched case, but received corrections when
the dynamics of the sea of massless flavors is included. The
conductivities, both in the gapped Minkowski embeddings and in the
metallic black hole ones, depended on the parity-breaking flux but also
contained a contribution from the dynamical flavors. This was
interpreted as an effect of the intrinsic disorder due to quantum
fluctuations of the fundamental degrees of freedom.

Despite the complexity of the equations of motion we managed to obtain
an explicit, analytic family of supersymmetric solutions with nonzero
charge density, electric, and magnetic fields. For these gapped QH
solutions, we obtained an analytic expression for the Hall conductivity,
which includes the effects of quark loops. We also analyzed the residual
@xmath boost invariance of the system at zero temperature; this is a
powerful tool for generating non-supersymmetric solutions with general
electric and magnetic fields starting from solutions with either @xmath
=0 or @xmath =0. We also explored the effect of the parity violation on
the computation of the meson spectrum. We restricted our analysis to the
fluctuations of the gauge field around the zero-temperature
supersymmetric configuration in which only the internal gauge field
components were switched on.

There remain many open topics for further investigation. Although, we
presented here a set of analytic, BPS solutions for a very specific set
of parameters, more general solutions with nonzero temperature and
arbitrary @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath still need to be
studied, probably numerically. A thorough analysis of the thermodynamics
and phase structure is needed to provide a complete understanding of
this model. For example, we anticipate a phase transition as the
temperature is increased from the MN to the black hole embeddings. ³ ³ 3
For a massless probe brane embedding, this phase transition is related
to the breaking of chiral symmetry. See e.g. [ 170 , 171 , 172 , 173 ]
for the holographic realization of (inverse) magnetic catalysis and [
174 , 175 , 165 ] for the study of the effect of the dynamical flavors
on magnetic catalysis.

The effects of internal flux and the sea of massless quarks are
particularly interesting. And, we would also like to understand how the
BPS solutions fit in to the complete picture.

Because there are so many possible parameters to vary, it makes sense to
start by isolating one or two. A good first step could be to analyze,
along the lines of [ 137 ] , the thermodynamics of the D6-brane probe
with only the internal flux, presented in section 4.3.2 . In the absence
of massless flavors, this system is essentially a probe D6-brane in the
ABJ background, but with zero worldvolume gauge field. This is another
system which deserves a detailed thermodynamic study.

Another interesting open problem is the study of flavor branes with
internal flux in the ABJM background with unquenched massive quarks
presented in chapter 3 . Recall that the geometry found in chapter 3 is
a running solution flowing between two @xmath spaces, in which the
control parameter is the mass of the sea quarks. One expects to find
conductivities depending on the mass of the dynamical quarks, which
interpolate between the values found here (for massless sea quarks) and
the unflavored values (for infinitely massive quarks).

In this chapter we considered brane probes with electric and magnetic
fields in their worldvolume and we have neglected the backreaction of
these electromagnetic fields. Computing this backreaction is a very
complicated task. One possible intermediate step could be considering
the geometry dual to the non-commutative ABJM model, which was found in
[ 176 ] by applying a TsT duality transformation. By adding internal
flux to the probe branes we should be able to find Hall states similar
to those found here [ 177 ] .

We initiated a very limited fluctuation analysis in section 4.7 , and a
more thorough study is needed. One goal would be to compute the full
meson dispersion about the BPS solution of section 4.6 . The lightest
neutral excitations of QH fluids are magneto-rotons, collective
excitations whose minimum energy is at nonzero momentum. They have been
detected in experiments, for example [ 178 ] , and they have also been
found in other holographic probe-brane QH models [ 179 , 180 ] .
Naturally, we would like to know if the spectrum of the model presented
here also includes rotons.

Homogeneity-breaking instabilities seem to be a general feature of black
hole embeddings in related brane models [ 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 ] ,
which are examples of the general type of instability described in [ 185
] . In some cases, examples of spatially-modulated ground states have
been found explicitly; for example, see [ 186 , 187 , 188 , 189 ] . A
thorough analysis of the quasi-normal mode spectrum is needed to
determine whether such instabilities exists in this model. If so, the
ABJM system, due to its symmetries and other special properties, might
afford an ideal laboratory to study inhomogeneous phases.

Another interesting area to explore is alternative quantization of the
D6-brane worldvolume gauge field. In a four-dimensional bulk, the gauge
field can take Dirichlet, Neumann, or mixed boundary conditions in the
UV, and these choices correspond to different boundary CFTs dual to
strongly coupled anyon fluids in dynamical gauge fields. In particular,
by changing the quantization as in [ 190 , 191 , 192 ] , this ABJM
system could be turned from a quantum Hall fluid into an anyon
superfluid.

In the next chapter, we will focus on a D6-brane probe with density
turned on, and all the rest of worldvolume gauge fields turned off. Of
course, the equations of motion are a particular case of those presented
in this chapter, but we will give a detailed analysis of the solutions.
Besides, we give a detailed study of the fluctuations. The main feature
that we have found is the interesting behavior of the quantum phase
transitions involved.

## Appendix 4.A Appendices

#### 4.a.1 Details of the background geometry

In this appendix we specify the coordinate system we employ to represent
the metric and forms of the background. Let us begin with the
four-sphere part of the internal metric ( 4.2.4 ). Most of the following
expressions are basically the ones presented in section ( 3.2 ) where we
rewrite @xmath in terms of a new angle @xmath related by @xmath . Let
@xmath ( @xmath ) be the @xmath left-invariant one-forms which satisfy
@xmath . Together with a new coordinate @xmath , the @xmath ’s can be
used to parameterize the metric of the four-sphere @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The @xmath instanton one-forms @xmath which fiber the
@xmath over the @xmath in ( 4.2.4 ) can be written in these coordinates
as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us next parametrize the @xmath coordinates of the @xmath by means of
two angles @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ), namely:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, one can easily prove that the @xmath part of the metric ( 4.2.4 )
can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the following one-forms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In order to write the explicit expression for @xmath , we first define
three new one-forms @xmath @xmath as the following rotated version of
the @xmath ’s:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Next, we define the one-forms @xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in terms of which the metric of the four-sphere is just @xmath .

With these definitions, the ansatz for the RR two-form @xmath for the
flavored background is

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.A.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

Note that the two-form @xmath is not closed when @xmath ; @xmath is
proportional to the charge distribution three-form of the flavor
D6-branes. The RR four-form @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.A.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the volume-form of the four-dimensional black hole (
4.2.2 ). The solution is completed by a constant dilaton @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now spell out the embedding of the D6-brane probe in the
background geometry. We first represent the @xmath left-invariant
one-forms @xmath in terms of three angles @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In these coordinates our embedding is defined by the conditions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with the coordinate @xmath defined in ( 4.A.3 ) being a function of the
radial coordinate @xmath . The relation of the coordinates defined here
with those used in ( 4.3.6 ) to write the internal part of the induced
metric is as follows: The angle @xmath here is equal to the one
introduced in ( 4.A.1 ), while @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is now easy to check that the pullback of the metric ( 4.2.1 ) to the
worldvolume is, indeed, the line element written in ( 4.3.6 ).

##### Matching the unflavored ABJ model

Let us now explore our prescription ( 4.3.8 ) in the case of the
unflavored model. The main point is that, when @xmath , the worldvolume
gauge field for the supersymmetric configurations can be understood as
induced by a flat NSNS @xmath field of the bulk, which is proportional
to the Kähler form @xmath of @xmath . When the coefficient multiplying
@xmath is appropriately quantized, the corresponding supergravity
solution is the dual of the ABJ theory with gauge group @xmath . We will
see that the rank difference @xmath can be identified with the
quantization integer in ( 4.3.8 ).

Let us begin our analysis by writing the Kähler form of @xmath in our
variables:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The pullback of @xmath to the probe brane worldvolume is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, as claimed, it has the form written in ( 4.3.10 ) if we identify
the flux function @xmath with:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant. Actually, one can check that the worldvolume
gauge field @xmath ( 4.3.10 ) for this unflavored case can be written in
terms of the pullback of @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will see below in appendix 4.A.3 that the relation ( 4.A.16 ) between
the flux and embedding functions is dictated by supersymmetry when
@xmath . Notice also that the flux function at the tip is just @xmath ,
as in ( 4.3.14 ).

In the DBI+WZ action for D-branes, the worldvolume gauge field @xmath is
always combined additively with the pullback of @xmath . It follows
that, in this case, the worldvolume flux can alternatively be thought of
as induced by the following NSNS @xmath field:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that @xmath is a closed two-form, and it has the same form as in
the proposed gravity dual of the ABJ model [ 62 ] with gauge group
@xmath , where @xmath is related to @xmath . Actually, the integer
@xmath is determined by the discrete holonomy of @xmath on the @xmath
cycle of the @xmath space, which is inherited from the holonomy of the
three-dimensional three-form potential of the eleven-dimensional
supergravity along the torsion cycle of the @xmath . Let us compute
explicitly the integral of the two-form ( 4.A.18 ) along the @xmath . In
our coordinates (see [ 76 ] ) the @xmath is obtained by keeping the
coordinates of the @xmath cycle fixed. Therefore, the pullback of @xmath
is just:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus the integral of @xmath along the @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows from ( 4.A.18 ) that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now use our quantization condition ( 4.3.13 ) and the
identification ( 4.3.14 ) to write the period of @xmath in terms of
@xmath and the quantization integer @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the fractional holonomy proposed in [ 62 ] for the gravity dual
of the @xmath theory.

The coefficient @xmath can also be fixed by looking at the Page charge
@xmath for fractional D2-branes (D4-branes wrapped on a @xmath
two-cycle), which is given by the following integral over the @xmath
dual to the @xmath where the D4-branes are wrapped:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We require that @xmath is equal to our quantization integer @xmath ,
which can then be interpreted as the number of fractional D2-branes.
Taking into account ( 4.A.18 ) and that @xmath for this unflavored case,
we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To compute this integral we use the fact that the equation of the @xmath
cycle in our coordinates is @xmath (see appendix A in [ 76 ] ), which
implies:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, it follows that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the quantization condition @xmath coincides with the one obtained in
( 4.3.13 ) for @xmath .

#### 4.a.2 Probe brane equation of motion

Let us consider a D @xmath -brane probe propagating in a background of
type II supergravity. Let @xmath denote the components of the induced
metric on the worldvolume:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are coordinates of the ten-dimensional space and @xmath
is the target space metric of the background. In what follows @xmath
will denote indices of the target space, whereas @xmath will represent
worldvolume indices. Let us denote by @xmath the following matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the worldvolume gauge field. Then, the action of a D
@xmath -brane probe can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the DBI and WZ terms are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath being the D @xmath -brane tension (from now on in this
appendix we will take @xmath ) and @xmath is the sum of RR potentials.
In order to write the equations of motion derived from this action
following the analysis of section 2 of [ 193 ] , let us consider the
inverse @xmath of the matrix @xmath and let us decompose @xmath in its
symmetric and antisymmetric parts as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the antisymmetric component of @xmath and @xmath is the
inverse open string metric. Then, the equation of motion of the gauge
field component @xmath is [ 193 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the source current for the gauge field @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, the equation for the scalar field @xmath becomes [ 193 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the source for the scalar @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Currents for the D6-brane

Let us write the form of the currents for the case of a D6-brane probe.
In this case, the WZ term of the action is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us perform a general variation of the worldvolume gauge field @xmath
, under which @xmath varies as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to compute the current associated to the worldvolume gauge
field, we use the fact that, for any odd-dimensional form @xmath , one
has

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The total derivative generates a boundary term which vanishes since we
are assuming that @xmath is fixed at the boundary in the variational
process. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that, although we have chosen Dirichlet boundary
conditions for @xmath here, @xmath can, in fact, have arbitrary mixed
boundary conditions, corresponding to alternative quantization, as
discussed in [ 190 ] . Taking into account that, with our notation
@xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the gauge current along the worldvolume direction @xmath is given
by the expression:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to compute the source current @xmath for @xmath , we should
vary in ( 4.A.37 ) the scalars which enter the pullback of the RR
potentials. It turns out that the final expression can be written in a
rather simple form, which we will now spell out. Let @xmath be any
vector field in target space. The interior product of @xmath with a
@xmath -form @xmath is a @xmath -form @xmath defined as follows. Let
@xmath be:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath denote the interior product of @xmath and the vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the current @xmath , corresponding to the scalar @xmath , can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the hat denotes the pullback of the different @xmath to the
worldvolume. In ( 4.A.45 ) @xmath and @xmath are defined as Hodge duals
of @xmath and @xmath , respectively, i.e. , @xmath and @xmath .

Notice that we have derived the expressions of @xmath and @xmath from
the action ( 4.A.37 ), where we have assumed the existence of the RR
potentials @xmath . In the case of backreacting flavor some Bianchi
identities are violated and, as a consequence, some of the RR potentials
do not exist. However, the currents @xmath and @xmath (and the
corresponding equations of motion) only depend on the RR field strengths
and their pullbacks, and then they can be generalized to the case in
which we include the backreaction. This is the point of view we will
adopt in what follows.

##### The equations of motion for our ansatz

We now write explicitly the equations of motion for the D6-brane with a
gauge potential @xmath as the one written in ( 4.3.18 ). We will also
assume that the embedding is defined by the conditions ( 4.A.12 ) with
@xmath being a function of @xmath to be determined. The set of
worldvolume coordinates we will employ is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the angles defined in ( 4.A.1 )
and ( 4.A.13 ). First of all, let us write the non-zero components of
the worldvolume gauge field strength @xmath corresponding to the
potential ( 4.3.18 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to the radial
variable. Notice that, in our ansatz, isotropy in the @xmath plane is
explicitly broken by the electric field in the @xmath -direction.

We will start by computing the different components of the currents
appearing in ( 4.A.33 ) and ( 4.A.35 ). It is straightforward to prove
that @xmath , and it therefore does not contribute to @xmath and @xmath
. The non-vanishing components of the gauge current @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now work out the current for the three transverse scalars. First we
compute the interior products of @xmath with the tangent vectors along
the three scalar directions @xmath . We find:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, the product of @xmath with the other two tangent vectors gives
a result proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We already mentioned that @xmath does not contribute since its pullback
is zero. It is also immediate to check that @xmath does not have
components along the transverse scalars and will not contribute to
@xmath . The contribution of @xmath to @xmath is determined by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the result for the other scalars are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the proportionality factors in ( 4.A.50 ) and ( 4.A.52 ) are
the same. Thus, the current for the scalar @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, the other two components of @xmath are:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.A.54)
  -- -- -- ----------

Let us now finally write the equations of motion for the different gauge
field components and scalars. We have to compute the different
components of the antisymmetric tensor @xmath , as well as the elements
of the inverse open string metric @xmath . This calculation is
straightforward (although rather tedious in some cases) and we limit
ourselves to give the final result for the equations. The equation of
@xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the quantity defined in ( 4.3.21 ). The equation for
@xmath can be integrated once ( @xmath is a cyclic variable) to give the
following equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The equation for @xmath is also non-trivial and given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is easy to demonstrate that the equations for @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath are trivially satisfied by our ansatz. The only non-trivial
equation for the gauge field that remains to write is the one
corresponding to @xmath , which is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, one can prove that the three equations for the transverse
scalars @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the same, namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 4.A.56 ) allows us to eliminate @xmath , after which we have four
second-order, coupled differential equations ( 4.A.55 )-( 4.A.59 ) for
four radial functions of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Solving
this system in general is a quite formidable task. For this reason it is
worth to look for simplifications and partial integrations. Notice that
( 4.A.55 ) and ( 4.A.57 ) present some electric-magnetic symmetry.
Actually, by combining these equations one easily finds the following
constant of motion:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which could be used to eliminate @xmath or @xmath from the system of
equations. Moreover, in the unflavored case ( @xmath ), the last two
terms in ( 4.A.55 ) and ( 4.A.57 ) can be combined to construct the
radial derivative of @xmath , which leads to two constants of motion. In
this unflavored case, @xmath and @xmath are cyclic variables and can be
eliminated.

#### 4.a.3 Kappa symmetry analysis

The kappa symmetry matrix for a D @xmath -brane in the type IIA theory
is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the induced metric, @xmath ( @xmath are a set of
worldvolume coordinates and @xmath is the polyform matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath being the @xmath -form whose components are the
antisymmetrized products of the induced Dirac matrices @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular, we are interested in the case of a D6-brane with a flux
across a (non-compact) four-cycle. The corresponding kappa symmetry
matrix takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now study the conditions imposed by kappa symmetry in the case in
which the embedding is determined by the conditions ( 4.A.12 ), the
worldvolume gauge field takes the form ( 4.3.18 ) with @xmath , and the
background is the zero-temperature supergravity solution of [ 76 ] . We
begin by computing the pullbacks of the left-invariant @xmath one-forms
@xmath of ( 4.A.11 ) in the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath variables:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas those of @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The pullbacks of the frame one-forms used in appendix B of [ 76 ] are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The corresponding induced gamma matrices become:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us next compute the different contributions on the right-hand side
of ( 4.A.64 ). First of all we notice that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the antisymmetrized product of all induced gamma
matrices, namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of flat 10d matrices, @xmath can be written as:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.A.71)
  -- -- -- ----------

With our notation, the supersymmetric embeddings are those that satisfy
@xmath , where @xmath is a Killing spinor of the background. To
implement this relation we impose that @xmath satisfies the projection
corresponding to a D2-brane, i.e. ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We also impose that @xmath satisfies the generic projections found in
appendix B of [ 76 ] for a generic ABJM-like geometry (Eqs. (B.4) and
(B.14) in [ 76 ] ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From these projections it follows that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 4.A.72 ) and ( 4.A.73 ), @xmath reduces to:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the condition that @xmath acts diagonally on @xmath ( i.e. , @xmath
acts on @xmath as a matrix proportional to the unit matrix), we get the
following equation for the embedding angle:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.76)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, when ( 4.A.76 ) and the projections ( 4.A.72 ) and ( 4.A.73 )
hold, @xmath acts on @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now study the terms in ( 4.A.64 ) that are linear in the
worldvolume gauge field @xmath . Let us write these terms as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath contains the contributions of the components of @xmath
along the internal directions and @xmath is the contribution of the
components of @xmath with legs along the Minkowski spacetime. It is
readily verified that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The antisymmetric products of induced gamma matrices appearing on (
4.A.79 ) can be straightforwardly computed from ( 4.A.68 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The products of the induced Dirac matrices needed to compute @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A quick inspection of the different terms appearing in @xmath and @xmath
reveals that, after using the projections ( 4.A.72 ) and ( 4.A.73 ), all
terms contain products of @xmath matrices and there are no terms
containing the unit matrix. Therefore, to implement the condition @xmath
we should require that @xmath . By combining ( 4.A.79 ) and ( 4.A.80 )
we find that the product of @xmath ’s contained in @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After using the equation ( 4.A.76 ) satisfied by the angle @xmath , we
find that @xmath if the flux function @xmath satisfies the following
first-order equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

When @xmath and @xmath , Eqs. ( 4.A.76 ) and ( 4.A.84 ) guarantee that
the embedding preserves two of the four supersymmetries of the
background. If this is not the case, we should continue analyzing the
remaining terms in @xmath . From ( 4.A.81 ) and ( 4.A.82 ) we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.A.85)
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

After using the projections ( 4.A.73 ) we can write the action of @xmath
on the Killing spinor @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.A.86)
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Using the BPS equation for @xmath ( 4.A.76 ), we can rewrite this last
expression as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To ensure that @xmath we first impose one of the following two extra
projections on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the conditions ( 4.A.88 ) are compatible with the
projections ( 4.A.72 ) and ( 4.A.73 ) that we have imposed so far. We
get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we have that @xmath if @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath satisfy
the following conditions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The two signs correspond to the two projections in ( 4.A.88 ) (in
section 4.6 we have chosen the upper signs). Therefore, after imposing
these conditions, we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the extra projection ( 4.A.88 ) is only needed if the
worldvolume gauge field has components along the Minkowski directions.
Furthermore, one can check that the BPS equations ( 4.A.76 ), ( 4.A.84
), and ( 4.A.90 ) and the projections ( 4.A.72 ), ( 4.A.73 ), and (
4.A.88 ) imply that the remaning terms in @xmath act on @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and one can verify by computing the DBI determinant for the BPS
configuration that, indeed, @xmath .

#### 4.a.4 Fluctuations

To find the equations satisfied by the fluctuations at first order, we
just compute the variation of the gauge field equations ( 4.A.33 ). One
can check that the variation of @xmath is zero at first order and, as a
consequence, the equations for the fluctuations are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will restrict our attention to the case in which the only non-zero
components of @xmath are those along the Minkowski directions,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that in ( 4.A.95 ) we are assuming that the @xmath ’s do not
depend on the internal angles. It is then easy to verify that, when the
index @xmath corresponds to one of those internal directions, the
equation of motion ( 4.A.94 ) is satisfied automatically by the ansatz (
4.A.95 ). Moreover, when @xmath this equation reduces to the following
Lorentz condition:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, when @xmath , Eq. ( 4.A.94 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
                 (4.A.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and, in our conventions, @xmath . To solve these equations,
let us separate variables in @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.A.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant polarization vector. It follows immediately
from ( 4.A.96 ) that this vector satisfies the transversality condition
( 4.7.97 ).

In order to write the fluctuation equation for the radial function
@xmath in a compact form, let us define the differential operator @xmath
, which acts on any function of the radial coordinate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the mass of the dual meson (see ( 4.7.98 )). We also
define the function @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, the fluctuation equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Moreover, by substituting the values of the functions @xmath and @xmath
which correspond to a SUSY embedding ( 4.6.76 ) and ( 4.6.77 ), we can
greatly simplify the operator @xmath and the function @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The three equations in ( 4.A.101 ) are coupled to each other. Let us see
how they can be decoupled and reduced to a single ordinary differential
equation. First of all, without loss of generality we pick the Minkowski
momentum as @xmath with the meson mass being @xmath . The transverse
polarization has been written in ( 4.7.100 ) in terms of two unknown
constants @xmath and @xmath . For this parametrization of @xmath one can
show that the equations for @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.A.101 ) are
equivalent and that the remaining two equations are just:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To decouple these equations, let us consider the complex combinations
@xmath defined in ( 4.7.101 ). Then, one can straightforwardly show that
the system ( 4.A.101 ) can be reduced to the equations:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Obviously, @xmath can be eliminated from ( 4.A.104 ) when they are
non-vanishing and the system can be reduced to two ordinary differential
equations for the radial functions @xmath , which can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

To find the mass spectrum we must compute the values of @xmath leading
to a normalizable solution. This can be done numerically by the shooting
technique. We present these numerical results for the two types of modes
in Figs. 4.1 and 4.2 .

##### WKB mass spectrum

When the mass @xmath is large we can neglect the term containing the
function @xmath in the fluctuation equation ( 4.A.105 ), and we can
estimate the mass levels by using the WKB method developed in [ 155 ] .
Indeed, let us consider a differential equation of the form

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the mass parameter and @xmath and @xmath are two
arbitrary functions that are independent of @xmath . We will assume that
near @xmath and @xmath these functions behave as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are constants. Then, the
mass levels for large quantum number @xmath can be approximately written
in terms of these constants as [ 155 ] :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the following integral:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In our case @xmath and @xmath are the functions:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The behavior of these functions at @xmath is characterized by the
following values of the coefficients and exponents defined in ( 4.A.107
):

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Similarly, for the behavior at large @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Therefore, the WKB mass spectrum is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.113)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the following integral:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

By expanding in series the square root in the numerator and integrating
term by term, we can express @xmath as the following series:

  -- -- -- -----------
           (4.A.115)
  -- -- -- -----------

Some particular values of the integral @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (4.A.116)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Interestingly, for @xmath and @xmath (the unflavored model without
internal flux) the WKB formula for the mass levels is exact. Moreover,
for large @xmath we can approximate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.117)
  -- -------- -- -----------

It follows that, for fixed quantum number @xmath , the WKB mass levels
for large @xmath decrease as @xmath according to the equation:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.118)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In Fig. 4.2 we compare the WKB estimates using ( 4.A.113 ) and the
numerical results. The WKB method, however, is not valid at large values
of @xmath , as it falls off the validity regime of [ 155 ] . Our
numerical studies verified this expectation.

## Chapter 5 Quantum phase transitions in the ABJM model

### 5.1 Introduction

Quantum phase transitions are transitions that happen at zero
temperature and that are induced by quantum fluctuations. They occur
when some control parameters are varied and tuned to critical values, at
which the ground state of the system undergoes a macroscopic
rearrangement and the energy levels develop a non-analytic behavior on
these parameters. Although, the quantum phase transitions occur at zero
temperature, they determine the behavior of the system at low
temperature in the so-called quantum critical regime, which is a region
of the phase diagram surrounding the quantum critical point (see, for
example [ 194 ] [ 195 ] for reviews).

Strong coupling is a natal environment, where one expects quantum phase
transitions. Therefore, a natural question is whether holography could
be useful to search and characterize new types of quantum critical
matter. Indeed, it is extremely important to develop new theoretical
models which could shed light on the nature of quantum criticality and
could serve to establish new paradigms to describe these phenomena.

In the recent years different holographic models displaying quantum
phase transitions have been studied in the literature (see, for example
[ 196 , 197 , 198 , 199 , 200 , 201 , 202 , 203 ] ). We are especially
interested in top-down models, for which the field theory dual is
clearly identified. In particular, we will deal with probe flavor
D-branes in a gravitational background, that corresponds, in the field
theory side, to adding fields on the fundamental representation of the
gauge group which act as charge carriers. When @xmath flavor D-branes
are added to a geometry generated by @xmath color branes with @xmath ,
we can use the probe approximation and neglect the backreaction of the
flavor branes on the geometry. This precludes the fundamentals being
dynamical and they are treated as quenched in the field theory.

The worldvolume dynamics of the flavor branes is governed by an action
which has two pieces. The first one is the standard Dirac-Born-Infeld
(DBI) action, which contains a gauge field. The other one is the
Wess-Zumino (WZ) action which couples the brane to the Ramond-Ramond
potentials of the background. The effects from the latter typically lead
to far reaching consequences. In this probe brane setup it is rather
simple to generate a configuration dual to a compressible state with
non-zero charge density [ 204 , 205 , 206 , 207 , 208 ] . Indeed, the
charge density is dual to a radial electric field on the worldvolume.
When the density is non-vanishing all consistent embeddings reach the
horizon, i.e. are black hole embeddings, whereas at zero density there
could also be Minkowski embeddings which always stay outside the
horizon. ¹ ¹ 1 Suitable WZ terms would allow regular Minkowski
embeddings even at non-zero charge density [ 162 , 163 ] . It was shown
in [ 196 ] for the D3-D7 and D3-D5 systems that a quantum phase
transition takes place at zero temperature at the point where the charge
density vanishes, which corresponds to the chemical potential being
equal to the quark mass. This phase transition is of second order and is
realized in the holographic dual as a topology change of the embedding
(from the black hole to Minkowski). In [ 209 ] the critical exponents of
the transition were found, corresponding to a non-relativistic scale
invariant field theory with hyperscaling violation. These results were
generalized in [ 210 ] to generic D @xmath -D @xmath and D @xmath -D
@xmath intersections.

The aim of this chapter is to study the quantum phase transitions of
brane probes in the gravity dual of the ABJM Chern-Simons matter theory,
especially in the Veneziano limit. Recall that the ABJM theory
(explained in detail in section 1.3.1 ) is an @xmath Chern-Simons gauge
theory in @xmath dimensions with levels @xmath and bifundamental fields
transforming in the @xmath and @xmath representations of the gauge
group. When @xmath and @xmath are large the theory admits a supergravity
description in the ten-dimensional type IIA theory. The corresponding
geometry is of the form @xmath with fluxes.

The flavors in the ABJM theory are fields transforming in the
fundamental representations @xmath and @xmath of the gauge group. In the
holographic dual these flavors are introduced by means of D6-branes
extended in @xmath and wrapping an @xmath cycle inside the @xmath
internal manifold. In the probe approximation these holographic quarks
have been reviewed in section 1.4.2 . Moreover, by using the smearing
technique (reviewed in section 1.4.1 ), when @xmath is large, one can
obtain simple analytic geometries encoding the effects of dynamical
quarks in holography. The geometry generated by the backreaction of
massless flavors in ABJM has been obtained in [ 76 ] at zero temperature
and generalized in [ 137 ] to non-vanishing temperature. A detailed
review on this solution was given in section 4.2 , together with some
details in appendix 4.A . The backreaction affects the ABJM geometry
rather mildly since the metric differs from the unflavored one by
constant squashing factors which depend on @xmath . For massive quarks
this construction was carried out in chapter 3 .

In this chapter we probe the ABJM background (with and without massless
dynamical quarks included) with a flavor D6-brane corresponding to a
massive quark. We study the dynamics of this probe at zero temperature
and non-vanishing charge density. This dynamics is governed by the DBI
action, with the WZ term playing a fundamental role. We are interested
in the phase structure of the system as the charge density is varied
and, in particular, in analyzing the phase transition that occurs when
the charge density is small.

The D6-brane embedding ansatz is a particular case of the one studied in
section 4.3 . Consequently, the equations of motion obtained in this
chapter are a particular case of the ones of section 4.3 . In chapter 4
we only solve the equations for a concrete case. In this chapter, we
solve the equations of motion for a different particular case.

We first study the probe in the unflavored ABJM background. Working at
zero temperature, we find a continuous quantum phase transition at the
point where the charge density vanishes. This transition is similar to
the one that happens in the D @xmath -D @xmath systems in [ 209 , 210 ]
and corresponds to passing from a black hole to a Minkowski embedding.
However, the scaling behavior of the probe near the critical point
differs from the ones found in [ 209 , 210 ] . Indeed, we find that the
corresponding critical exponents are different and, in addition, our
system displays multiplicative logarithmic corrections to the scaling
behavior.

We also study the effects due to the presence of unquenched dynamical
quarks in the background. In general, the inclusion of the flavor
backreaction in holography is quite challenging. However, in the ABJM
model the deformation of the geometry due to massless flavors seems
quite mild and this gives us a unique opportunity to explore the
different flavor effects. What we found below is that the influence on
the phase transition of the unquenched case is not so moderate as their
effects of the geometry could suggest. Indeed, we show below that the
flavored black hole to Minkowski phase transition occurs at non-zero
density and, moreover, it is of first order. We have been able to
compute several quantities characterizing this discontinuous transition,
such as its latent heat and the speed of sound close to the transition
point.

The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In section 5.2 we
study the embeddings of flavor D6-branes in the unquenched massless
flavored ABJM background, both at zero and non-zero temperature. Section
5.3 is devoted to the analysis of the zero temperature thermodynamics
and to explore the quantum phase transitions in the unflavored and
flavored cases. In section 5.4 we determine the charge susceptibility
and diffusion constants at non-zero temperature. In section 5.5 we
analyze the fluctuations of the probe and, in particular, we calculate
the speed of its zero sound mode. In section 5.6 we summarize our
results and discuss possible future research directions. The chapter is
completed with appendix 5.A.1 in which we carry out in detail the
analysis of the fluctuations of the D6-brane.

### 5.2 Probes on the flavored ABJM

We are interested in analyzing the behavior of a flavor D6-brane probe
in the background described in section 4.2 of chapter 4 (for details see
also appendix 4.A ). This flavor brane is extended along the @xmath
coordinates @xmath and wraps a compact three-dimensional submanifold of
the internal space. Let us recall the expression ( 4.3.6 ) of the
induced metric on the worldvolume of the flavor D6-brane:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2.1)
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are angles taking values in the range
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is an angle which determines the profile of
the probe brane. We want to deal with a system with non-zero baryonic
charge density. Therefore, we should have a non-zero value of the @xmath
component of the worldvolume gauge field strength @xmath . Accordingly,
we will adopt the following ansatz:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that the D6-brane probe is governed by the standard DBI+WZ
action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In ( 5.2.4 ) @xmath is the induced metric on the worldvolume and the
@xmath ’s are the pullbacks of the different RR potentials of the
background. In the flavored ABJM background @xmath and, therefore, the
RR potential @xmath is not well-defined. In this unquenched case one
should work directly with the equations of motion of the probe derived
from @xmath , which contain the RR field strengths @xmath and do not
contain the potentials (see appendix 4.A.2 ). Nevertheless, to determine
the embedding corresponding to the ansatz ( 5.2.2 ), only the term with
@xmath in ( 5.2.4 ) is relevant (the explicit expression of @xmath can
be found in [ 76 , 137 ] ).

We will use the following system of worldvolume coordinates @xmath .
After integrating over the internal coordinates, we can write the action
in the form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the lagrangian density of the probe, given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here and in the following, the prime denotes differentiation with
respect to @xmath . In ( 5.2.6 ) @xmath is a constant given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that the ansatz 5.2.2 is a particular case of the ansatz for the
embedding of the D6-brane considered in section 4.3 of chapter 4 , for
@xmath . Consequently, the equations of motion obtained from the
lagrangian 5.2.6 are a particular case of the equations of motion in
section 4.3 .

In the lagrangian ( 5.2.6 ) the variable @xmath is cyclic and its
equation of motion can be integrated once as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant, which is proportional to the charge density.
This equation can be inverted to give:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

According to the standard AdS/CFT dictionary the chemical potential
@xmath is identified with the value of @xmath at the UV:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For a black hole embedding one can write an expression for @xmath as an
integral over the radial variable @xmath . Indeed, in this case we
integrate ( 5.2.9 ) with the condition @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, it follows that the chemical potential @xmath for a black hole
embedding is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now write the equation of motion for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 5.2.9 ) to eliminate @xmath , we can rewrite ( 5.2.13 ) as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 5.2.14 ) must be solved numerically, except in the case of
vanishing temperature and density, where an analytic supersymmetric
solution is available [ 76 ] . All solutions of ( 5.2.14 ) reach the UV
with an angle which approaches asymptotically the value @xmath .
Actually, for large @xmath the deviation of @xmath with respect to this
asymptotic value can be represented as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the constant (depending of the flavor deformation
parameter @xmath ) defined in ( 3.3.48 ) and @xmath and @xmath are
constants related to the quark mass and the condensate, respectively.
The precise holographic dictionary for our probes has been worked out in
[ 137 ] . For our purposes it is sufficient to recall that the physical
quark mass @xmath is proportional to @xmath . This non-trivial exponent
is related to the anomalous mass dimension @xmath , which enters in the
(holographic) Callan-Zymanzik equation [ 165 ] .

The different solutions of ( 5.2.14 ) are obtained by imposing suitable
boundary conditions at the IR. We will study them in the next two
subsections, starting with the embeddings at zero temperature. There are
three different kinds of embeddings, sketched in Fig. 5.2 . They are
introduced one-by-one in the following subsection.

#### 5.2.1 Embeddings at zero temperature

Let us now consider eq. ( 5.2.14 ) for @xmath ( i.e. for @xmath ). One
can verify by numerical integration that ( 5.2.14 ) admits a family of
solutions in which the embeddings reach the origin @xmath at any given
value of @xmath , quantities which we shall denote as initial angles.
These solutions are called black hole embeddings as they are
continuously connected with their @xmath counterparts. Actually, one can
solve ( 5.2.14 ) for @xmath in a power series expansion near @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These solutions can be found numerically by imposing the initial
conditions @xmath and @xmath . The mass parameter @xmath of the
embedding (determined by the value of @xmath at @xmath ) is related to
the initial angle @xmath . Given the embedding, the chemical potential
can be obtained by evaluating the integral ( 5.2.12 ). When @xmath the
mass approaches zero. In fact, the whole embedding becomes trivial with
constant angle. When @xmath , on the other hand, the embedding becomes
increasingly spiky and the corresponding chemical potential approaches
the value:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have verified ( 5.2.17 ) numerically. This result can also be easily
demonstrated analytically as follows. Let us first introduce the
Cartesian-like coordinates @xmath , related to @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In these coordinates the black hole embeddings start in the IR at the
origin @xmath with a certain angle @xmath with respect to the @xmath
-axis and they end at the UV at @xmath with @xmath (see Fig. 5.3 ). If
the initial angle @xmath is very small, the embeddings are very spiky
and approach the maximal value @xmath very fast for very small values of
the coordinate @xmath . Instead of parameterizing the embedding as
@xmath , it is more convenient in this situation to represent it as
@xmath . It is then straightforward to demonstrate that @xmath is given
by the integral:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath the coordinate @xmath is very close to zero except when
@xmath and we can approximate the integral ( 5.2.19 ) by taking @xmath
in the integrand. We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in agreement with ( 5.2.17 ). For a fixed value of the mass parameter
@xmath , the limiting value ( 5.2.17 ) corresponds to sending @xmath .
Actually, the dependence of @xmath on @xmath for fixed @xmath can be
obtained numerically by performing the integral ( 5.2.12 ). The result
is shown in Fig. 5.4 , where we notice an important difference between
the unflavored and flavored cases. Indeed, when @xmath the chemical
potential @xmath grows monotonically with @xmath , starting from its
minimal value @xmath at @xmath . When @xmath is large the chemical
potential grows as @xmath , which is the behavior expected in a
conformal theory in 2+1 dimensions. On the contrary, when the
backreaction of the flavors is added, @xmath decreases for small values
of @xmath until it reaches a minimum at a non-zero value of @xmath and
then it grows and converges eventually to the unflavored case. The
presence of minimum in the @xmath curve means that the charge
susceptibility @xmath diverges at @xmath , signaling a discontinuous
phase transition at a non-zero density. We will confirm this fact below.

The black hole embeddings considered above are not the only possible
ones. Indeed, there are also two other configurations in which the brane
does not reach the @xmath origin. The so-called brane-antibrane
embeddings are characterized by the initial boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the minimal value of @xmath . In terms of the @xmath
variables the brane is orthogonal to the @xmath -axis in the IR (at
@xmath , @xmath ) and becomes parallel to the @xmath -axis as @xmath
becomes large (see Fig. 5.3 ). Notice that @xmath diverges at @xmath ,
which indicates that the brane has a turn-around point where the brane
jumps to a second branch.

A third class of configurations are the so-called Minkowski embeddings,
in which the brane reaches the @xmath -axis at some non-zero value of
@xmath , as shown in Fig. 5.3 . Due to charge conservation these
embeddings are only consistent if the density @xmath is zero. When this
is the case there are analytic solutions which preserve some amount of
supersymmetry [ 76 ] . In terms of the @xmath variables, these embedding
are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Equivalently @xmath . Notice that in this case the minimal value of
@xmath is @xmath . Moreover, when @xmath vanishes it follows from (
5.2.9 ) that @xmath and, therefore, the gauge field @xmath is an
arbitrary constant, which equals the chemical potential @xmath . Thus,
the SUSY embeddings ( 5.2.22 ) correspond to @xmath , with @xmath being
a free parameter.

Notice that, in this zero temperature case, the mass parameter @xmath
can be scaled out by a suitable change of the radial variable followed
by some redefinitions. Indeed, from ( 5.2.15 ) we conclude that @xmath
can be taken to be one if one changes variables from @xmath to @xmath .
Then, it follows from ( 5.2.12 ) that @xmath can be eliminated from this
last equation if @xmath and @xmath are written in terms of the rescaled
quantities @xmath and @xmath , defined as @xmath and @xmath .

In section 5.3 we will determine which of these three types of
embeddings at zero temperature is thermodynamically favored. We will
carry out this analysis by comparing their thermodynamic potentials
@xmath in the grand canonical ensemble.

#### 5.2.2 Embeddings at finite temperature

As will become clear later, we need to extend some of our analysis to
small and non-zero temperature. All three types of embeddings, as
discussed in the preceding section, extend continuously to @xmath .
However, as our main motivation in this work are the quantum critical
phenomena, we will restrict our attention in the black hole phase. Let
us thus only consider the black hole embeddings at non-zero temperature.
These embeddings reach the horizon @xmath with some angle @xmath . Near
@xmath we can solve ( 5.2.14 ) in powers of @xmath . The first two terms
in this expansion are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the constant @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To get the full @xmath function we need to integrate numerically (
5.2.14 ) with the initial condition at @xmath given by ( 5.2.24 ).
Notice that ( 5.2.14 ) depends explicitly on @xmath through the
blackening factor @xmath . It turns out that the horizon radius @xmath
can be scaled out by an appropriate change of variables followed by a
redefinition of the density @xmath . Indeed, let us define the reduced
variable @xmath and density @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, it is readily verified that the embedding equation in terms of
@xmath is just ( 5.2.14 ) with @xmath and @xmath substituted by @xmath .
Other quantities can be similarly rescaled. Indeed, let us define @xmath
and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to find an expression of @xmath in terms of the
rescaled quantities:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice also that the ratio @xmath does not depend on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

### 5.3 Zero temperature thermodynamics

The zero-temperature grand canonical potential @xmath is given by minus
the on-shell action of the probe brane:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that, as pointed out in [ 137 ] , the on-shell action of our ABJM
system is finite and does not need to be regulated. Indeed, the WZ term
of the action serves as a regulator of the DBI term, giving rise to
consistent thermodynamics. The explicit expression of @xmath at zero
temperature is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Other thermodynamic properties at @xmath can be obtained from ( 5.3.30
). For example, the pressure @xmath is just:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, we can evaluate @xmath for the different embeddings and
determine the one that is favored at different values of the chemical
potential. One can verify by plugging ( 5.2.22 ) in ( 5.3.30 ) that
@xmath for the SUSY embeddings ( 5.2.22 ) which have zero density @xmath
and arbitrary @xmath . In the case of the black hole embeddings the
situation varies greatly when the backreaction is included. Indeed, for
the unflavored background with @xmath the grand canonical potential of
the black hole embeddings is always negative and grows monotonically as
@xmath decreases towards its minimal value @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath (see Fig. 5.5 , left). On the contrary, in the flavored
backgrounds with @xmath , the grand canonical potential is negative for
large values of @xmath and vanishes for some @xmath which corresponds to
a non-zero density @xmath (see Fig. 5.5 , right). From this point on,
@xmath , reaching a maximum positive value, which corresponds to the
minimum value of the chemical potential @xmath . It is at this point
where the black hole embedding ceases to exist as it annihilates with
another (unstable) black hole embedding. This latter black hole branch
is the one which connects with the Minkowski embeddings at larger @xmath
, i.e. until the grand potential reaches the value @xmath when @xmath
and @xmath . The grand canonical potential for the brane-antibrane
embeddings is always non-negative and decreases monotonically as @xmath
grows ( @xmath for these embeddings). This structure in the @xmath plane
is the well-known swallow-tail shape, typical of first-order phase
transitions.

From the numerical results displayed in Fig. 5.5 it is clear that the
black hole embeddings are thermodynamically preferred for values of
@xmath such that their grand canonical potential @xmath is negative.
Moreover, when @xmath is such that @xmath , the Minkowski embeddings
(with @xmath ) are preferred. Notice also that the brane-antibrane
configurations are always thermodynamically disfavored. Therefore, at
@xmath such that @xmath there is a black hole-Minkowski embedding phase
transition. In Fig. 5.5 we see that the nature of this quantum phase
transition for the unflavored model is very different from that of the
backreacted background. Indeed, in the quenched unflavored case we have
a continuous second order phase transition in which the density @xmath
vanishes in both phases at the transition point @xmath . In section
5.3.1 we will study in detail this quantum critical point and we will
characterize the scaling of the different physical quantities near the
transition.

In the unquenched flavored model the phase transition at @xmath is
discontinuous since @xmath jumps from a non-zero value in the black hole
phase to @xmath in the Minkowski phase. Therefore, we have a first-order
phase transition, for which we will determine the latent heat and other
quantities in section 5.3.2 .

Once the grand canonical potential @xmath is known, we can determine
other thermodynamic functions. Indeed, the charge density @xmath is
given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By computing numerically the derivative in ( 5.3.32 ) at fixed mass
@xmath , we have checked that @xmath is related to @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the normalization constant ( 5.2.7 ). Eq. ( 5.3.33 )
confirms our identification of the constant @xmath . The energy density
@xmath can be obtained as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

More explicitly, after using ( 5.3.30 ), ( 5.2.12 ), and ( 5.3.33 ), we
have the following integral expression for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the minimal value of @xmath for the embedding. In Fig.
5.6 we plot @xmath for black hole embeddings as a function of @xmath ,
both for the quenched and unquenched model. We notice that the energy
density in the quenched theory grows monotonically with the chemical
potential, starting from the value @xmath at the transition point at
@xmath . On the contrary, when dynamical quarks are added to the
background, the function @xmath is not monotonic and becomes
double-valued, with a point where @xmath blows up. This is, of course,
consistent with the results plotted in Fig. 5.4 .

The speed of the first sound is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We evaluated numerically the derivative in ( 5.3.36 ) for black hole
embeddings by using ( 5.3.31 ) and ( 5.3.30 ). The results are
represented in Fig. 5.7 , both for the quenched and unquenched cases.
Again, they are very different in these two cases. In the quenched model
@xmath is always non-negative and decreases monotonically when @xmath
varies in the physical interval @xmath . In Fig. 5.7 (left) we compare
@xmath for our quenched system with the corresponding values for the
D3-D5 model [ 209 , 210 ] . In the unquenched case @xmath is not
monotonic and becomes negative for small @xmath , which again signals a
discontinuous phase transition.

#### 5.3.1 The unflavored transition

We have shown above that the unflavored system experiences a continuous
phase transition at @xmath and @xmath . In this section we look in more
detail the behavior of the system near this quantum critical point.
Accordingly, let us define @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly @xmath is the location of the phase transition. Therefore, we
expect that the grand canonical potential @xmath behaves in a
non-analytic form near @xmath . We assume that the system displays a
scaling behavior near the critical point. The goal of this section is to
characterize this behavior in terms of a set of critical exponents.

Let us consider a system with hyperscaling violation exponent @xmath and
dynamical exponent @xmath in @xmath spatial dimensions ( @xmath in our
case). Recall that in such a system @xmath is the effective number of
spatial dimensions near the critical point and @xmath is the effective
dimension of the energy. Therefore @xmath and the energy densities (such
as our grand canonical potential @xmath ) should have a dimension equal
to @xmath . These dimension assignments allow us to write @xmath near
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant. Eq. ( 5.3.38 ) is a generalization of the
expression written in [ 209 ] by including a logarithmic multiplicative
term with some new exponent @xmath . We show below that @xmath cannot be
zero in our ABJM case. This is to be compared with the D @xmath -D
@xmath systems studied in [ 209 , 210 ] , where @xmath . Similar
multiplicative logarithmic corrections to the scaling has been studied
in general in [ 211 ] for thermal phase transitions.

The charge density @xmath is obtained by computing the derivative of
@xmath with respect to @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us next consider, following [ 209 ] , the non-relativistic energy
density @xmath , defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Near the critical point, @xmath behaves as:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.41)
  -- -- -- ----------

and it is very convenient to consider the ratio @xmath , which is given
by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath the ratio @xmath reaches a constant non-vanishing value as
@xmath . This is clearly not the case for our system, as illustrated in
Fig. 5.8 . Therefore, our system should have @xmath . Moreover, the
logarithmic exponent @xmath should be non-zero and positive. ² ² 2
Indeed, if we had @xmath and @xmath the charge density @xmath in (
5.3.39 ) would be non-zero at the critical point, which is not the case
for our ABJM system. Therefore we get the following leading behavior for
our system:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can also compute the speed of sound @xmath near the critical point by
using ( 5.3.36 ), with the result:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.44)
  -- -- -- ----------

which, at leading order for @xmath becomes simply:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To determine the value of the exponent @xmath we can fit the numerical
values of @xmath and @xmath near @xmath to our scaling expressions (
5.3.43 ) and ( 5.3.45 ). Due to the logarithmic behavior of these
quantities we must explore very small values of @xmath . The results of
these fits is shown in Fig. 5.8 . The values of @xmath obtained are in
the range @xmath .

Let us determine, following the reasoning in [ 209 ] , the dynamical
critical exponent @xmath by dimensional analysis of the dispersion
relation of the sound mode, which is of the form @xmath , where @xmath
is given by ( 5.3.45 ) near the critical point @xmath . Actually, we
will see that the speed of the zero sound, obtained by numerical
integration of the fluctuation equations of the probe brane, is exactly
the same as the one determined by ( 5.3.36 ). Near @xmath eq. ( 5.3.45 )
tells us that @xmath (times a logarithmic correction) and, since @xmath
and @xmath , the dimensional consistency of the dispersion relation
@xmath implies that @xmath . Therefore, the values of @xmath and @xmath
for our system are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the value of @xmath just found differs from the value @xmath
obtained in [ 209 ] for the conformal systems D3-D7 and D3-D5.

Let us now consider the system at small non-zero temperature @xmath . We
can evaluate the free energy @xmath at first order in @xmath by using
the results of [ 212 ] . Notice that at @xmath , @xmath . Indeed,
according to the analysis of [ 212 ] , when @xmath is small the free
energy density can be approximated as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the non-relativistic free energy density is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Evaluating the right-hand side of ( 5.3.48 ) for our system, we get the
following expression of @xmath for small @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On general grounds, near a quantum phase transition the free energy
density should behave as a homogeneous function when the control
parameter @xmath and the temperature @xmath are scaled as @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath is the critical exponent that characterizes the
divergence of the correlation length @xmath [ 195 ] . Eq. ( 5.3.49 ) is
the first order term of a Taylor expansion of the scaling function of
@xmath . If we disregard the logarithmic terms in ( 5.3.49 ) (which give
rise to subleading terms when @xmath ), it follows that @xmath and
@xmath should be scaled by the same power of the scale factor @xmath .
Since @xmath for our system, we must have @xmath . Eq. ( 5.3.49 ) also
determines the value of the exponent @xmath which characterizes the
scaling of the heat capacity @xmath . Indeed, according to the analysis
of [ 209 ] the global power of @xmath in @xmath should be @xmath . If we
ignore again the logarithmic correction, this prescription gives @xmath
. Therefore, we have obtained that the critical exponents @xmath and
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath listed
in ( 5.3.46 ) and ( 5.3.50 ) satisfy the hyperscaling relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath .

#### 5.3.2 The flavored transition

We already pointed out above that the black hole-Minkowski phase
transition with dynamical quarks in the background is of first order. At
the transition point the density jumps from being @xmath in the black
hole phase to @xmath in the Minkowski phase. We have investigated
numerically the dependence of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath and we found
that, with big accuracy, this dependence can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is proportional to the physical mass of the quarks. Notice
that the dependence on @xmath written in ( 5.3.52 ) is the one expected
by the rescaling argument given at the end of section 5.2.1 .

The flavor dependent coefficient of the quadratic law ( 5.3.52 ) grows
monotonically with @xmath , as shown in Fig. 5.9 (left). For small
@xmath this growth is very fast and saturates very quickly for larger
values of the deformation parameter.

The phase transition occurs at a critical chemical potential @xmath .
Actually, the ratio @xmath is a decreasing function of @xmath which
approaches the value @xmath when @xmath . It is also interesting to
point out that the value of @xmath where the speed of sound vanishes
(see Fig. 5.7 )) corresponds to the turning point of @xmath as a
function of @xmath for a black hole embedding, i.e. to the minimum value
of @xmath for such embeddings. The phase transition occurs for a value
of @xmath close to its lowest value where @xmath is still positive.
Moreover, it follows from the above discussion that @xmath .

We also studied the latent heat of the phase transition, i.e. the
difference @xmath of the internal energy of the two phases. Notice that,
as @xmath in both phases at the transition point and @xmath in the
Minkowski phase, @xmath is simply obtained by evaluating @xmath at the
black hole side of the transition:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The behavior of this quantity with the number of flavors when @xmath is
displayed in Fig. 5.9 (right). We notice that the latent heat resembles
the behavior of the critical density. We have also verified that @xmath
grows with the quark mass as @xmath .

Most of the figures that we have presented above have been produced
using @xmath . It is however simple to obtain the results for any value
of @xmath by using the rescaling argument presented above. Indeed, one
can readily show that the different quantities scale with @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have checked that this behavior is confirmed by our numerical
results.

### 5.4 Charge susceptibility and diffusion constant

Let us now consider the system at non-zero temperature and compute the
charge susceptibility, which is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking into account that the charge density @xmath is related to @xmath
as @xmath ( 5.3.33 ), we can rewrite this last expression as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now evaluate explicitly the derivative in ( 5.4.56 ) as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The derivative inside the integral in ( 5.4.57 ) can be computed
directly. We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, the charge susceptibility can be written in the form:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.4.60)
  -- -- -- ----------

The charge diffusion constant @xmath can be related to the charge
susceptibility and to the DC conductivity @xmath by the Einstein
relation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The value of @xmath can be obtained from the two-point correlators of
the transverse currents. This calculation is performed in detail in
appendix 5.A.1 . Alternatively, @xmath can be computed by employing the
Karch-O’Bannon method [ 166 ] , as was done for the ABJM model in
chapter 4 . The result obtained by these two methods agree and is given
by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now plug ( 5.4.60 ) and ( 5.4.62 ) into the right-hand side of (
5.4.61 ) to get the diffusion constant @xmath . The final result is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the case of massless quarks, the embedding is just @xmath and the
integral ( 5.4.63 ) can be evaluated in analytic form. We get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the general case of massive quarks we have evaluated ( 5.4.63 )
numerically for the unflavored and flavored backgrounds as a function of
the chemical potential. The results of these calculations are displayed
in Fig. 5.10 . In the unflavored background @xmath is always
non-negative and vanishes when @xmath (see Fig. 5.10 , left). On the
contrary, when @xmath the diffusion constant is maximal for large
chemical potential (and given by the massless value ( 5.4.64 )) and
becomes negative after @xmath reaches its minimal value, which means
that the system becomes unstable and that the first-order phase
transition at @xmath survives at non-zero temperature. In the next
section we obtain the diffusion constant by looking at the fluctuation
modes of the probe in the hydrodynamical regime. The corresponding
values of @xmath are also plotted in Fig. 5.10 , where we notice that
they agree perfectly with the values found above by using Einstein
relation.

### 5.5 Fluctuations

We now want to carry out a dynamic ( i.e. time-dependent) study of our
system, to complement the static analysis performed so far. Accordingly,
let us consider the generic @xmath background and let us allow the probe
brane to fluctuate around the black hole embeddings described in section
5.2 . In general, the equations of motion of these fluctuations are very
complicated since the different fluctuation modes are coupled. However,
there are certain modes that can be decoupled from the rest and,
therefore, they constitute a consistent truncation of the general system
of equations. In this section we will study one of these restricted sets
of fluctuations, which involves the gauge field @xmath and the
transverse scalar @xmath . These fields take the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the first-order
perturbations. One can check that the ansatz ( 5.5.65 ) is indeed a
consistent truncation of the equations of motion. These truncated
equations can be derived from a second order lagrangian density @xmath ,
which is derived in detail in appendix 5.A.1 . The expression for @xmath
is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.5.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the open string metric defined in ( 5.A.3 ), @xmath is
the field strength for @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath is given by ( 5.4.59
). Let us now write the different equations of motion which can be
derived from the total lagrangian ( 5.5.66 ). The non-zero values of
@xmath are written in ( 5.A.5 ). First of all, we write the equation of
motion for @xmath (in the @xmath gauge):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The equation of motion for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (5.5.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the equation of motion for @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, the equation of motion for the scalar @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 (5.5.70)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us next Fourier transform the gauge field and the scalar to momentum
space as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and define the electric field @xmath as the following gauge-invariant
combination:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the equation of motion for @xmath in momentum space is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now combine this last equation with the definition of @xmath . We get
@xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

After using these equations, it is easy to check that ( 5.5.68 ) and (
5.5.69 ) become equivalent and equal to the following differential
equation for the electric field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (5.5.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now write the equation of motion for the scalar field @xmath in
momentum space as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.76)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

where it should be understood that @xmath is given by the first equation
in ( LABEL:at_ax_E ). The fluctuation equations ( 5.5.75 ) and ( 5.5.76
) depend explicitly on the horizon radius @xmath through the blackening
factor @xmath . This dependence can be eliminated by performing the
familiar rescaling of the radial variable and of the different
quantities appearing in the equations. Indeed, let us rescale the radial
variable @xmath and the density @xmath as in ( 5.2.25 ). Moreover, we
also define the rescaled frequency and momentum as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, one can easily verify that the resulting equations of motion are
independent of @xmath if the fields @xmath and @xmath are rescaled
appropriately. Actually, since only the relative power of @xmath in
these two fields matters, we can decide not to rescale the electric
field @xmath . The rescaling of the scalar @xmath that allows to
eliminate @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The resulting equations of motion are just ( 5.5.75 ) and ( 5.5.76 )
with @xmath and with all quantities replaced by their hatted
counterparts.

The collective excitations of the brane system are dual to the
quasinormal modes of the probe. The latter can be obtained by solving (
5.5.75 ) and ( 5.5.76 ) for low @xmath and @xmath by imposing infalling
boundary conditions at the horizon and the vanishing of the source terms
at the UV. At low temperature, in the so-called collisionless quantum
regime, the dominant excitation is the holographic zero sound [ 213 ,
214 , 182 ] (see also [ 183 , 184 , 215 , 216 , 217 , 218 ] ), whose
dispersion relation has the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In ( 5.5.79 ) @xmath is the speed of zero sound and @xmath is the
attenuation. We have integrated numerically the fluctuation equations
when @xmath is large ( i.e. at low temperature) and we have found the
value of @xmath , both for the unflavored and the flavored backgrounds.
The main conclusion from this calculation is that @xmath is equal to the
speed of the first sound @xmath (given by ( 5.3.36 )). As shown in Fig.
5.7 , @xmath reaches its maximal value ( @xmath ) when @xmath , where
the system is conformally invariant. In the unflavored case @xmath is
always positive and vanishes at the quantum critical point at @xmath
(see Fig. 5.7 , left). When dynamical quarks are included @xmath becomes
imaginary when @xmath reaches its minimal value, which occurs when the
Minkowski embeddings are thermodynamically favored.

At higher temperature ( i.e. with small @xmath ) the system enters into
the hydrodynamic diffusive regime. The dominant mode in this case has
purely imaginary frequency and a spectrum of the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the rescaled diffusion constant,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As in the zero sound case, this dynamic calculation of the diffusion
constant yields the same result as the static one. Indeed, the results
obtained by numerical integration of ( 5.5.75 ) and ( 5.5.76 ) coincide
with the ones obtained from the Einstein relation ( 5.4.63 ), as shown
in Fig. 5.10 .

Let us finish this section with the following observation. A careful
reader would had expected some discussion on the possible instability as
the WZ action has a term @xmath which is the source of striping via a
generic mechanism introduced in [ 185 ] . Indeed, the occurrence of
tachyonic fluctuations have been confirmed in similar brane models [ 182
, 183 ] , with the subsequent construction of the striped ground state [
189 ] . In the current work, we analyzed the fluctuations of the
transverse gauge field, where such an instability is expected. In this
sector, one needs to analyze the coupled fluctuations of the internal
gauge field @xmath and the transverse Minkowski gauge field @xmath at
non-vanishing momentum. The corresponding equations of motion are
presented in appendix 5.A.1 . While we did see the precursor of the
instability, a purely imaginary mode first ascending towards the upper
half of the complex @xmath plane and then descending as a function of
@xmath , we were unsuccessful to finding parameter values for which case
the mode would had actually become unstable. We expect that in the case
in which an internal flux is turned on at the unperturbed level, where
the contribution of the pullback of @xmath at the background level is
non-vanishing, the relevant WZ term can become sizable and thus implies
striping in some range of parameters.

### 5.6 Discussion

In this chapter we studied the phase diagram of a D6-brane probe with
non-vanishing charge density in a background dual to the ABJM
Chern-Simons matter theory with dynamical massless flavors at zero
temperature. We analyzed the phase transition between black hole and
Minkowski embeddings at zero temperature and non-vanishing chemical
potential. This transition is a holographic model of a
conductor-insulator phase transition between a gapless (black hole)
phase and a gapped (Minkowski) phase.

In the unflavored background we found that this transition occurs when
the charge density vanishes and is of second order. Moreover, we were
able to characterize the scaling behavior of the probe near the critical
point. Interestingly, we found logarithmic multiplicative corrections.
In the background with dynamical quarks the transition of the probe is
of first order and takes place when the density is non-zero. Therefore,
we have shown that, even if the change of the metric due to the
backreaction to the flavor is seemingly mild, the physical effects are
very important.

It is interesting to compare our results with the one corresponding to
the (2+1)-dimensional D3-D5 intersection [ 196 , 209 ] . When the mass
@xmath of the quarks is zero, the gravitational descriptions of both
systems are equivalent and have the same thermodynamic quantities.
However, for non-conformal embeddings with @xmath , the ABJM probe
action gets a non-trivial contribution from the Wess-Zumino term. This
term is responsible for the different critical behaviors of the systems
even in the absence of backreaction.

Let us now discuss some possible extensions of the work performed in
this chapter. First of all, it would be interesting to extend our study
of the Minkowski-black hole embedding phase transition to non-zero
temperature, in order to completely determine the phase diagram of the
model. In the absence of the chemical potential @xmath , this analysis
was performed in [ 137 ] . Another possible generalization would be to
consider the case of massive dynamical quarks presented in chapter 3 .
recall that this solution contains a scale (the mass of the sea quarks)
and it would be very interesting to explore how it affects the results
found here.

Turning on a suitable NSNS flat @xmath field in the ABJM supergravity
solution we get the so-called ABJ background, which is dual to a
Chern-Simons matter theory with gauge group @xmath [ 62 ] . The @xmath
field breaks parity in 2+1 dimensions. The embedding of flavor brane
probes in the ABJ background has been analyzed in chapter 4 and the
relation to the quantum Hall effect was doped out. It would be
interesting to analyze possible quantum phase transitions in this ABJ
system.

One of the main motivations of this work was the analysis of the effects
of the dynamical quarks in the phase diagram of holographic compressible
matter. We achieved this objective only partially since our backreacted
background did not include the effect of the charge density on the
flavor brane. On general grounds, one would expect having a Lifshitz
geometry in the IR of such a background. Indeed, this is precisely what
happens in the geometry recently found in [ 75 ] , corresponding to an
intersection of color D2-branes and flavor D6-branes. The study of the
quantum phase transitions, as well as the collective excitations of the
flavor brane, in this background is of great interest.

## Appendix 5.A Appendix

#### 5.a.1 Fluctuation analysis

Let us consider fluctuations of the gauge field @xmath and the embedding
function @xmath as in ( 5.5.65 ). We expand the induced metric @xmath
and the gauge field strength as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.A.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the metric written in ( 5.2.1 ) and @xmath is the field
strength of the unperturbed gauge connection ( 5.2.2 ), while @xmath and
the first and second order induced metrics @xmath and @xmath are given
by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.A.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us next write the inverse of the zeroth-order DBI matrix @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.A.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the symmetric part (the inverse open string metric) and
@xmath is the antisymmetric part. In order to write the different
elements of @xmath and @xmath it is quite convenient to introduce the
quantity @xmath defined in ( 5.4.59 ). In terms of @xmath , the equation
for the embedding takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.A.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the non-vanishing components of the open string metric are:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (5.A.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The only non-vanishing components of the antisymmetric tensor are:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.A.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At second order in the fluctuations, the DBI action is:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.A.7)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ---------

To evaluate this expression we use:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.A.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the indices @xmath and @xmath run over the Minkowski and radial
directions. After integrating over the internal angles, we get the
following second-order DBI lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The WZ term at second order yields the following lagrangian density:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now simplify these expressions. First of all, we should eliminate
@xmath . With this purpose we notice that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Secondly, we rewrite the terms with @xmath by integrating by parts and
neglecting the total derivative generated in this process. In the WZ
lagrangian we use

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The resulting WZ lagrangian takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the DBI part, we first write:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It follows that we can make the following substitution in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, after using eq. ( 5.2.13 ) for @xmath , can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking these results into account, it is straightforward to verify that
the total lagrangian density @xmath can be written as in ( 5.5.66 ).

##### Transverse fluctuations

We now consider fluctuations of the gauge field along the transverse
direction @xmath . It turns out that these fluctuations are coupled to
those along the internal directions. Actually, we can write the
following consistent ansatz:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are first-order fluctuations. The equation of
motion for @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.A.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas that for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.A.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For our purposes, it is enough to consider the fluctuations at zero
momentum ( @xmath ). In this case the equation for @xmath is decoupled
from the internal fluctuation @xmath and becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Explicitly, this equation for @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us expand this equation near @xmath . First, we expand the embedding
as in ( 5.2.23 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given by (see ( 5.2.24 )):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The coefficients of ( 5.A.21 ) will be expanded as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.A.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We now solve the equation of motion for @xmath in a Frobenius series
around @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, for infalling boundary conditions, the exponent @xmath is given
by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will also perform a low frequency expansion by considering @xmath and
@xmath . Then one can show that @xmath and is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now take the limits in opposite order. First, we consider the low
frequency limit. At leading order, we can neglect the last term in (
5.A.20 ) and write the equation for @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation can be immediately integrated:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant of integration and, in the last step, we have
defined the function @xmath . This solution can be expanded near the
horizon @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now compare this near-horizon expansion with the one written in (
5.A.26 ) for low frequency. First, we compute @xmath by direct
differentiation of the expansion ( 5.A.26 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking into account that @xmath and @xmath , we get, at leading order in
@xmath , that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, matching ( 5.A.33 ) and ( 5.A.31 ), we get that the constant
@xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now obtain the @xmath correlator from these results. The term in
the lagrangian density depending on @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking into account that @xmath and that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we arrive at:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the on-shell boundary action of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The two-point function of the transverse currents, at zero momentum, is
given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have defined the quantity @xmath . From the explicit
expressions of @xmath and @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From this result we get the DC conductivity, namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.A.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is just the result written in ( 5.4.62 ).

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

In this thesis we have studied new cases of the AdS/CFT correspondence
by using non-abelian T-duality and by including fundamental matter.
Furthermore, we have constructed new holographic models of condensed
matter physics systems.

-   In the first chapter we gave a general introduction to the
    gauge/gravity duality. We reviewed the basic aspects of supergravity
    and T-duality. Moreover, we have introduced the AdS/CFT
    correspondence and how to add flavor to it. Finally, we commented on
    some applications of the AdS/CFT duality.

-   In the second chapter we have reviewed some applications of
    non-abelian T-duality. In the context of type IIA/B supergravity,
    the non-abelian T-duality is used to obtain new solutions from
    previously know solutions. We have obtained new interesting cases of
    the gauge/gravity duality, in particular, new @xmath fixed points.
    Furthermore, we have analyzed the field theory duals of the new
    supergravity solutions, through the computation of some observables.

-   In the third chapter we have constructed a new type IIA supergravity
    background with D6-branes sources, whose field theory dual
    corresponds to a generalization of the ABJM theory that includes
    unquenched massive flavors. We have analyzed several observables,
    and the results confirmed a RG flow between two fixed points at the
    IR and the UV

-   In the fourth chapter we have constructed a supergravity solution
    based on the ABJM model that presents quantum Hall states. We have
    introduced D6-flavor branes with non-trivial worldvolume gauge
    fields. This set up allowed to have Hall states, and the filling
    fraction was computed. We have found supersymmetric Hall states for
    particular values of the parameters.

-   In the fifth chapter we have obtained a supergravity solution based
    on the ABJM model, dual to a field theory exhibiting quantum phase
    transitions. The fundamental matter was introduced via D6-branes,
    and charge density was turned on. In the ABJM background, the
    fundamental matter undergoes a second order phase transition at zero
    charge density. In the partially backreacted ABJM solution, the
    phase transition becomes first order, and takes place at a finite
    value of the charge density.