# Acknowledgements

I thank my supervisor, for whom I have deep admiration, Dr. Jorma Louko,
for taking me as a PhD student, for his guidance and advice throughout
this work. It is hard for me to think of a supervisor who is more
dedicated to his students than Dr. Louko. Many thanks for always
pointing at the errors in my often flawed arguments. If I have at all
become a stronger scientist, it is thanks to this. I also thank my
supervisor for encouraging me to continue in academia in an evermore
competitive environment.

Thanks are due to my collaborators, Prof. J. Fernando Barbero G.,
Prof. Christopher J. Fewster, Juan Margalef-Bentabol and
Prof. Eduardo J. S. Villaseñor, from whom I have learned many beautiful
things about physics and mathematics while doing research together.

I thank Prof. Adrian Ottewill and Dr. Silke Weinfurtner for reading this
work and suggesting many points that improved this thesis.

I would like to thank the members of the Mathematical Physics Group in
the School of Mathematical Sciences with whom I have had the opportunity
to discuss physics and mathematics: I thank Prof. John W. Barrett and
Prof. Ivette Fuentes for assessing my research progress. I also enjoyed
many insightful discussions with Prof. Kirill Krasnov and Dr. Thomas
Sotiriou, and I acknowledge them for this. It is a pleasure for me to
thank all of my colleagues researching gravity, postdocs and students,
for our stimulating discussions and our reading groups together. I thank
especially Manuel Bärenz, Tupac Bravo, Marco Cofano, Dr. Hugo R. C.
Ferreira, James Gaunt, Yannick Herfray, Jan Kohlrus, Dr. Carlos Scarinci
and Vladimir Toussaint for sharing their knowledge with me. I hope that,
but I am not sure if, I was able to share some valuable knowledge with
them.

I also thank the staff in the School of Mathematical Sciences for making
my stay as a student a smooth one.

On a personal note, I thank every single one of my friends who made my
stay in Nottingham the happiest time. Thanks to the climbing crew for
our great times bouldering, our trips and dinners together. I thank my
friends in the Postgraduate New Theatre for our amazing time on and off
stage. Muchas gracias to my Mexican friends in Nottingham for bringing
home to the UK. Thanks to my B50 officemates for our (big) breaks from
research and thanks to all of my mathematician friends. Of course, I
thank my friends who do not belong to any of the aforementioned
categories. A big thank you for our time discussing life, philosophy,
science and mathematics, as well as the forbidden topics: politics,
religion and signature conventions.

J’aimerais remercier très fort ma copine, Caroline , pour notre temps
ensemble, qui continue à être extraordinaire. Merci!

Finalmente, agradezco muy cariñosamente a mi familia y a mis amigos de
toda la vida. Muchísimas gracias a mis padres, Benito y Flor , por todos
los momentos felices, pero en especial por su apoyo en los momentos
difíciles. A mi hermana, Montse , le debo el haber estudiado física.
?‘Qué más puedo decir? No tengo palabras para agradecerle.

This work was supported by Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología,
Mexico (CONACYT) REF 216072/311506. Early stages of this work were
supported in part by Sistema Estatal de Becas del Estado de Veracruz.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Elements of QFT in curved spacetimes
    -    2.1 Classical field theory
        -    2.1.1 Covariant formulation
        -    2.1.2 Canonical formulation
    -    2.2 Quantum field theory
        -    2.2.1 Covariant formulation
        -    2.2.2 Canonical formulation
        -    2.2.3 Physical states
        -    2.2.4 Thermal states
        -    2.2.5 Conformal states
    -    2.3 Particles in quantum field theory and detectors
        -    2.3.1 KMS states and the detailed balance condition
        -    2.3.2 Particles in @xmath dimensions
-    3 Particles in @xmath -dimensional spacetimes
    -    3.1 Isolating the coincidence limit
    -    3.2 The sharp switching limit and the transition rate
    -    3.3 The transition rate: stationary case
        -    3.3.1 Stationary formula
        -    3.3.2 Massless limit
        -    3.3.3 Thermalisation
-    4 Quantum aspects of black holes
    -    4.1 Classical aspects of black holes in @xmath dimensions
        -    4.1.1 The receding mirror spacetime
        -    4.1.2 The @xmath Schwarzschild black hole
        -    4.1.3 The @xmath generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole
    -    4.2 Quantisation in @xmath -dimensional black holes
        -    4.2.1 Quantisation in the receding mirror spacetime
        -    4.2.2 Quantisation in the @xmath Schwarzschild black hole
        -    4.2.3 Quantisation in the @xmath generalised
            Reissner-Nordström black hole
    -    4.3 Quantum effects of black holes
        -    4.3.1 Effects in the receding mirror spacetime
        -    4.3.2 Effects in the @xmath Schwarzschild black hole
        -    4.3.3 Effects in the @xmath generalised Reissner-Nordström
            black hole
    -    4.4 Spacetime dimension and the response function
-    5 Asymptotic time-scales in the Unruh effect
    -    5.1 The KMS and the detailed balance conditions
        -    5.1.1 Non-uniformity of the asymptotic thermal limit
        -    5.1.2 Example: The Unruh effect
    -    5.2 Approaching the Unruh temperature by adiabatic interaction
    -    5.3 Approaching the Unruh temperature by constant interaction
-    6 Conclusions
-    A Supplement to Chapter 3
    -    A.1 Massive field in Minkowski half space
    -    A.2 Massless field in Minkowski half space
-    B Supplement to Chapter 4
    -    B.1 The receding mirror spacetime
        -    B.1.1 Static trajectory with respect to the mirror in the
            distant past
        -    B.1.2 Travelling towards mirror in the distant past
    -    B.2 The Schwarzschild black hole
        -    B.2.1 Static detector
        -    B.2.2 Inertial detector near the infinity
        -    B.2.3 Inertial detector near the singularity
    -    B.3 The generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole
        -    B.3.1 Boundary terms in eq. (4.56)
        -    B.3.2 Integral term in eq. (4.57)
        -    B.3.3 The @xmath geodesic.
        -    B.3.4 Local energy density near the Cauchy horizon
        -    B.3.5 The @xmath Rindler horizon
-    C Supplement to Chapter 5
    -    C.1 A collection of lemmas
    -    C.2 Bounds for (5.33) in Theorem 5.10
        -    C.2.1 Bound for @xmath
        -    C.2.2 Bound for @xmath
        -    C.2.3 Bound for @xmath

###### List of Figures

-    4.1 Receding mirror spacetime
-    4.2 Conformal diagram of the maximally extended Schwarzschild
    spacetime.
-    4.3 Part of the conformal diagram of the maximally extended
    generalised @xmath non-extremal Reissner-Nordström spacetime
-    4.4 Detector approaching the generalised @xmath Reissner-Nordström
    Cauchy horizon.
-    4.5 Transition rate in the receding mirror spacetime.
-    4.6 Asymptotic early and late-time behaviour of the transition rate
    in the receding mirror spacetime.
-    4.7 Energy flux in the receding mirror spacetime.
-    4.8 Loss of thermality along infalling geodesic in the HHI state in
    Schwarzschild
-    4.9 Loss of thermality along infalling geodesic in the Unruh state
    in Schwarzschild
-    4.10 Asymptotic behaviour of the transition rate near infinity and
    near the singularity in the HHI state in Schwarzschild
-    4.11 Transition rate for @xmath geodesic in the HHI state in
    Schwarzschild

###### List of Tables

-    4.1 Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates for the Schwarzschild extension
-    4.2 Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates for @xmath in the generalised
    Reissner-Nordström extension.
-    4.3 Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates for @xmath in the generalised
    Reissner-Nordström extension.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

General relativity and quantum field theory are two of the greatest
achievements of physics. On the one hand, general relativity describes
the classical interactions between the gravitational field and classical
matter at macroscopic scales, low energies and non-extreme curvature.
While the first victory of general relativity, the correct calculation
of the precession of the perihelion of Mercury, may seem modest today,
the recent detection of gravitational waves by the collision of two
black holes [ 1 ] reminds us that Einstein’s theory is not only elegant,
but truly formidable. On the other hand, quantum field theory describes
the fundamental interactions between matter at high energies, but below
the Planck scale at @xmath GeV. The success of quantum field theory is
manifest in the standard model of particle physics, which, in light of
the recent discovery of the Higgs boson [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] , seems to
be correct up to the Higgs scale at @xmath GeV. (It can be argued that
phenomena such as dark matter and dark energy are still not fully
understood, but the @xmath CDM model remains phenomenologically viable,
and neutrino physics phenomena are correctly explained by the see-saw
mechanism extension of the standard model, within our experimental
bounds.)

Yet, general relativity and quantum field theory remain disunited:
Despite many efforts, the gravitational field has not been quantised.
There are many reasons why this is so: First and most important, there
are no experiments available at the energy scale at which quantum
gravitational effects are expected to occur. While the experiments at
the LHC have reached energies up to @xmath GeV, there are @xmath orders
of magnitude before the Planck energy is reached, a feat that may not be
attainable in the foreseeable future, if at all. Second, from a
mathematical viewpoint, even at a perturbative level the theory is
non-renormalisable, due to the physical dimension of the gravitational
coupling constant, @xmath , and non-perturbative techniques face
difficulties due to the non-linearity of the Einstein field equations.
Third, from a physical standpoint, the quantisation of gravity is the
quantisation of the spacetime metric, which determines the notion of
distances, time lapses and causality, thus, serious conceptual
considerations have to be taken into account. Approaches in the
direction of quantum gravity include string theory [ 7 , 8 ] , canonical
quantum gravity [ 9 , 10 , 11 ] , path integral approaches [ 12 , 13 ,
14 ] and many others ( e.g. [ 15 , 16 , 17 ] ), but no line of attack
has succeeded thus far.

The point of view of quantum field theory in curved spacetimes [ 18 , 19
, 20 , 21 , 22 ] is to take one step back and describe quantum matter,
e.g. , the quarks, leptons, gauge bosons, the Higgs and composite fields
of the standard model, propagating in spacetime with a classical metric
that encodes the gravitational field. We take this point of view in this
thesis.

The surprising feature about quantum field theory in curved spacetime is
that one can learn many things about the physics and mathematics of
quantum gravity and even of flat spacetime quantum field theory.
Arguably the most important physical insights in quantum gravity come
from this semiclassical treatment. The Hawking effect , i.e. , the
process whereby black holes radiate away their mass in the form of
thermal radiation at infinity [ 23 , 24 ] , indicates that there is a
deep connection between gravity, thermodynamics and quantum physics.
This connection expresses itself transparently in the laws of black hole
mechanics [ 22 , 25 ] : Because the horizon area of a black hole is
proportional to its entropy, one can conjecture the existence of
gravitational microscopic degrees of freedom at the horizon [ 26 , 27 ,
28 ] . A related phenomenon, which was discovered as a by-product of the
study of the quantum phenomena of black holes, is the Unruh effect ,
whereby a linearly uniformly accelerated observer in Minkowski spacetime
will perceive a temperature proportional to their acceleration, due to
the interaction with the quantum matter in the spacetime [ 29 , 30 ] .

The most important mathematical insights for quantum gravity and flat
spacetime quantum field theory come from the programme to formulate
precisely quantum field theory in curved spacetimes. The attempt to
generalise the quantum field theoretic flat spacetime formulation (see
e.g. [ 31 ] ) led to the conclusion that concepts such as Poincaré
invariance and particles are meaningless in general situations. There is
simply no way to choose a preferred Hilbert space for the theory.
Already in flat spacetime, a theory restricted to a Rindler wedge is
unitarily inequivalent to the Poincaré invariant flat spacetime theory,
based on the Minkowski vacuum state. Instead, quantum field theory, in
flat spacetimes or otherwise, must be based on physical principles such
as locality, covariance and causality [ 32 , 33 , 34 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 Field
theory is under good control for globally hyperbolic spacetimes, but
there is a large arena to explore for boundary value problems,
especially in the context of non-trivial boundaries, or the imposition
of boundary values as theory constraints. See, e.g. , [ 35 , 36 ] for
classical aspects and [ 37 ] for quantisation in this context. Thus,
there is no reason to expect a theory of quantum gravity to be
formulated directly in terms of a Hilbert space. It is very likely that
such structure will appear only a posteriori .

In addition to the Hawking and Unruh effects, other important
discoveries and advances in the context of quantum field theory in
curved spacetimes, or at least inspired by the theory, include the
cosmological creation of particles [ 38 , 39 , 40 ] , the creation of
particles by moving boundaries [ 41 , 42 ] , analogue gravity [ 43 , 44
, 45 ] , lightcone fluctuations in spacetime [ 46 ] , the detailed
understanding of the Casimir effect [ 47 , 48 ] and quantum energy
inequalities [ 49 , 50 ] .

In this thesis, we revisit the Hawking and Unruh effects in selected
contexts, which we describe below. Before that, we would like to point
out that in a large portion of our work, we shall take the point of view
that the Hawking and Unruh effects are detected by observers equipped
with particle detectors . To support our point of view, the statement
that the Hawking effect is a process whereby a black hole radiates away
particles is ambiguous. The notion of a particle is a global one,
because it makes reference to excitations of a fixed vacuum state. But,
as we have mentioned, states are not unique (up to unitarity) in general
curved spacetimes. ² ² 2 In Minkowski space one can use the Poincaré
symmetry to select a prefer vacuum and fields are representations of the
Poincaré group. One can make sense of the concept of particles locally
only if one interprets a particle as the absorption or emission
transition in a localised test apparatus with internal states coupled to
quantum fields. Such a test apparatus is called a particle detector. The
dictum a particle is what a particle detector detects [ 51 ] summarises
this point of view.

Particle detectors are a powerful tool for analysing the experiences of
observers along their spacetime worldlines. Perhaps the most prominent
example is the Unruh-DeWitt detector [ 30 ] , a model upon which our
work is based. While a large part of the literature has focused on
stationary situations [ 52 , 53 ] , particle detectors can be defined on
non-stationary situations and analysed within first order perturbation
theory [ 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66
] and by non-perturbative techniques [ 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 ] . A
review with further references can be found in [ 72 ] .

The aim of this work is to realise the Hawking and Unruh effects as
phenomena experienced by local observers, and characterise how these
effects emerge or disappear in certain regimes. We now discuss the
objectives, contents and results of this work:

In Chapter 2 , we give an introduction to the quantisation of fields in
curved spacetimes. The purpose of this chapter is, on the one hand, to
make the thesis reasonably self-contained and, on the other hand, to
introduce all the relevant notation and technical results that we shall
exploit throughout the rest of the thesis. By no means is this an
exhaustive review. There are many excellent introductions to the subject
that deepen and expand the material that we present, such as the classic
texts [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] . A reader well acquainted with quantum
field theory in curved spacetimes can safely skip the reading of this
chapter, with the possible exception of Section 2.3 , which motivates
the part of our work in lower dimensions in this thesis.

Chapters 3 and 4 deal with quantum effects in @xmath dimensions. We
shall work with a minimally coupled massless scalar field theory, which
has the advantage of being conformal in @xmath -dimensional spacetimes,
giving full analytic control in many interesting situations. As simple
as @xmath -dimensional scalars are, the Wightman two-point function of
the theory, which is crucial for defining (Hadamard) vacuum or thermal
states, contains an infrared ambiguity. ³ ³ 3 This ambiguity is absent
for Dirac fields, see e.g. [ 73 ] in the context of detectors. While
this is not a problem for uniquely defining the stress-energy tensor in
a given state [ 74 , 75 ] , it is so for defining the vacuum
polarisation. Hence, the transition probability of the Unruh-DeWitt
detector, which is proportional to the (smeared) power spectrum of the
vacuum polarisation (up to perturbative leading order), is ambiguous. To
solve this problem, in Chapter 3 we introduce a derivative-coupling
detector [ 104 , 54 , 67 , 76 , 77 ] , in dimensions greater than or
equal to two, which couples linearly to the derivative of the field,
instead of the field itself as in the Unruh-DeWitt model, and that has
an unambiguously defined transition probability. One way to interpret
the coupling of such a detector can be understood by making an analogy
with quantum electrodynamics. In this context, the derivative-coupling
detector would not be sensitive to the gauge potential, but only to the
electric field. Another way to interpret this coupling comes from the
work of Grove [ 104 ] , who realised that such derivative-coupling
detector would be sensitive to the energy flux of the quantum field to
which it couples.

In Chapter 3 , based on ref. [ 78 ] , we provide an
ultraviolet-divergence-free and infrared-unambiguous formula for the
response function ⁴ ⁴ 4 The term response function and transition
probability are usually used interchangeably because the perturbative
leading order in the transition probability of the detector is
proportional to the response function, with a proportionality factor
independent of the field state, spacetime and detector trajectory. of
the derivative-coupling detector along arbitrary worldlines in @xmath
dimensions. We study the sharp-switching limit of the detector response
and obtain a general formula for the sharp instantaneous transition rate
along non-stationary and stationary worldlines. We then verify that the
rate of the detector satisfies many desirable properties in stationary
situations. Namely, we verify that the massive-to-massless limit of the
field is continuous in the Minkowski vacuum and in Minkowski half-space,
that the detector thermalises in a heat bath at the bath temperature, in
accordance with the detailed balance version of the KMS condition and,
finally, that the detector responds at the Unruh temperature, due to the
Unruh effect, along linearly uniformly accelerated worldlines.

In Chapter 4 , with the confidence that the derivative coupling detector
has the correct massless limit and is sensitive to thermal phenomena, we
study quantum effects in several black hole (and black hole motivated)
spacetimes. The work that we present here is based on [ 78 ] and partly
on the conference paper [ 79 ] . ⁵ ⁵ 5 At present time, a full paper
that extends [ 79 ] and includes results that have first appeared in
this thesis is in preparation.

First, in Section 4.1 , we introduce the @xmath -dimensional spacetimes
that we shall be working on. Namely, a receding mirror spacetime à la
Davies-Fulling [ 41 , 42 ] in @xmath dimensions that mimics the
gravitational effects of a spherically symmetric collapsing star at late
times, and which asymptotes the Minkowski half-space with Dirichlet
boundary conditions at early times; the @xmath Schwarzschild black hole
and a conformal class of spacetimes that generalise the @xmath
non-extremal Reissner-Nordström black hole, in the sense that these
spacetimes share the causal structure of Reissner-Nordström, which
includes the presence of Cauchy horizons.

Second, in Section 4.2 , we quantise the free (non-interacting)
massless, minimally coupled scalar field in the aforementioned
spacetimes. In the receding mirror spacetime, we obtain a state that
vanishes at the mirror and that contains, in addition to the ultraviolet
divergences, appropriately regularised divergences whenever two
spacetime points are connected by a null ray reflected on the mirror. In
the Schwarzschild and in our generalised Reissner-Nordström spacetimes,
we define Unruh and Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI) vacua in the appropriate
globally hyperbolic submanifolds of the black hole spacetimes.

Third, in Section 4.3 , we study quantum effects on these spacetimes. In
the receding mirror spacetime, we compute the rate of detectors, which
are inertial with respect to the mirror in the asymptotic past, at the
early and late times, and find that the right-moving modes of the scalar
field are detected by the derivative-coupling detector at the would-be
Hawking temperature that emerges at late stages of the star collapse.
The transient time behaviour is analysed numerically. In the
Schwarzschild spacetime, we study the transition rate of static
observers, as well as the transition rate along infalling geodesics. The
transition rate is computed in the near-infinity and near-singularity
regimes analytically for the Unruh and HHI vacua, and the interpolating
behaviour is computed numerically, showing a loss of thermality along
the infalling trajectory and a divergence of the transition rate
proportional to @xmath as the radial coordinate, @xmath , approaches
zero. In the HHI vacuum, we also consider detectors that are switched on
in the white hole region and travel towards the black hole singularity,
and their behaviour is analysed numerically. In our class of generalised
Reissner-Nordström spacetimes, we compute the rate of divergence of the
transition rate as a left-travelling geodesic observer equipped with a
detector approaches the future Cauchy horizon in the Unruh and HHI
vacua, and find that the strength of the divergence is as for the
detector approaching the Schwarzschild singularity as a function of the
proper time. We then compute the (sharply and smoothly smeared
renormalised local energy density, obtained from the renormalised
stress-energy tensor, along this trajectory and find agreement with the
detector rate, in the sense that the energy density becomes large along
the trajectory as the Cauchy horizon is approached.

Fourth, in Section 4.4 , we comment on the validity of using @xmath
-dimensional models to describe @xmath phenomena. We consider a @xmath
observer equipped with a derivative-coupling detector in the Rindler
vacuum and compute the divergence of the detector’s transition rate as
the observer approaches the future horizon of the Rindler spacetime
along an orbit of the Minkowskian time translation Killing vector. We
find that the transition rate diverges in a non-integrable fashion,
which is stronger than the situation for the @xmath non-derivative
Unruh-DeWitt detector. This leads us to conjecture that the transition
rate divergent behaviour near a @xmath Reissner-Nordström Cauchy horizon
may be integrable for a sharply switched detector.

In Chapter 5 , we address the question of how long one needs to wait to
detect the Unruh effect by looking at the response of particle detectors
that interact with a field for a finite time, such that after a long
interaction time has elapsed the detailed balance form of the KMS
condition holds up to a prescribed precision at the Unruh temperature.
The work that we present in this chapter is based in part on [ 80 ] . ⁶
⁶ 6 At present time, a full paper that extends [ 80 ] and includes
results that have first appeared in this thesis is in preparation. We
consider a finite-time interacting Unruh-DeWitt detector that interacts
with a massless @xmath scalar field in the Minkowski vacuum state for a
finite amount of time through an interaction Hamiltonian whose coupling
strength is controlled by a smooth function of compact support.

In Section 5.1 we first show rigorously that, under general conditions,
the asymptotic limit of the response function as the interaction time
goes to infinity, prescribed by a time scale, @xmath , which rescales
the detector-field interaction, satisfies the detailed balance condition
if and only if the state is KMS. For the switching function, we consider
both an adiabatic time scaling, which represents a long and slow
switching, and a scaling that leaves the switch-on and switch-off tails
of the switching function intact, but scales the constant-strength
interaction time between the field and the detector. Second, we prove
that, under mild assumptions, the thermal limit of the response function
cannot be uniform in the detector transition energy gap. Third, we prove
that in the case of the Unruh effect the above hypotheses hold and,
hence, the thermal limit cannot be uniform in the detector energy.

Thus, the question of how long one waits to detect the Unruh temperature
can only be answered in terms of the energy scale of the detector, i.e.
, how long one needs to wait to detect the Unruh temperature up to a
prescribed large energy scale, @xmath . In Section 5.2 we show that, in
the case of the adiabatic scaling, one can find a class of switching
functions for which the thermalisation time scale is polynomial in the
large energy, i.e. , one needs to wait a polynomially long time to
detect the Unruh temperature. We then show, in Section 5.3 , that for
the constant-interaction rescaling, there is no switching function for
which the detector thermalises in a long time scale which is polynomial
in the large energy. The moral is that the details of the thermalisation
are in the switching of the interaction.

We believe that the estimates that we present in Chapter 5 are relevant
in the design of experiments seeking to verify the Unruh effect by
measuring the Unruh temperature with precision up to a prescribed energy
scale in the detector response spectrum.

Finally, we summarise our results and make our concluding remarks in
Chap. 6 .

Appendices A , B and C contain several technical computations and
results that we use throughout this thesis.

We set the metric signature such that the contraction with two timelike
vector fields is negative and the contraction with two spacelike vector
fields is positive. We work in units in which @xmath , unless explicitly
indicated. Complex conjugation is denoted by an overline and Hermite
conjugation is denoted by an asterisk.

Throughout this work we use the Big O and small o notation for
asymptotic quantities. We illustrate this notation: Let @xmath be a
real-valued real function. We say that @xmath as @xmath if @xmath is
bounded as @xmath . @xmath as @xmath if @xmath falls off faster than any
positive power of @xmath as @xmath . @xmath if @xmath is bounded in the
limit under consideration. @xmath as @xmath if @xmath as @xmath .
Finally, @xmath if @xmath vanishes in the limit under consideration.

## Chapter 2 Elements of quantum field theory in curved spacetimes

The aim of this chapter two-fold. First, we review quantisation in field
theory. Second, we introduce the relevant technology in the mathematical
theory of quantum fields. There exists an extensive literature on the
subject of quantum field theory in curved spacetimes that expands and
deepens the exposition that we present here. Classic texts include [ 18
, 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] . Recent progress on the field has been achieved
from the so-called algebraic point of view. Relevant literature reviews
on the topic include [ 81 , 82 , 83 ] and references therein. For a
discussion from a mathematical point of view, see for example [ 84 , 85
] .

In Section 2.1 we review classical field theory, the theory that
describes the macroscopic aspects of our universe. We introduce the
procedure known as quantisation in Section 2.2 . We take the opportunity
to emphasise that the quantisation map acts on fields and, while the
language of quantum field theory is appropriate to describe particle
physics, particles are not the fundamental objects in the theory.
Instead, quantum fields are. We explain in Section 2.3 what the
relationship between quantum fields and particles is, by introducing
particle detectors .

###### Definition 2.1.

A spacetime is a pair @xmath consisting of a connected, real, smooth
manifold, @xmath , equipped with a Lorentzian metric, @xmath , with
signature @xmath .

In calculations, we shall often make use of abstract index notation, by
which we write, e.g. , a vector field in the tangent bundle of the
spacetime, @xmath , as @xmath and a cotangent vector, @xmath , as @xmath
. The metric tensor reads @xmath in this notation.

We further demand that these spacetimes be orientable and
time-orientable according to the following:

###### Definition 2.2.

An @xmath -dimensional spacetime is called an oriented spacetime ,
denoted by @xmath , if there exists a nowhere vanishing top form @xmath
with the orientation @xmath inherited from @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 We have
denoted by @xmath the space of @xmath -forms on the spacetime @xmath .

###### Definition 2.3.

A spacetime is called a time-oriented spacetime , denoted by @xmath , if
there exists an everywhere timelike vector field @xmath , i.e., @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.

Let @xmath be a subset of the time-oriented spacetime @xmath ,

-   @xmath is the chronological future/past of @xmath , i.e., the set of
    points @xmath that can be reached by a future/past directed timelike
    curve that starts at a point in @xmath .

-   @xmath is the causal future/past of @xmath , i.e., as above in the
    case of causal curves.

-   @xmath and @xmath .

We present some notation that will be useful in our discussion:

###### Definition 2.5.

We denote:

-   @xmath : the space of @xmath -valued, smooth functions on a manifold
    @xmath .

-   @xmath : the space of @xmath -valued, smooth functions of compact
    support on a manifold @xmath .

-   @xmath : the space of @xmath -valued, smooth functions of space-like
    compact support, i.e., whose support is contained in @xmath where
    @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath .

-   @xmath : the space of @xmath -valued, smooth functions of
    future/past compact support, i.e., if @xmath , for any @xmath ,
    @xmath is compact.

In classical field theory, an all-important property for time-oriented
spacetimes is global hyperbolicity .

###### Definition 2.6.

Let @xmath be a time-oriented spacetime. A subset @xmath is called an
achronal set if @xmath . Moreover, such an achronal set @xmath is called
a Cauchy hypersurface if for any @xmath , every past and future
inextendible causal curve through @xmath intersects @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.7.

Let @xmath be a time-oriented spacetime. The following statements are
equivalent:

1.  @xmath is globally hyperbolic.

2.   There exists a Cauchy hypersurface @xmath , i.e., @xmath .

3.  @xmath is isometric to @xmath with metric @xmath , where @xmath is a
    smooth negative function, @xmath is a Riemannian metric on @xmath
    depending smoothly on @xmath and each @xmath is a smooth spacelike
    Cauchy hypersurface in @xmath .

The proof is due to A. Bernal and M. Sánchez. See e.g. [ 81 ] , Chapter
2, Theorem 1. The proof extends the work by Geroch [ 86 ] , who showed
that a globally hyperbolic manifold is homeomorphic to @xmath . This
result is strengthened to show that the @xmath and @xmath are
diffeomorphic and, furthermore, that @xmath and @xmath are isometric.

Spacetimes which satisfy this property support fields with well-posed
initial value problems. Throughout this chapter we will present the
quantisation of fields in globally hyperbolic spacetimes. The
quantisation of fields on non-globally hyperbolic manifolds has been
studied in the context of boundary value problems. Notable examples
include the Casimir effect [ 47 , 48 ] and quantisation in
Davies-Fulling mirror spacetimes, first introduced in [ 41 , 42 ] . We
shall encounter quantum fields in non-globally hyperbolic spacetimes in
Chapters 3 and 4 and we shall be able to also perform the field
quantisation in this context.

@xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetimes, with @xmath , can be
understood as the dynamical evolution of @xmath Riemannian metrics. Such
interpretation is provided by the ADM formalism, to which we turn our
attention. We use abstract index notation:

Suppose one selects a time function @xmath . Cauchy surfaces @xmath are
defined by constant @xmath surfaces, and are normal to @xmath . We
normalise this vector field to unity and call it @xmath . The metric
induced on @xmath is defined by @xmath .

The 3-metric @xmath defines a projector on the surface, @xmath . The
projector orthogonal to the surface is defined by @xmath , @xmath . In
this way, any vector field can be decomposed as @xmath .

These projectors define the important Lapse function , @xmath , and
Shift vector , @xmath . We select a global timelike vector field @xmath
, which satisfies the condition @xmath . The integral curves of @xmath
represent the flow of time in @xmath . The vector field @xmath is
decomposed in its normal and tangential components to the Cauchy surface
@xmath as @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, let us discuss the situation for non-globally hyperbolic
spacetimes. Many of the most important solutions in General Relativity
are not globally hyperbolic. Notably, most members of the Kerr-Newman
family are not globally hyperbolic.

By Theorem 2.7 , non-globally hyperbolic spacetimes contain no Cauchy
hypersurfaces. Instead, to any achronal surface there will be an
associated manifold subset called the domain of dependence , but this
domain of dependence cannot be the whole manifold. Let us make this
geometrical notion more precise.

###### Definition 2.8.

Let @xmath be a time-oriented spacetime. Let @xmath be a closed,
achronal set. The future domain of dependence of @xmath , denoted by
@xmath , is the set of points @xmath , such that every past-inextendible
causal curve through @xmath crosses @xmath .

The past domain of dependence of @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the set
of points @xmath , such that every future-inextendible causal curve
through @xmath crosses @xmath .

The domain of dependence of @xmath is @xmath .

The boundary of the domain of dependence of an achronal surface is
called a Cauchy horizon , according to the following

###### Definition 2.9.

Let @xmath be a closed, achronal set in @xmath . The future Cauchy
horizon of @xmath is the achronal surface @xmath , where the overline
denotes the set closure.

The past Cauchy horizon of @xmath is the achronal surface @xmath .

The Cauchy horizon of @xmath is @xmath .

###### Remark.

An achronal surface @xmath in the spacetime @xmath is a Cauchy
hypersurface if and only if @xmath . Conversely, every achronal surface
on a non-globally hyperbolic spacetime will contain a Cauchy horizon.

We now proceed to introduce classical and quantum field theory in
globally hyperbolic spacetimes, where the Cauchy problem is well-posed.
In non-globally hyperbolic spacetimes, the same treatment can be applied
inside the domain of dependence of an achronal surface with prescribed
initial data, with the caveat that the dynamics cannot be extended past
the Cauchy horizon.

### 2.1 Classical field theory

Classical field theory explains gravity, matter and their interactions
at macroscopic scales. In this section, we shall review the kinematical
and dynamical aspects of field theory. The kinematics describes the
observables, classical field maps, understood as sections on vector
bundles. The dynamics enters in the form of the equations of motion of
the theory.

One usually describes classical field theory by writing an action
functional on field configuration variables and the extremisation of
this functional is equivalent to satisfying the equations of motion of
the field theory. Prominent examples are the Einstein-Hilbert action,
which yields the Einstein field equations in vacuum upon variation, the
standard model, which describes the electromagnetic and nuclear forces,
and the sum of the Einstein-Hilbert action ² ² 2 The coupling between
fermions and gravity is best achieved using the vielbein formulation of
general relativity. and the standard model action, which describes all
of the fundamental interactions in nature.

Action functionals are useful for physicists because they allow a
theorist to postulate a field theory based on symmetries, which are
believed to be fundamental in nature, but actions are not essential. A
physical experiment is only sensitive to the equations of motion of the
theory. For example, if one wishes to describe the theory of a free
scalar field, @xmath , with mass @xmath on a fixed Lorentzian spacetime,
@xmath , with Riemann curvature tensor, @xmath , one can postulate the
action functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

subject to regularity conditions on the field, where the Ricci scalar,
@xmath , is the trace of the Ricci tensor, built from the contraction of
the Riemann tensor @xmath , and with @xmath . One can ensure that the
theory is invariant under diffeomorphisms by using as an integration
measure the generally covariant volume element defined locally by @xmath
.

###### Remark.

The orientation of our spacetime is provided by @xmath . We choose
@xmath as an orientation.

The variation of this action produces the Klein-Gordon equation for a
free scalar field with mass @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In abstract index notation, @xmath . Eq. ( 2.3 ) dictates the dynamics
of the field, and one can simply start from this equation without
specifying an action.

If one wishes to study the dynamics between the field and gravity, one
simply promotes @xmath to a dynamical field in the Klein-Gordon action (
2.2 ) and adds up the Einstein-Hilbert action. The action functional
(with a cosmological constant, @xmath , term) is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is Newton’s gravitational constant. Upon variation, one
obtains the eleven partial differential equations that determine the
metric and the field,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the celebrated Einstein tensor and @xmath is the energy
momentum tensor of @xmath , @xmath .

From now on we consider the metric field @xmath to be a background field
and we further suppose that there is no back-reaction on the metric. In
other words, we switch off gravity, @xmath . (Because @xmath is a
dimensionful quantity, the limit must be taken using the appropriate
scales of the system. For example, if the coupled matter has mass @xmath
, then @xmath is the dimensionless quantity that runs to zero.) In this
way, we can focus on the essential structures of classical field theory
by using a very simple model and, in turn, make the relation between the
classical and quantum mathematical structures transparent.

#### 2.1.1 Covariant formulation

The kinematics of classical field theory on a manifold @xmath can be
formulated both covariantly and canonically. In the covariant approach,
the relevant space of field configurations is the covariant
configuration space, which consists of fields supported in spacetime
regions. In the canonical approach, the relevant space of field
configurations is the canonical configuration space, which consists of
field configurations on a Cauchy surface of the spacetime equipped with
a Riemannian metric. Additionally, one specifies the momenta of these
canonical field configurations to define a canonical phase space. While
the covariant configuration space and the canonical phase space are a
priori not the same, they lead to the same space of solutions, once the
dynamics are imposed. Elements in the covariant and canonical space of
solutions can be identified in a one-to-one correspondence.

We denote the covariant configuration space by @xmath . The dynamics
impose a condition on this configuration space and, when the field
equations are satisfied, we say that the field is on-shell. The space of
on-shell field configurations is the solution space of the field theory,
denoted by @xmath .

Intuitively, the configuration space of fields is the space of smooth
vector-valued functions over the spacetime manifold, @xmath . ³ ³ 3
While one needs not impose a priori such strong regularity conditions,
this does not affect the discussion at this level. We will not be
worried about this problem at present, and we will trust our intuition
in choosing @xmath . In addition, we introduce the space of real valued
functionals on these smooth functions, which are elements of the dual
space @xmath . Functionals will become relevant in the discussion of the
field observables of the theory.

These functional spaces have a geometric interpretation in terms of
sections on a vector bundle, which we denote @xmath , with additional
structure, depending on the spin and gauge symmetries of the field.

In this chapter, it suffices for our purposes to introduce this
geometric technology in the context of real scalar fields on an
arbitrary fixed spacetime background.

Let us start by providing a useful definition:

###### Definition 2.10.

A (smooth) vector bundle @xmath is a fibre bundle consisting of:

1.  The total space, @xmath , a smooth manifold.

2.  The base manifold, @xmath , a smooth manifold.

3.  The fibre, @xmath , a vector space and a smooth manifold.

4.  The projection @xmath , which satisfies that, for @xmath , @xmath ,
    the fibre over @xmath , is isomorphic to the fibre @xmath .

5.  The structure group, @xmath , which is the general linear group
    acting on the left on @xmath .

Moreover, we have that

1.  Local trivialisations, @xmath , satisfy that, for any coordinate
    chart @xmath , @xmath is a diffeomorphism for which @xmath .

2.  Transition functions, @xmath , satisfy that, for any two coordinate
    charts @xmath , with @xmath , for every @xmath , we have that @xmath
    .

The relevant vector bundle for a real scalar field on a manifold @xmath
is @xmath , with structure group @xmath . This vector bundle is called
the line bundle. The next useful definition that we need is

###### Definition 2.11.

A smooth section on @xmath is the smooth map @xmath , which satisfies
@xmath . The space of smooth sections on @xmath is denoted by @xmath . A
local section on @xmath is the smooth map @xmath .

One can also define the spaces of smooth sections in terms of their
support on @xmath .

###### Definition 2.12.

We denote:

-   @xmath : the space of smooth sections of compact support on a
    manifold @xmath .

-   @xmath : the space of smooth sections of space-like compact support,
    i.e., whose support is contained in @xmath where @xmath is a compact
    subset of @xmath .

-   @xmath : the space of smooth sections of future/past compact
    support, i.e., if @xmath , for any @xmath , @xmath is compact.

In view of this definition, the configuration space of the scalar field,
@xmath , is isomorphic to @xmath , since a smooth function @xmath can be
identified with a section @xmath and vice-versa.

The functionals, @xmath , are sections on @xmath valued in the dual
vector bundle, i.e.,

###### Definition 2.13.

The dual bundle of the fibre bundle @xmath is the fibre bundle @xmath ,
in which the fibre @xmath is the dual space of @xmath .

In view of this definition, a functional @xmath is identified with the
map @xmath , where @xmath is a bilinear form that defines the pairing
@xmath .

In the case of linear scalar field theory, in which the configuration
space is comprised of field configurations of free, non-interacting
fields, the space of functionals is linear, i.e. , for @xmath , we have
that @xmath , and we can identify the space of linear functionals with
@xmath , i.e. , @xmath and field configurations, @xmath , are mapped to
the real numbers by functionals, @xmath with the bilinear form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This concludes the discussion on the kinematics of the classical field
theory. To implement the dynamics, we need to impose equations of motion
and obtain the space of solutions of a real scalar field. The space of
solutions, @xmath , contains so-called on-shell configurations of the
field. The equation of motion that we are interested in solving is the
Klein-Gordon equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

subject to appropriate initial conditions.

An important property of the Klein-Gordon operator in curved spacetimes
is that it is a normally hyperbolic operator .

###### Definition 2.14.

A second order linear partial differential operator, @xmath , is called
normally hyperbolic if there exists a local trivialisation on @xmath
such that, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are smooth coefficients.

Normally hyperbolic operators have the important characteristic that
they are, morally speaking, invertible, although not in a strict sense.
Let us make this statement more precise by defining the advanced and
retarded Green operators .

###### Definition 2.15.

Let @xmath be globally hyperbolic spacetime and @xmath a normally
hyperbolic operator. A linear operator, @xmath , is called an
advanced/retarded Green operator for @xmath if it satisfies

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath , for all @xmath .

We turn our attention to the inhomogeneous Klein-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following theorem allows us to solve eq. ( 2.9 ):

###### Theorem 2.16.

Let @xmath be globally hyperbolic spacetime and @xmath a normally
hyperbolic operator. There exist unique advanced and retarded
fundamental solutions to eq. ( 2.9 ), @xmath and @xmath . We say that
@xmath is Green hyperbolic.

The proof is standard. See for example [ 84 ] , Chapter 3.

We now form the advanced-minus-retarded fundamental solution to the
homogeneous Klein-Gordon equation, by setting @xmath , and solve the
Klein-Gordon equation with @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, every smooth,
space-like compact solution is of this form, by the properties of the
support of the fundamental solutions. Thus, the space of solutions is
given by the linear surjection @xmath . In other words,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have implicitly identified smooth sections and functions in the space
of solutions by @xmath . The space of solutions is a symplectic space.
Let @xmath and @xmath . We define the symplectic structure, @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.11 ) implies that the observables in the covariant picture,
@xmath , are precisely defined by linear functionals of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The symplectic structure defines a Poisson bracket for the observables,
@xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The observables equipped with the Poisson bracket form the classical
algebra of observables, or Poisson algebra , @xmath .

###### Remark.

The Dirac equation is a first order linear differential equation, hence
the Dirac operator is not normally hyperbolic. Nevertheless, it is a
Green hyperbolic operator and we can form the fundamental solution as
above.

This concludes our discussion on the classical dynamics of the
Klein-Gordon field from the covariant point of view.

#### 2.1.2 Canonical formulation

Let us start by discussing the kinematical features of the theory of
classical fields from the canonical point of view. In the canonical
approach we define a Lagrangian density , whose integral yields the
action functional, because it allows one to obtain the canonical momenta
in the canonical phase space of the theory. We consider the action ( 2.2
) for concreteness. For a free real scalar field ( 2.3 ) on a fixed,
oriented globally hyperbolic, smooth spacetime @xmath , the covariant
Lagrangian density , @xmath , is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

On a globally hyperbolic spacetime, we seek to define the canonical
configuration space on a Cauchy surface. In abstract index notation, we
choose a time function @xmath and a global timelike vector field @xmath
, and define the canonical configuration space, @xmath , on a Cauchy
surface, @xmath , defined by @xmath and normal to the unit timelike
vector field, @xmath . The surface is equipped with a Riemannian metric
@xmath induced by the metric of @xmath , and hence @xmath is a
Riemannian manifold. The covariant Lagrangian density induces a
Lagrangian density on every slice @xmath . Using the ADM decomposition
@xmath , this Lagrangian density is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the field velocity, @xmath , by @xmath . Because
the action of the theory is given by the integral of the Lagrangian
density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

it suffices to consider @xmath as the canonical configuration space to
ensure that the integral exists. The velocity phase space of the theory
is @xmath .

###### Definition 2.17.

Let @xmath be an action functional with configuration @xmath and
velocity @xmath , the canonical momentum density is defined by @xmath .

The canonical momentum of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The canonical phase space of the theory is @xmath consisting of couples
of fields and momenta, @xmath , on @xmath .

This concludes our discussion on the kinematics in the canonical
approach.

We proceed to implement the dynamics. The space of solutions, @xmath ,
contains so-called on-shell configurations of the field. For a free real
scalar field ( 2.3 ) on a fixed, oriented, globally hyperbolic, smooth
spacetime @xmath , we consider the initial value problem of ( 2.5b ) on
a Cauchy surface @xmath with unit normal vector field @xmath .

Let @xmath be initial data on @xmath . The solution to the initial value
problem,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

specifies the field values on all of @xmath . Following [ 22 ] (Theorem
4.1.2),

###### Theorem 2.18.

Let @xmath be globally hyperbolic with smooth spacelike Cauchy surface
@xmath . Then the initial value problem ( 2.18 ) is well-posed, i.e.,
there exists a unique solution that depends only upon data on @xmath ,
is smooth and varies continuously with the initial data with respect to
a suitable Sobolev topology defined on the initial data.

The content of the theorem is that all smooth solutions are in
one-to-one correspondence with a set of initial value data @xmath on a
Cauchy surface, @xmath . We call @xmath the isomorphism that relates the
solutions in the canonical and covariant picture: @xmath .

The space of solutions carries the symplectic structure, @xmath ,
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Poisson structure of the theory is defined from the symplectic
structure. The observables are maps of the form @xmath . The canonical
position and momentum observables are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the Poisson bracket, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

yields the familiar expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now verify that the canonical and covariant pictures give rise to the
same space of solutions and are, hence, equivalent. We show the
equivalence of eq. ( 2.11 ) and ( 2.19 ).

###### Theorem 2.19.

Let @xmath be globally hyperbolic. Let @xmath be the solution to the
Klein-Gordon equation with initial data @xmath on the Cauchy surface
@xmath and @xmath be the solution with initial data @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let us choose a Cauchy surface @xmath such that the support of @xmath is
@xmath . By the integration theorem of Stokes,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have written the normal volume element on @xmath as @xmath
before applying Stokes’ theorem. Writing @xmath , and using the field
equation, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

∎

This concludes our discussion on the classical field theory.

### 2.2 Quantum field theory

In this section, we describe how to obtain a quantum field theory from a
classical theory in curved spacetimes. The procedure by which this is
achieved is called quantisation , whereby we describe the microscopic
structure of fields. We review the quantisation procedure for the real,
free scalar field of Section 2.1 . In this way, the main steps in the
quantisation procedure are transparent. We emphasise the distinction
between the kinematics and the dynamics of the quantum field, both in
the covariant and canonical pictures.

We have analysed the classical dynamics of a linear field theory. Such
theories are called free because the equations of motion contain no
field interaction (or self-interaction) terms. A word on free theories
is due: Strictly speaking, free fields interact only with the
gravitational field, but in many cases the assumption that a field is
free is in good agreement with nature, when interactions can be
neglected. Moreover, they are very important as they are the starting
point for perturbative interaction theories. For example, in quantum
electrodynamics, the interacting theory takes place in the Fock space
@xmath , which we define below, but in scattering processes, the
asymptotic states of the theory lie in the tensor product state space of
the free photon and free electron fields, @xmath in the asymptotic past
and @xmath in the asymptotic future. There exist many processes, such as
the formation of bound states, that cannot be described in these terms,
but fields do interact very weakly in asymptotic regions in many cases.

We discuss the quantum field theory of the real, free scalar field
covariantly in Subsection 2.2.1 , and we review the canonical approach
in Subsection 2.2.2 .

#### 2.2.1 Covariant formulation

We shall start our discussion by constructing the algebra of quantum
observables. Then, we shall introduce states as maps from the algebra of
observables to the complex numbers. Finally, we shall comment on the
locality and covariance properties of relativistic fields.

##### Quantum observables

The quantisation procedure of Dirac consists of promoting the Poisson
algebra of observables, @xmath , to a quantum @xmath -algebra , with a
commutator, @xmath , promoted from the Poisson bracket, and a set of
additional properties, defined axiomatically, depending on the details
of the field.

###### Definition 2.20.

An algebra @xmath over a field @xmath is a vector space over @xmath
equipped with a bilinear form @xmath , which defines an associative
multiplication. Moreover, an algebra @xmath is said to be unital if
there exists an identity element @xmath . Furthermore, it is said to be
a @xmath -algebra , if there exists an involution @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 More
generally, an algebra can be defined over a ring, but this is not
necessary for our purposes.

For a Klein-Gordon field, in the covariant approach, we have that the
classical observables of the theory are maps from the solution space to
the real numbers, e.g., @xmath , for @xmath . The observables of the
theory are equipped with a Poisson bracket @xmath . See eq. ( 2.12 ) and
( 2.13 ).

In order to accommodate the involution in the quantum algebra of
observables, we will extend the classical space of observables, @xmath ,
to admit complex-valued test functions, by extending the map @xmath by
complex linearity (and anti-linearity). @xmath is the complex extension.
We are ready to define the quantum field theory of a Klein-Gordon field:

###### Definition 2.21.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime. A Klein-Gordon quantum
field is a map @xmath , where @xmath is the neutral Klein-Gordon field
algebra. This algebra is generated by elements @xmath satisfying the
quantisation axioms:

1.  Linearity: @xmath is a linear map.

2.  Hermiticity: @xmath .

3.  Field equation: @xmath .

4.  CCR: @xmath .

In axiom 4 CCR stands for canonical commutator relations and @xmath is
the algebra unit. From this point onward, we shall set @xmath . The CCR
encode the bosonic character of the field. For fermions, the commutator
in axiom 4 is replaced by the anti-commutator, usually denoted in the
literature by @xmath (not to be confused with the Poisson bracket) or
@xmath , replacing the negative sign in the definition by a positive
sign. For a charged field, axiom 2 needs to be modified. The field
dynamics are encoded in axiom 3.

We would like to point out that in the axiomatic approaches to quantum
field theory, several axioms may be added to strengthen the definition
that we have provided. Of particular importance, the locally covariant
quantum field theory axioms further require

1.  Isotony: Let @xmath , then @xmath

2.  Einstein causality: Let @xmath and @xmath be causally disjoint
    subsets of @xmath , then @xmath .

3.  Time-slice: Let @xmath be a Cauchy surface, then @xmath .

We shall not dwell into the extensive subject of axiomatic quantum field
theory, but some commentary is due. The Wightman axioms postulate the
first attempt at rigorously defining a quantum field theory in flat
spacetime. The subsequent Haag-Kastler axioms first introduced the
formalisation of fields as operator algebras, and emphasised the role of
locality in quantum field theory [ 31 ] . The axiomatic approach was
extended to curved spacetimes by Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch,
emphasising the locality and covariance of the theory [ 32 ] . The
flavour of this last construction is much in the spirit of category
theory [ 87 ] , where quantisation is understood as a functor between
relevant categories and smeared fields are natural transformations .
Recently, Hollands and Wald took an axiomatic operator product expansion
point of view for defining quantum field theories in curved spacetimes [
88 ] .

The hope, which we shall realise below, is that one can construct field
states on which representations of the algebra of observables act as
operators. These states, in turn, provide the probabilistic
interpretation of quantum field theory. We turn now to this question.

##### Field states

There is a prodecure, due to Gelfand, Naimark and Segal, known as the
GNS construction , by which one can construct a Hilbert space and linear
operators acting on it out of a @xmath -algebra equipped with an
algebraic state , by which we mean the following:

###### Definition 2.22.

Let @xmath be a unital @xmath -algebra. An algebraic state on @xmath is
a linear map @xmath , satisfying

1.  Normalisation: @xmath .

2.  Positivity: @xmath for any @xmath .

Further, we require that the state be determined fully by the knowledge
of all the field n-point functions : Let @xmath be a collection of
@xmath elements in @xmath . Then the state @xmath is determined by the
knowledge of all the n-point functions of the form @xmath for all @xmath
.

###### Remark.

States that are fully determined by the two-point functions are called
quasi-free or Gaussian states. Vacuum states and thermal states are
quasi-free.

The idea is to construct a norm for the field algebra, @xmath , out of
which the kinematic Hilbert space of the theory can be constructed. This
norm should turn the field algebra into a Banach @xmath -algebra .

###### Definition 2.23.

An algebra @xmath is called a Banach algebra if it is an algebra over a
normed vector space, with norm @xmath , such that for any @xmath ,
@xmath . Moreover, it is called a Banach @xmath -algebra if it has an
involution, such that @xmath .

A @xmath -algebra is called a C @xmath -algebra if it is a Banach @xmath
-algebra and it satisfies that, for any @xmath , @xmath .

It is clear that @xmath does not provide the necessary structure to
endow the field algebra with a norm. Indeed, we could realise @xmath as
an inner product if and only if the strict equality in the positivity
condition above held only for @xmath . Alas, this is not the case. Yet,
algebraic states add structure in the right direction. For example, the
following lemma can be shown:

###### Lemma 2.24.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -algebra and @xmath an algebraic state. Then,
@xmath and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality holds, @xmath .

The proof makes use of the positivity of the state and one proceeds with
the standard projective decomposition of the vector @xmath into
orthogonal and parallel components to @xmath to attain the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

The next mathematical structure that we need to introduce is the notion
of an algebraic representation .

###### Definition 2.25.

Let @xmath be a unital @xmath -algebra, a representation of @xmath is a
map @xmath , where @xmath is a Hilbert space and @xmath is a @xmath
-homomorphism between the @xmath -algebra and the space of linear
operators on @xmath , i.e. , a linear map that satisfies, for any @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath .

Moreover, if @xmath is a unital C @xmath -algebra, the representation
maps elements of the algebra to bounded linear operators , i.e. , @xmath
, such that, for any @xmath and any @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is a
constant.

Morally speaking, the GNS construction endows a @xmath -algebra with a
Banach norm, and by Definition 2.25 , a representation @xmath realises
the construction as operators on the Hilbert space of the theory. Let us
state this precisely:

###### Theorem 2.26 (Gelfand-Naimark-Segal construction).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -algebra and @xmath an algebraic state. Then,
there exists a quadruple @xmath , such that @xmath is a Hilbert space,
@xmath is a dense subspace, @xmath is a representation of the algebra
elements as linear operators on the Hilbert space, @xmath is a cyclic
vector, i.e., a vector such that @xmath , and @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

We start by endowing the algebra @xmath with an inner product. Define
the pairing @xmath for any @xmath . We claim that the set defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a left ideal of @xmath , i.e. , it satisfies that, for any @xmath and
any @xmath , the product @xmath . This is verified by the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, @xmath form a vector space, i.e. , it is closed under scalar
multiplication and vector addition, i.e., for @xmath , and @xmath ,
@xmath . Again, this is guaranteed by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
Similarly, @xmath is a right ideal and a vector space.

Next, we we define the vector space quotient @xmath with elements @xmath
defined by the equivalence relation @xmath if @xmath with @xmath . We
construct the inner product space @xmath by endowing the quotient space
@xmath with the scalar product @xmath . Finally, the Hilbert space
completion ⁵ ⁵ 5 See, for example [ 89 ] . of @xmath yields the
kinematic Hilbert space of the theory, @xmath .

The algebra elements act on the Hilbert space @xmath through the map
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a @xmath -homomorphism by the associative property of the
algebra. Thus, @xmath is a representation of @xmath into a set of
(generally unbounded) linear operators that are defined on @xmath .
Finally, we can choose the cyclic vector using the unit element of the
algebra, @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This concludes the GNS construction with quadruple @xmath . ∎

To perform the GNS construction of the quantum field, we can take
advantage of the Weyl formulation of the Klein-Gordon field.

###### Definition 2.27.

The Klein-Gordon Weyl algebra, @xmath , is the unique, unital @xmath
-algebra generated by elements @xmath , with @xmath , together with the
relations

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

3.  @xmath for any @xmath .

While the Weyl algebra does not yield the physical intuition that the
field algebra does, it has the advantage that, upon choosing an
algebraic state, it can be realised as a space of bounded linear
operators acting on a Hilbert space using the GNS construction, which
simplify the domain issues in the Hilbert space.

We define a state @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

already defines an inner product because the Weyl algebra is unitary in
the sense that @xmath for all @xmath . The Hilbert space, @xmath ,is the
completion of the Banach @xmath -algebra @xmath . A representation
@xmath is given by the left action of algebra elements. It is bounded
because the Weyl algebra is unitary. The cyclic vector @xmath defines

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two-point function takes the neat form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we obtain a representation, @xmath , on the field algebra by
using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We emphasise that the GNS construction starts from considering the
algebra of observables associated to a spacetime region and a linear
functional from this algebra to the complex numbers. In Minkowski space,
for example, selecting the algebra of observables of the whole spacetime
and imposing Poincaré covariance, one arrives to the Minkowski vacuum
state. If one considers simply, say, the right wedge of the Minkowski
spacetime, this is a globally hyperbolic spacetime on its own right, and
the GNS construction can be carried out starting from the algebra of
observables confined to this wedge, whereby one obtains the
boost-invariant Rindler vacuum by a similar procedure.

#### 2.2.2 Canonical formulation

The canonical formulation of quantum field theories has the advantage
that the approach is more constructive. We start by defining the
Klein-Gordon canonical quantum field theory by applying the Dirac
quantisation to the canonical Poisson algebra of observables, and we
then proceed to construct the field states.

##### Quantum observables

In the canonical approach, the algebra of observables is constructed
from the quantum field configurations and the momenta on a fixed
spacelike slice. This leads to the so-called equal-time quantum field
algebra.

###### Definition 2.28.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and @xmath a Cauchy
hypersurface of @xmath defined by constant @xmath . The Klein-Gordon
quantum observables are maps @xmath , where @xmath is the algebra
generated by elements of the form @xmath and @xmath satisfying the
canonical quantisation axioms:

1.  Linearity: @xmath and @xmath are linear maps.

2.  Hermiticity: @xmath and @xmath .

3.  Canonical commutation relations:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                       
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34a)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34b)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34c)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The usual creation and annihilation operators are defined in terms of
the field and momenta operators. For the moment, they should be regarded
as an abstract CCR algebra, and they will be realised as operator-valued
distributions once we define the Hilbert space of the theory. Let @xmath
and @xmath be the annihilation and creation operators respectively, then
the CCR reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We proceed to construct the states of the theory.

##### Field states

As we have seen above, the classical space of solutions, @xmath is an
infinite-dimensional symplectic manifold with symplectic structure,
@xmath , defined by eq. ( 2.19 ). The idea is, as usual, to complexify
the space of solutions, and construct a positive inner product, by
selecting a ‘‘space of positive frequency”, that leads to the Hilbert
space of the theory. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Introducing a complex structure and selecting
positive frequency solutions is not the only way in which the solution
space can be endowed with an inner product. There exist inner products
that may not be attainable from our construction. See, for example, the
discussion in [ 22 ] .

A complexification of Sol is attained by introducing a complex structure
@xmath , and identifying the complexified space of solutions as @xmath .
This procedure is non-unique. Indeed, the choice of a positive frequency
space of solutions in the mode-sum picture comes with the choice of a
complex structure, whereby the Lie-derivation of a plane-wave field mode
with respect to a timelike vector field induces the action of a complex
structure on the field mode. ⁷ ⁷ 7 See Chapter 4 . A selection of the
complex structure can be made following physically-motivated criteria,
for example, the energy minimisation condition, proposed by Ashtekar and
Magnon, is suitable for stationary spacetimes where energy along
spacelike slices is conserved [ 90 ] . In general situations, for
non-stationary spacetimes, the complex structure need not stem from a
notion of positive frequency. See e.g. [ 91 ] also in the context of
energy minimisation.

We now introduce the holomorphic and antiholomorphic decomposition of
the complexified space of solutions. The complex structure, on @xmath ,
@xmath decomposes @xmath into its holomorphic and antiholomorphic parts
as follows: We perform a partition of unity , @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . Then, the space of solutions decomposes into @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath .

The complex conjugation map @xmath is a bijection between @xmath and
@xmath , hence, it is customary to identify @xmath . Under this
identification, the complex structure defines an anti-involution in
@xmath , @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath .

The structure that we have introduced defines a complexified
pseudo-Kähler space .

###### Definition 2.29.

A pseudo-Kähler space is the quadruple @xmath , where

1.  @xmath is a real vector space,

2.  @xmath is a symplectic form,

3.  @xmath is an anti-involution,

4.  @xmath is a non-degenerate symmetric form, for @xmath

If @xmath is positive definite, then @xmath is a Kähler space .

###### Remark.

Item 4 in the definition above is understood weakly in
infinite-dimensional spaces, such as field theory, because @xmath is
weakly non-degenerate.

###### Definition 2.30.

A complexified (pseudo-) Kähler space is the quadruple @xmath ,
consisting of the complex vector space @xmath , the complex linear
extension of @xmath , a complex structure @xmath and the complex linear
extension of @xmath , together with

1.  a charged symplectic form, @xmath , for @xmath ,

2.  a Hermitian form @xmath , for @xmath .

Our complexified pseudo-Kähler space of solutions consists of the
quadruple @xmath , where the charged symplectic structure and the
Hermitian form are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

respectively. An inner product can be defined on the subspace @xmath
from the Hermitian form defined above. Let @xmath , then it can be
verified (by integration by parts) that

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.37)
  -- -- -- --------

is a symmetric, positive-definite bilinear form. We call @xmath the
positive frequency space of solutions. ⁸ ⁸ 8 In full notation, @xmath is
a complex Kähler space, and we have defined the inner product ( 2.37 )
by @xmath .

The one-particle Hilbert space of the theory, @xmath is the Hilbert
space completion of the inner product space @xmath . The Hilbert space
of the theory is the symmetric Fock space , @xmath , where @xmath is a
symmetrised tensor product and @xmath by convention.

The creation and annihilation operators, obeying the relations 2.35 ,
are realised as operator-valued distributions on @xmath . Let @xmath be
an element of the symmetric Fock space, represented in abstract index
notation by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all, but finitely many of the wavefunctions @xmath vanish. then
the action of the creation and annihilation operators is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the contractions are defined by the inner product ( 2.37 ), @xmath
. The vacuum state of the theory is defined by @xmath .

In the case of fermions, the construction differs in that the canonical
space of solutions carries an inner product from the start, that can be
completed into the Hilbert space of the theory. The Fock space is then
constructed by taking anti-symmetric tensor products of the Hilbert
space, yielding the antisymmetric Fock space @xmath .

#### 2.2.3 Physical states

Physical states satisfy an important property known as the Hadamard
condition, which ensures that the @xmath -point functions of the
observables have the correct ultraviolet behaviour. The idea is that, at
sufficiently short scales, states should resemble the Minkowski state in
a precise way. In order to state the condition, we introduce Synge’s
world function, the half-square-geodesic distance between two points on
a spacetime.

###### Definition 2.31.

Let @xmath be a spacetime and let @xmath . We call @xmath a geodesically
convex neighbourhood of @xmath , defined by the set of points connected
to @xmath by a unique geodesic. Let @xmath and @xmath be an affine
parameter along the geodesic connecting @xmath and @xmath , we define
the Synge world function by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark.

Along geodesic trajectories, @xmath is a constant of motion. In
particular, it is equal to @xmath if the geodesic is timelike with
proper time affine parameter ( @xmath ), @xmath if the geodesic is null
and @xmath if the geodesic is spacelike with proper distance affine
parameter ( @xmath ). Then,

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------
                             
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.41a)
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.41b)
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.41c)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------

We are ready to define the Hadamard property. We will restrict our
attention to quasi-free states, i.e. , states that are fully defined by
the two-point function.

###### Definition 2.32.

Let @xmath be a scalar field on @xmath , a spacetime of dimension @xmath
. A quasi-free field state @xmath is called Hadamard if its two-point
function is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath as @xmath , where @xmath is a regular, state-dependent
biscalar and @xmath is a state-independent bidistribution, called the
Hadamard parametrix , and is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.43a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.43b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.43c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is the regularised Synge world function, which replaces (
2.41 ), along timelike geodesics according to the @xmath prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and eq. ( 2.43 ) is understood distributionally as @xmath . The
biscalars @xmath and @xmath are regular and have a (non-unique ⁹ ⁹ 9
See, e.g. , [ 92 ] . ) asymptotic expansion

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with coefficients given by a covariant Taylor expansion,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

given by recursion relations that guarantee that the equations of motion
be on-shell, supplemented with the boundary condition @xmath . Above, we
have used the semicolon notation to denote covariant differentiation.

The asymptotic expansions of the biscalars @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
together with their boundary conditions have been worked out in detail
by Décanini and Folacci [ 93 ] .

In the language of Green bi-distributions, informally known as Green
functions, the two-point function is usually called the Wightman
function , which we denote by @xmath . An excellent reference for the
use of Green functions in quantum field theory is [ 20 ] .

A reformulation of the Hadamard condition was worked out by Radzikowski
using microlocal analysis, and dubbed a wave front set spectral
condition [ 94 ] . Wald and Hollands used the microlocal wave front
spectral condition to prove the existence and uniqueness of local
covariant time ordered products of quantum fields in curved space-time [
33 ] . For our purposes, it suffices to use Definition 2.46 .

#### 2.2.4 Thermal states

We now introduce an important class of quasi-free stationary states
that, in addition to being Hadamard, satisfy a special property at the
level of the two-point function, called the KMS condition, introduced by
Haag [ 95 ] , based on the pioneering studies of Kubo, Martin and
Schwinger, who studied the mathematical properties of statistical
systems in equilibrium [ 96 , 97 ] .

Let us make this statement precise.

###### Definition 2.33.

Let @xmath be a stationary, globally hyperbolic @xmath -dimensional
spacetime with global timelike Killing vector @xmath . The spacetime can
be foliated with respect to @xmath by introducing the time function
@xmath . We denote points on the @xmath -dimensional hypersurface normal
to @xmath , where @xmath is constant, by @xmath . Let @xmath be a
quasi-free state of positive frequency with respect to @xmath .

The state is @xmath is stationary with respect to @xmath if the Wightman
function of @xmath satisfies the distributional relation @xmath . The
notation @xmath is standard.

We are ready to give the definition of a KMS state. From now on we set
Boltzmann’s constant to be @xmath .

###### Definition 2.34.

Let @xmath be a stationary, globally hyperbolic spacetime. Let @xmath be
a stationary, quasi-free state with Wightman function (mapping pairs of
spacetime points to) @xmath , with @xmath . Furthermore, let @xmath be
holomorphic on the complex strip @xmath of the complex @xmath -plane. We
call @xmath a thermal KMS state temperature @xmath , where @xmath , if
it satisfies the KMS condition ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The KMS condition describes thermal states in the sense that it is
satisfied by statistical states that are defined by thermal partition
functions. In quantum field theory we take eq. ( 2.47 ) as the
definition of the KMS condition for quasi-free, stationary states.

#### 2.2.5 Conformal states

Conformal transformations have a rich group-theoretic structure, as a
subgroup of the diffeomorphism group, and a richer algebraic structure,
in terms of vector fields generating local conformal transformations.
The situation is especially important in @xmath (Euclidean) or @xmath
(Lorentzian) dimensions, where all spacetimes, say with zero
cosmological constant, are conformally related. We do not attempt to
give a detailed account of this immense field of research, but we should
mention that in @xmath dimensions, the group of orientation-preserving
conformal diffeomorphisms is isomorphic to the product of two copies of
the group of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms on the circle,
@xmath . As a result, the Lie algebra generating @xmath conformal
transformations must be infinite dimensional, as vector fields on the
circle generate @xmath . We refer the reader to [ 98 , 99 ] for more a
more extense and precise account of the group- and algebraic-theoretic
issues of conformal field theories.

Classical and quantum field theories that enjoy invariance under
conformal transformations are called conformal field theories . They are
important because much of the analysis is significantly simpler in
conformal field theories, and many toy models with conformal invariance
serve to provide physical intuition in more general situations. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10
Indeed, in this thesis we work out a variety of quantum phenomena with
the aid of conformal methods in @xmath dimensions.

###### Definition 2.35.

Let @xmath and @xmath be oriented spacetimes, and let @xmath be a
conformal transformation with conformal factor @xmath , i.e. , such that
@xmath . Let @xmath be a classical on-shell field on @xmath . We say
that the field theory solved by @xmath is a conformal field theory if
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is a solution to the field theory on
spacetime @xmath . The real number @xmath is called the conformal weight
of @xmath .

Many important physical theories are conformally invariant on their own
right. In @xmath dimensions, Maxwell’s equations are an example. In
@xmath dimensions, the decomposition @xmath gives rise to the decoupling
of left - and right - movers in field theory, which provides analytic
control in many interesting situations. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Another relevant
example in @xmath dimensions is string theory. The dynamics of the
string is is a @xmath conformal field theory. This, in turn, allows
string theorists to exploit a great deal of mathematical technology
stemming from conformal field theory for stringy applications.

A relevant example for this work is that of a @xmath -dimensional
minimally coupled, massless scalar field theory. Let @xmath be an @xmath
-dimensional spacetime, and @xmath a Klein-Gordon field on @xmath
defined by the theory @xmath , where @xmath . The choice of @xmath is
called conformal coupling because it renders the field theory into a
conformal field theory. Indeed, under a conformal transformation, @xmath
, @xmath , with @xmath if @xmath . This follows from the conformal
transformation of the Ricci scalar. See, for example, the classic
monograph of Birrell and Davies [ 18 ] for the detailed form of the
Ricci scalar transformation. It follows that in @xmath dimensions, the
minimally coupled massless field is conformally coupled.

Because the on-shell solutions of a conformal field theory are related
under conformal transformations, so is the quantum theory, as per the
constructions that we have presented above. In particular, the quantum
states of the theory after a conformal transformation are related to the
states of the untransformed theory.

Let @xmath be the annihilation operator in the quantum field theory that
comes from the quantisation of @xmath . This annihilation operator
defines a vacuum state @xmath . We similarly define a vacuum state
@xmath by the action of the annihilation operator @xmath coming from the
theory @xmath .

The relation between the two vacua can be obtained from the Hilbert
space construction that we have defined above. The annihilation
operators are related by @xmath . This relation is expressed succintly
for quasi-free states, in terms of field operators

###### Definition 2.36.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two vacuum states, and let their two-point
functions be related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, we call @xmath a conformal vacuum with respect to @xmath .

### 2.3 Particles in quantum field theory and detectors

An important result of (finite-dimensional) quantum mechanics is that we
can choose to describe a quantum system using the triple @xmath , for
example, by choosing a state @xmath and carrying out the GNS
construction, or we can choose the triple @xmath , and the two
descriptions are equivalent in a precise sense. This is the content of
the Stone-von Neumann theorem:

###### Theorem 2.37 (Stone-von Neumann).

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional symplectic space and let @xmath and
@xmath be irreducible, strongly continuous, ¹² ¹² 12 This point is
technical, but not central for our discussion. unitary representations
of the Weyl relations. Then there exists a unitary map @xmath , such
that for any @xmath , @xmath , i.e., @xmath and @xmath are unitarily
equivalent.

The field theories that we have described above do not satisfy the
hypotheses of the Stone-von Neumann theorem. Elements of the space of
solutions are labelled by space-time points. Hence, the space of
solutions is infinite dimensional. This means, from the covariant point
of view, that different algebraic state choices will lead to unitarily
inequivalent theories. From the canonical point of view, this non-unique
choice is traced back to the selection of a time function, that
encompasses the notion of positive energy, which is, in turn, equivalent
to the choice of a complex structure in the space of solutions.

The failure of the Stone-von Neumann theorem in infinite-dimensional
systems brings in an ambiguity to the choice of a preferred Hilbert
space in quantum field theory. While one may be guided to select a space
of states, out of the infinitely many inequivalent choices, based on the
symmetries of spacetime, in generic, curved spacetimes, spacetime
isometries provide no guideline, in addition to the Hadamard condition.
As a consequence, particles cannot be fundamental objects in the
description of nature.

On this line, the correct definition of particles is operational and
hence only makes sense for interacting systems. More precisely, one can
interact with a field through a measuring apparatus that is coupled to
the field. The system consisting of the apparatus and the field will
evolve unitarily and the state transitions in the measurement apparatus
are identified with the absorption or emission of field quanta. Because
such measurement apparatus detect particles, they go by the name of
particle detectors .

There is an extensive literature on particle detector models. See, for
example, [ 72 ] and references therein. A simple, yet powerful detector
model is the so-called Unruh-DeWitt detector [ 29 , 30 ] . A large part
of this thesis is devoted to the analysis of this model and
modifications thereof. For the moment, let us concentrate on situations
where the field has a well-defined Wightman function. In the
Unruh-DeWitt model one considers a Klein-Gordon quantum field @xmath
coupled to a two-level point-like particle detector on a spacetime
@xmath . In the regime that we are considering there is no back-reaction
from the field or the detector on the spacetime. The Hamiltonian of the
system is given by @xmath , where @xmath is the Hamiltonian operator of
the scalar field, @xmath is the detector Hamiltonian, and the
interaction Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a coupling constant, @xmath is the monopole moment
operator of the detector and @xmath is a smooth switching function of
compact support that controls the interaction of the field and the
detector along the worldline of the detector. @xmath is a function of
the detector proper time, @xmath , and vanishes for times less than
@xmath and greater than @xmath , i.e. , @xmath .

The space of states of the field is given by the symmetric Fock space
@xmath . The detector Hilbert space, @xmath , consists of a
two-dimensional space spanned by the energy eigenvectors as follows: The
detector Hamiltonian can be written in terms of the creation and
annihilation operators of the detector, @xmath and @xmath , and the
detector energy gap, @xmath . It is given by @xmath . Then the detector
Hilbert space is spanned by the energy eigenvectors @xmath with
eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath we call @xmath the ground
state and @xmath the excited state. The situation is the opposite for
@xmath . The space of states of the coupled system is @xmath . Notice
that when @xmath the Hamiltonian is negative, but bounded from below.

The key idea is to compute the transition probability of the detector
evolving from an initial state @xmath at proper time @xmath to a final
state @xmath at time @xmath . Such transition is interpreted in terms of
field quanta. For example, if @xmath and initially @xmath , finding at a
later time @xmath that @xmath is interpreted as the absorption of a
particle of energy @xmath [ 22 ] .

If one supposes that the system is weakly coupled, where the coupling
constant @xmath is smaller than any other scale in the problem, and in
the initial state @xmath , where @xmath is a Hadamard state, it is
possible to compute, perturbatively in @xmath , the transition
probability of finding the detector in the state @xmath at proper time
@xmath .

The evolution of the detector-field model in the interaction picture is
given by the pull-back of the Schrödinger equation along the detector
worldline

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the initial conditions @xmath at @xmath .

The solution to eq. ( 2.50 ) is given in terms of a unitary operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining eq. ( 2.51 ) and ( 2.50 ), one obtains the Tomonaga-Schwinger
equation for the unitary operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is understood at the level of the operator algebra on the states,
subject to the initial conditions @xmath . The pertubative solution is
obtained by transforming eq. ( 2.52 ) into an integral eq. and
iterating, to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the time ordering operator, i.e. , the operators under
time ordering are arranged from past to future acting on the left. The
S-matrix is defined as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scattering amplitude of a transition in the detector subsystem is
given by the trace over the final states of the field, which are not
being measured by an observer equipped with a particle detector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

To leading order in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have used the fact that observables are self-adjoint operators.
Writing @xmath in the interaction representation, @xmath and using the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains that to leading order in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from eq. ( 2.58 ) that all the dependence in the initial
field state, trajectory of the detector and the spacetime comes from the
term inside the parentheses, while the rest of the expression on the
right hand side of eq. ( 2.58 ) contains only the internal details of
the detector. In most of our work we shall set the state to be initially
in an appropriate Hadamard vacuum state. In this case, the field
dependence comes only through the pull-back of the Wightman function of
the field along the detector worldline, @xmath . Because vacuum states
are quasi-free states, the Wightman function fully determines the state.
This leads to defining the response function of the detector, @xmath ,
which is equal to the double Fourier transform of the Wightman function
of the field weighted by the switching function and describes the
(smeared) power spectrum of the field vacuum noise. It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath , it is customary to use the terms response and
transition probability interchangeably in the jargon of weakly coupled
particle detectors. For smooth, timelike trajectories, the pull-back of
the Wightman function is a distribution in @xmath and eq. ( 2.59 ) is
well-defined with @xmath playing the role of a test function [ 50 , 100
, 101 , 102 ] . Given a family of functions @xmath that converges to the
distribution @xmath as @xmath , @xmath is evaluated by replacing @xmath
in ( 2.59 ) and then taking the limit @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 KMS states and the detailed balance condition

From the point of view of a local observer along their spacetime
worldline, the KMS condition can be realised by making use of particle
detectors. The detailed balance form of the KMS condition associates the
temperature measured by a stationary particle detector, with the
response of such detector and the energy gap,

###### Definition 2.38.

A function @xmath is said to obey the detailed balance condition if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the language of detectors, a series of arguments relate @xmath to the
response of a stationary detector in a stationary state [ 18 , 22 , 29 ,
30 , 52 ] that measures a temperature @xmath . We give a heuristic
relation between the detailed balance condition and the KMS condition,
which should not be taken as a proof, but rather as a motivation. We
will make the relation precise and provide a proof in Chapter 5 .

For a stationary detector, the response is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one wishes to make the interaction of such detector constant at all
times, @xmath , the response function diverges. This divergence can be
written formally as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

keeping in mind that @xmath . Yet, heuristically, the ratio @xmath is
finite and equal to ¹³ ¹³ 13 Alternatively, one can use the
instantaneous transition rate @xmath , where the dot stands for a proper
time derivative, which is finite, to obtain the relation on the right
hand side of the equation above. We shall do this in Chapters 3 and 4 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we assume that @xmath is KMS, then the contour of integration on the
numerator can be pushed down by @xmath inside the complex analytic strip
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Changing variables to @xmath and using the KMS condition @xmath , eq. (
2.60 ) follows. Following the same logic, if ( 2.60 ) holds, then @xmath
must satisfy the KMS condition.

We will make this heuristic argumentation precise in Chapter 5 . We
feel, however, that it is important to discuss the detailed balance form
of the KMS condition already at this stage, as we will make use of it in
Chapters 3 and 4 .

#### 2.3.2 Particles in @xmath dimensions

There are serious difficulties in extending the Unruh-DeWitt model to
@xmath dimensions for a massless scalar field. Any Hadamard massless
scalar state in @xmath dimensions contains infrared ambiguities. A way
to see this is by taking the naïve massless limit of the Wightman
function of a massive @xmath Klein-Gordon field in @xmath Minkowski
spacetime. Let us start our discussion by analysing the ultraviolet
behaviour of Hadamard states in @xmath dimensions.

The two-point function Hadamard form is, as per Def. 2.46 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, the bidistribution @xmath has the @xmath asymptotic expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the van Vleck-Morette determinant . Redefining the
regular piece in ( 2.65 ), the short-distance behaviour of the two-point
function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we obtain the @xmath massive Klein-Gordon Minkowski Wightman
function. A standard strategy to do so is to use the formal plane-wave
integral representation of the quantum field, in terms of annihilation
and creation operators. This yields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Minkowskian coordinates. The expression
above can be massaged and integrated into a modified Bessel function of
the second kind, for example, following [ 65 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath prescribes the analytic continuation to the timelike case
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where sgn denotes the signum function,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Choosing the branch of the Bessel function following the analytic
continuation formulas in [ 103 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Hankel functions, we have for timelike
separations.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On the one hand, eq. ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.74 ) define a Hadamard state in
@xmath dimensions in the coincidence limit, with the appropriate
logarithmic ultraviolet behaviour. On the other hand, viewing, e.g. , (
2.70 ) as a function of @xmath , the limit @xmath is not defined, as it
also diverges logarithmically at arbitrary (spacelike) separations. An
additive constant is needed to make sense of this limit. Let us
introduce the dimensionful constant @xmath . The limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

exists, but cannot be extended to @xmath . Above, @xmath is Euler’s
constant. Because we have added a constant piece, the limit continues to
be Hadamard, as is explicit in eq. ( 2.75 ). Nevertheless, the massless
limit possesses an additive ambiguity, and justifying the presence of
this ad hoc constant is problematic.

A way to go around this issue is to restrict the matter available for
detection and work only with massive fields. This, however, spoils the
advantages of conformal field theory in @xmath dimensions. We argue that
a better approach is to introduce a coupling between the field and the
detector in such a way that the interaction between the detector and
massless fields in @xmath dimensions is well-defined and unambiguous.
This would, in turn, allow one to perform calculations of interest with
analytic control. Indeed, one can argue that no physical process should
register this ambiguity.

Let @xmath be a spacetime with dimensions @xmath , @xmath . A local and
covariant element of the algebra of observables of @xmath is given by an
appropriate smearing of the operator @xmath , where @xmath is a test
vector field and @xmath is the covariant derivative along the vector
field @xmath . Along the worldline of the detector, a natural coupling
between the monopole moment of the detector and @xmath comes by setting
@xmath . In other words, the choice for this test vector along the
worldline of the detector is merely given by the vector field which is
everywhere tangent to the path of the detector parametrised by the
proper time. Any other vector field choice would require the detector to
have a spatial physical size. The derivative coupling is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

An alternative expression is @xmath . This alternative representation
has the advantage of making it transparent that the detector is
sensitive to changes of the field along the worldline rather than the
value of the field itself.

The derivative-detector coupling has first been introduced in [ 104 ] in
order to examine the relation between energy fluxes and particle
production in receding mirror spacetimes. In [ 104 ] , Grove argues that
the particle response of a derivative coupling detector is related to
the (positive) energy flux coming from a receding boundary. We will turn
to this issue in Chapter 4 .

In our context, the hope, that will be realised in Chapter 3 , is that
the derivative-coupling detector is insensitive to the infrared
ambiguity. In this way, we admit couplings with massless fields in
@xmath dimensions, and one is able to use the full machinery of
conformal field theory. This allows us to examine quantum field
theoretic effects analytically in @xmath -dimensional models of many
otherwise intractable situations in full @xmath -dimensional spacetimes.
We present several applications of this model in @xmath -dimensional
black hole spacetimes in Chapter 4 .

## Chapter 3 Particles in @xmath-dimensional spacetimes

Let us begin this chapter by recapitulating our discussion on the nature
of particles in quantum field theory. In curved spacetimes, given the
unitarily inequivalent representations of the algebras of observables,
there is no preferred vacuum state to which one can associate a
canonical one-particle Hilbert space. Different vacua will lead to
different notions of particles. A solution to this problem is to make
the notion of particle operational, by defining particles as transitions
in particle detectors . The simplest particle detector models are
so-called Unruh-DeWitt pointlike detectors. A difficulty with this model
is that it is ambiguous for massless @xmath scalar fields. In @xmath
dimensions we have argued that a derivative-coupling detector with
interaction Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and which is sensitive to the changes of the field values along the
detector worldline, is a more suitable definition.

The transition probability can be computed as in the Unruh-DeWitt
detector model, described in Chapter 2 , and one arrives at eq. ( 2.58 )
but making the replacement @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the response function formula. One obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the derivatives of the pullback of the Wightman function are
understood distributionally.

In this chapter, we develop this model ( 3.1 ) for @xmath -dimensional
spacetimes. First, in Section 3.1 we write the response in a way that
the singularities at the diagonal, @xmath , are replaced by locally
integrable functions. Second, in Section 3.2 we take the sharp-switching
limit of formula ( 3.3 ). The response is ill-defined in the
sharp-switching limit, but the instantaneous transition probability per
unit time @xmath is finite and all the distributional singularities at
the coincidence limit remain under control represented by locally
integrable functions. This renders the transition rate formula into a
powerful tool for studying many situations in a variety of spacetimes
supporting fields in suitable quantum states and along different
detector trajectories, inertial or otherwise. Third, in Section 3.3 we
verify that the detector rate satisfies the following desirable
properties: The sharp transition rate reduces to the intuitive formal
expression that yields the spontaneous emission of particles in
Minkowski spacetime 3.3.1 , the rate has the finite massless limit 3.3.2
and the detector thermalises in a heat bath and along linearly uniformly
trajectories at the Unruh temperature 3.3.3 .

### 3.1 The response function: isolating the coincidence limit

Physical states in quantum field theory satisfy the Hadamard property.
This allows one to know in detail the singularity structure of @xmath as
@xmath . In @xmath dimensions, it suffices to write @xmath , where
@xmath is the locally integrable function

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and sgn denotes the signum function. In higher dimensions, @xmath needs
to approximate the Hadamard parametrix with a higher precision. The
parameters @xmath and @xmath in eq. ( 3.4 ) refer to the proper time
along an arbitrary worldline, while the parameters @xmath and @xmath in
the Hadamard parametrix refer to the proper time along a geodesic curve.
For a @xmath derivative-coupling detector eq. ( 3.4 ) captures the
ultraviolet behaviour along any (geodesic or otherwise) worldline. For
the four-dimensional situation, see [ 60 ] and for higher dimensions,
see [ 61 ] .

Correspondingly, we define

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (3.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the derivatives are understood in the distributional sense and
such that @xmath .

The Hadamard short distance form of the Wightman function, shown in eq.
( 2.68 ), implies that both @xmath and @xmath are represented in a
neighbourhood of @xmath by locally integrable functions, i.e. ,
functions that are integrable in an open neighbourhood around any point
lying on @xmath in @xmath . This renders the integral ( 3.5a ) free of
distributional contributions at @xmath and the integral can be split
over the subdomains @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
                          (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Letting @xmath and @xmath , we perform the change of variables @xmath
and @xmath in the subdomain @xmath , while in the subdomain @xmath we
set @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used the property @xmath and @xmath , which follows from
the definition of @xmath in ( 3.4 ), and used the definition of @xmath
as given in eq. ( 3.2 ).

To evaluate @xmath , we integrate ( 3.5b ) by parts and we perform the
split @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The right hand side of eq. ( 3.8a ) can be integrated immediately over
@xmath and one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have noted that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath we follow a strategy similar to our analysis of @xmath . We
split the integrals in the subintervals @xmath and @xmath . We perform
the change of variables @xmath and @xmath in the subdomain @xmath and
@xmath and we set @xmath in the subdomain @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . Eq. ( 3.8b ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have integrated by parts the distributional derivatives acting
on @xmath . Now yet again performing an integration by parts in the
@xmath -derivative,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the last equality we have performed an integration by parts in
the @xmath -variable. The boundary term in @xmath vanishes because
@xmath is even and, hence, has odd derivative. This also makes the
integral over @xmath convergent at small @xmath in the last expression
of ( 3.12 ). Writing @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -integral in the first term on the right hand side of eq. (
3.13 ) is standard, @xmath and it is clear that the second term is
convergent at small @xmath by integrating by parts over @xmath . We can
now combine ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.13 ) into

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

An alternative expression for @xmath can be obtained from ( 3.9 ) by
writing @xmath and using the standard integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereby one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is clear that in the full response,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

or alternatively

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

all the dependency on the state of the field is in ( 3.7 ), while ( 3.14
) (or alternatively ( 3.16 )) contain purely switching details.

### 3.2 The sharp switching limit and the transition rate

In this section, we consider the sharp switching limit of the
derivative-coupling detector in @xmath dimensions. We consider a family
of switching functions given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real positive parameters such that
@xmath and where @xmath and @xmath are smooth, non-negative functions
that satisfy @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The support of
the switching function is compact, @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . The
detector switches on smoothly during a time interval @xmath according to
the profile of @xmath , has a constant detector-field interaction for a
duration @xmath and switches off smoothly according to the profile of
@xmath during a time interval @xmath .

The sharp switching limit is obtained as @xmath . At this point, we can
exploit the similarity between the @xmath derivative coupling response (
3.18 ) with the @xmath Unruh-DeWitt response in [ 60 ] . Provided that
@xmath is free of distributional singularities located at @xmath , in
which case the singularities are located at the endpoints of the
integration interval, one can follow the analysis leading to equations
(4.4) and (4.5) in [ 60 ] to find that, for the @xmath derivative
coupling response,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant that depends only on @xmath and @xmath .

The sharp response function ( 3.20 ) diverges logarithmically as @xmath
. This divergence depends purely on the switching and is independent of
the quantum state and the detector worldline. The transition rate @xmath
remains finite as @xmath , and in this limit is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Writing @xmath , using the sine integral in the notation of [ 103 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the oddness of the sine integral, we can express ( 3.21 ) with the
alternative representation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In practical situations, it is useful to consider when the switch-on has
taken place in the asymptotic past. As @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From this point onward, we shall use the notation @xmath , whereby
suppressing the @xmath dependence in the arguments of @xmath indicates
that we are considering a (sharp) switch-on in the asymptotic past.

A final remark is that in this long interaction time limit, @xmath the
transition rate formula ( 3.24 ) is valid even when @xmath has isolated
singularities located at @xmath and @xmath cannot be represented by an
integrable function in a neighbourhood around such singular points. This
can occur, for example, when one is dealing with quantum field theory in
manifolds with boundary. Suppose one has a point in the detector
timelike worldline parametrised by a proper time @xmath which can be
traced back along a null ray that is reflected at the boundary to a
point @xmath in the worldline. In this case, @xmath will be singular. An
example of this situation will be encountered below in Chapter 4 in the
context of a receding mirror spacetime. Along a null curve, a similar
situation can occur when photons reintersect their own worldline, for
example, when photons orbit a black hole.

### 3.3 The transition rate: stationary case

In this section, we would like to verify a series of reasonable checks
on the derivative-coupling detector in stationary situations for
detectors that have been switched on sharply in the asymptotic past,
@xmath and @xmath .

First, we verify that the transition rate formula in this limit is given
precisely by the formula obtained by formally setting @xmath and
factoring out the infinite detection time [ 18 ] , which yields the
spontaneous emission spectrum in Minkowski space. Second, we verify the
massive-to-massless consistency limit. This is important because in
@xmath dimensions the Wightman function has an infrared ambiguous
additive constant for massless fields. The hope, that will be realised
in this work, is that, because in the derivative coupling model the
response depends only on derivatives of the Wightman function, @xmath ,
one can verify that the massless limit of the response function
satisfies the consistency relation @xmath . Finally, we shall
demonstrate that the derivative coupling detector thermalises. To this
end, we present two examples. We consider a detector submerged in a heat
bath and the uniformly accelerated detector interacting with the
Minkowski vacuum.

#### 3.3.1 Stationary formula

Starting out from eq. ( 3.24 ) and using @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This formula holds in general. Now, using the translation invariance of
the stationary Wightman function to write @xmath and @xmath , we can
extend the limits of integration of eq. ( 3.24 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where each term inside the integral has distributional singularities.

We can now evaluate the second term in eq. ( 3.26 ), by deforming the
integration contour into the complex lower half-plane near @xmath . From
the residue theorem and Jordan’s lemma,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath               (3.27a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the closed path @xmath closes following an arc at infinity on the
upper complex plane enclosing the point @xmath and @xmath closes
following an arc at infinity on the lower complex plane. We obtain the
standard formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is usually obtained by formally setting @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Massless limit

In this subsection, we shall show that the transition rate is continuous
in the mass of the field, @xmath , for a static detector in Minkowski
space. Because of the importance of boundary conditions in field theory,
we perform this analysis also for the Minkowski half-space with
Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions.

Let @xmath be the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime. In the
standard Minkowski coordinates, @xmath , the spacetime metric tensor
reads @xmath . The Minkowski half-space is the submanifold @xmath of
@xmath specified by @xmath , equipped with the metric @xmath inherited
from @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

In the Minkowski spacetime, the field of mass @xmath is in the Minkowski
vacuum state @xmath which is of positive frequency with respect to the
global timelike Killing vector @xmath . In the Minkowski half-space, the
@xmath field is in the vacuum state @xmath which is also of positive
frequency with respect to @xmath . We consider a detector following the
static worldline

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive constant devoid of geometric significance in
@xmath . In @xmath @xmath represents the distance of the detector from
the boundary at @xmath . The static detector is switched on in the
asymptotic past, such that formula ( 3.28 ) gives its transition rate.
We now show that @xmath is continuous in the limit @xmath .

The classical equation of motion on @xmath for a massive scalar field is
given by @xmath subject to the boundary conditions

  -- -- -------- -- ---------
                    
        @xmath      (3.30a)
        @xmath      (3.30b)
  -- -- -------- -- ---------

The quantum field, understood as an operator valued distribution,
satisfies the equations of motion via the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath satisfying eq. ( 3.30a ) or ( 3.30b ) for Dirichlet or
Neumann boundary conditions respectively. In practice, the best way to
obtain the state in the Minkowski half-space is to use the method of
images with respect to the Minkowski massive Wightman function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the modified Bessel function of the second kind, and the
expression is understood as a distribution as @xmath .

The Wightman function in @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for Dirichlet and @xmath for Neumann boundary conditions.
The image term in ( 3.33 ) is most efficiently obtained by studying the
fundamental solutions of the wave equation. The causal propagator,
@xmath , satisfies @xmath for @xmath . It follows that every solution of
@xmath subject to the boundary conditions is of the form @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Denoting @xmath the Causal propagator in Minkowski, the Dirichlet
boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

imply that @xmath . It follows that @xmath , which accounts for the
image term in eq. ( 3.33 ) with @xmath .

Similarly, the Neumann boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

imply that @xmath . It follows that @xmath , which accounts for the
image term in eq. ( 3.33 ) with @xmath .

As we have discussed in Chapter 2 , the naïve massless limit of the
Minkowski Wightman function diverges. However, the massless limit of
@xmath , where @xmath is Euler’s constant and @xmath is a positive
constant with inverse length dimensions, remains finite as @xmath [ 103
] . We define the massless Minkowski Wightman function as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we define the massless half-space Wightman function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the way in which we have defined the massless Wightman
functions makes the massless limit discontinuous. What we wish to argue
is that this mass discontinuity is irrelevant for an observer who
interacts with the matter field using a particle detector coupled via (
3.1 ). To support this argument, we proceed to show that the
instantaneous rate along a static worldline in the Minkowski half-space
is continuous in the massless limit. More precisely

###### Theorem 3.1.

Let @xmath be the instantaneous transition rate of a sharply switched
static ( 3.28 ) detector following the trajectory @xmath in the
Minkowski half-space and coupled through ( 2.76 ) in the sharp switching
limit, to a massive Klein-Gordon field of mass @xmath subject to
Dirichlet or Neumann boundary conditions ( 3.30 ) in the state ( 3.33 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Concordantly, let @xmath be the instantaneous transition rate of such
detector coupled instead to a massless scalar field in the state ( 3.38
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

It then holds that @xmath .

###### Proof.

The massive Wightman function,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

can be pulled back along the static detector trajectory and
differentiated twice to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the representation ( 3.24 ) of the static transition rate, and
inserting eq. ( 3.42 ) into this equation, we see that the formula for
the sharp, static transition rate splits into the integral of a regular
function and an integral with distributional contributions, which we
denote

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath               (3.43a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

such that @xmath . A prime denotes a derivative with respect to the
argument. Following the steps in Appendix A.1 , we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the massless case, inserting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

into ( 3.26 ) one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

This integral is evaluated by elementary complex integration methods. We
detail this in Appendix A.2 . One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from eq. ( 3.44 ) and ( 3.47 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

###### Corollary 3.2.

Let instead @xmath be the instantaneous transition rate of a static
detector coupled to a massive Klein-Gordon field in the Minkowski vacuum
state, and let @xmath be the instantaneous transition rate of such
detector coupled to a massless Klein Gordon field. Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Setting @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the result follows. ∎

#### 3.3.3 Thermalisation

We now verify that the derivative coupling detector in @xmath dimensions
responds to a thermal state by the detailed balance condition. In
Minkowski spacetime there are two situations of prime interest. First,
an inertial detector immersed in a heat bath. Second, a uniformly
accelerated detector that registers the Unruh effect.

##### Inertial detector in a thermal bath

We consider a massless @xmath field in Minkowski space in a thermal
state with positive temperature @xmath . The Wightman function can be
obtained from the resummation of the formal non-convergent sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating ( 3.50 ) with respect to @xmath term by term yields a
convergent sum that converges to the elementary function defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath has a tower of infinite periodic singularities in
the complex plane located at @xmath , @xmath , with period @xmath . We
define the thermal Wightman function (up to the @xmath massless
ambiguity) as the improper integral of this elementary function, fixing
the arbitrary @xmath -dependent constant in such a way that our
definition is a Green function of the massless Klein-Gordon equation,
and requiring evenness for @xmath for @xmath , i.e. ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Remark.

The thermal two-point function has periodic logarithmic singularities at
@xmath on the left-moving sector and at @xmath on the right-moving
sector.

We consider an inertial detector with worldline @xmath , where @xmath is
the detector’s rapidity parameter with respect to the rest frame of the
heat bath. We consider a switch-on in the asymptotic past. The @xmath
bi-distribution is obtained by differentiating twice the pullback of the
Wightman function, and the transition rate is given by the stationary
formula ( 3.28 ). The transition rate can be written in terms of the
left- and right-moving contributions as @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.3.

Each of the the left- and right-moving parts of the transition rate,
defined by @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.53 ), satisfies the detailed balance
condition at temperature, @xmath and @xmath respectively.

###### Proof.

We deform the contour integral in ( 3.53 ) to @xmath , where @xmath and,
using formula 3.985 in [ 105 ] , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The detailed balance condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied at the correct temperatures. ∎

The content of the theorem is that the rate of response of a detector
(or ensemble thereof) that is travelling inertially with respect to the
bath will detect left-moving and right-moving particles at a temperature
@xmath , compensated by the appropriate Doppler shift due to the
relative velocity of the detector with respect to the bath.

A detector that is static with respect to the bath will thermalise
exactly at the heat bath temperature, as can be seen by examining the
total rate of the detector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which simplifies in the special case @xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.57 ) conforms fully with the @xmath expectation, where an
Unurh-DeWitt detector traveling statically in a heat bath thermalises at
the heat bath temperature.

##### Unruh effect

Let again @xmath be @xmath Minkowski spacetime and @xmath be a massless
scalar field in the Poincaré invariant Minkowski vacuum. The trajectory
of a uniformly accelerated detector confined to the right Rindler wedge
is the integral curve of the boost Killing vector field @xmath , given
by the solution of the equation @xmath . The solution, parametrised by
the proper time normalised to @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the magnitude of the proper acceleration. By
construction, the trajectory is stationary along @xmath .

With the detector switch-on pushed to the asymptotic past, the
transition rate is independent of time and we can use the stationary
formula ( 3.28 ). Differentiating twice the pullback of the Wightman
function and using eq. ( 3.28 ) we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Theorem 3.4.

The transition rate ( 3.59 ) satisfies the detailed balance condition at
the Unruh temperature, @xmath .

###### Proof.

As before, we deform the contour integral to @xmath , where @xmath and,
using formula 3.985 in [ 105 ] , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfies the detailed balance condition at the Unruh temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

The form of eq. ( 3.60 ) is the usual Planckian spectrum encountered in
@xmath dimensions for a non-derivative detector coupled to a massless
field along uniformly accelerated trajectories. Moreover, it is known
that in even dimensions the spectrum arising from the Unruh effect is
bosonic, whereas in odd dimensions it is fermionic [ 52 ] , and result
also conforms to this expectation.

With the confidence that the @xmath detector that we have introduced
satisfies the conditions verified in Section 3.3 , we are set to examine
phenomena on curved spacetimes and non-stationary situations in Chapter
4 .

## Chapter 4 Quantum aspects of black holes

The study of quantum field theory in black hole spacetimes was pioneered
by Hawking, with the discovery that black holes emit thermal radiation
at a temperature proportional to their surface gravity [ 106 , 23 ] .
Understanding this radiation has been an effort at the forefront of a
number of physical investigations, mainly because of the thermal
character of radiation. Suppose a pure state is defined on a Cauchy
hypersurface at early stages of the collapse of a star that will form a
black hole. Once the black hole has formed, the state defined in the
asymptotic future infinity appears to be thermal, because there exist
correlations with field modes inside the black hole. The future infinity
is not Cauchy in the whole spacetime and the modes inside the black hole
region need to be traced. As a result of the collapse, the state will
appear to have evolved from a pure state to a mixed state. This apparent
pure to mixed evolution for an observer that only has access to the
exterior region of the black hole should not be alarming. It simply
indicates that there exist field modes in the interior black hole region
to which one has no access from the exterior region [ 22 ] .

Nevertheless, the conventional wisdom affirms that if the back-reaction
of such black hole radiation onto the spacetime is considered, the black
hole will radiate all of its mass and the information, initially encoded
in a pure state, will be lost in the form of thermal radiation in the
asymptotic future. This unresolved problem bears the name of the
information paradox [ 24 ] . The resolution of this paradox has
stimulated much research. We simply mention non-exhaustively a few lines
of attack. These include the proposal of brick-wall conditions at the
horizon [ 107 ] , quantum gravity resolutions [ 108 ] , non-unitary
quantum dynamics and firewalls [ 109 ] . More recently, it has been
proposed that the information of infalling matter is stored at the black
hole horizon as soft hair [ 110 ] .

The objective of this chapter is to put forward several calculations in
@xmath dimensions that allow analytical control in many interesting
situations that occur in black hole spacetimes, especially in strongly
time-dependent situations, in which analytic control in @xmath
dimensions is more difficult. The message that we wish to convey is that
many of the interesting features of full @xmath -dimensional black holes
survive in the @xmath -dimensional setting, where the conformal symmetry
of the theory allows one to compute analytically interesting quantities,
such as the transition rate of a detector and the renormalised
stress-energy tensor. An important remark is that the issue of
back-reaction is a subtle one in @xmath dimensions, because the Einstein
tensor vanishes identically, and the Einstein field equations are
trivial. We do not deal with this issue, but one can certainly venture
in this direction.

In Section 4.1 , we discuss classical aspects of black holes. First, we
introduce a receding mirror spacetime à la Davies-Fulling [ 111 , 41 ,
42 , 112 , 77 ] that mimics the process by which a spherically symmetric
collapsing star forms a Schwarzschild black hole. We consider a mirror
receding to the left in @xmath Minkowski spacetime and impose Dirichlet
boundary conditions along the mirror trajectory, in such a way that the
asymptotic past matches the Minkowski half-space. The motion of the
mirror produces a shift in the classical modes that mimics the redshift
of field modes in a collapsing star at late times. Second, we introduce
the @xmath Schwarzschild spacetime and discuss the classical features of
a massless scalar field on this spacetime. Third, we consider the @xmath
-dimensional Reissner-Nordström spacetime. This is especially
interesting due to the appearance of future and past Cauchy horizons, a
feature that is shared by the astrophysically relevant @xmath
-dimensional Kerr black hole.

Sections 4.2 and 4.3 deal with quantum aspects of black holes. In
Section 4.2 we shall perform the quantisation of massless scalar fields
in the spacetimes introduced in Section 4.1 . We use conformal
techniques that allow one to obtain the two-point function directly.
This is the main advantage of massless @xmath dimensional field
theories. In the case of the receding mirror spacetime, we choose a
field state that resembles the Minkowski half-space vacuum in the
asymptotic past. In the Schwarzschild and generalised Reissner-Nordström
spacetimes, we are concerned with massless fields in the Unruh and
Hartle-Hawking-Israel vacua.

In Section 4.3 we study several quantum effects of black holes. The main
result in the receding mirror spacetime is the thermalisation of the
rate of inertial detectors in the asymptotic future, by a radiation flux
coming from the receding mirror. In the @xmath Schwarzschild spacetime
we verify that static detectors thermalise due to the Hawking radiation,
and we verify the loss of thermality of inertial infalling detectors.
Their asymptotic behaviour, both near infinity and as they approach the
curvature sigularity, is computed analytically, while the interpolating
behaviour is calculated numerically. We also consider the rate of an
inertial detector that switches on near the white hole singularity and
follows a “straight up” trajectory across the bifurcation point of the
Killing horizons into the black hole and analyse numerically the
transition rate as a function of the detector’s energy gap, @xmath , and
of the detector’s position relative to the white hole and black hole
singularities. In the @xmath Reissner-Nordström spacetime we calculate
the strength at which the detector’s transition rate diverges as the
detector approaches the Cauchy horizon, as well as the renormalised
local energy along the worldline of such detector.

Finally, in Section 4.4 , we discuss the validity and limitations of the
@xmath models that we have examined in the light of our expectations in
@xmath situations.

Throughout this chapter we set @xmath , but continue to work in the
regime of no back-reaction of the fields on the metric.

### 4.1 Classical aspects of black holes in @xmath dimensions

We now introduce the classical geometry of the aforementioned
spacetimes. In Subsection 4.1.1 , we present the receding mirror
spacetime that we use to model the collapse of a star in @xmath
dimensions. In Subsection 4.1.2 we introduce the @xmath Schwarzschild
black hole. In Subsection 4.1.3 we generalise the @xmath -dimensional
Reissner-Nordström black hole to a family of black hole spacetimes which
have the same causal structure. We refer to this class of spacetimes as
the generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole.

In this chapter, we deal with asymptotically flat spacetimes, that are,
additionally, strongly asymptotically predictable spacetimes ¹ ¹ 1 We
follow Wald [ 113 ] , chap. 11 and 12, in our definition, but see also
the classical monograph by Hawking and Ellis, chap. 9 [ 106 ] . .

###### Definition 4.1.

An asymptotically flat spacetime @xmath with a conformal map to the
spacetime @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , is strongly asymptotically
predictable if there exists an open region @xmath , such that @xmath and
@xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime.

We are obliged to provide the following important definition:

###### Definition 4.2.

Let @xmath be a strongly asymptotically predictable spacetime. @xmath is
said to contain a black hole if @xmath is not contained in the causal
past of future null infinity, @xmath . We call @xmath the black hole
region of the spacetime and the event horizon is the intersection of the
boundary of the causal past of future null infinity with @xmath , i.e.,
@xmath .

This definition formalises the intuition that black holes are regions of
spacetime from which classical signals cannot escape to infinity.

A final technical point that we need to clarify is that the spacetimes
that we introduce in this chapter are geodesically convex . This
property, which strengthens the notion of geodesic neighbourhoods
introduced in Def. 2.40 , will allow us to perform asymptotic analysis
unambiguously, in the spacetimes that we will define below, in the
situations in which we are interested.

###### Definition 4.3.

A spacetime @xmath is said to be a geodesically convex set if, given any
two points in @xmath , there is a unique geodesic between the two points
lying in @xmath .

#### 4.1.1 The receding mirror spacetime

Let @xmath be the Minkowski spacetime in @xmath dimensions. The
spacetime metric can be written in terms of the global null coordinates
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . We consider a mirror moving in this
spacetime with a trajectory given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive constant. Writing eq. ( 4.1 ) as @xmath
allows one to parametrise the trajectory with the proper time @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.2a)
     @xmath      (4.2b)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proper velocity, @xmath , and proper acceleration @xmath are towards
the negative @xmath coordinate. The dots represent derivatives with
respect to the proper time. The magnitude of the acceleration, @xmath ,
is equal to @xmath . At early times, @xmath , the trajectory is
asymptotically inertial, @xmath , with a proper acceleration vanishing
exponentially fast. At late times, the mirror recedes to infinity as
@xmath and the trajectory asymptotes the null line @xmath from below.
The proper acceleration diverges as @xmath . A spacetime diagram is
shown in Fig. 4.1 .

We now consider the spacetime @xmath which consists of the Minkowski
spacetime submanifold at the right of the mirror equipped with the
inherited Minkowski metric. This is the receding mirror spacetime.

#### 4.1.2 The @xmath Schwarzschild black hole

The @xmath -dimensional Schwarzschild spacetime is constructed by
analogy with the @xmath -dimensional counterpart. The @xmath
Schwarzschild black hole consists of the real manifold @xmath equiped
with a metric @xmath which in the exterior region, @xmath , is locally
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Riemannian metric on @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is a
length parameter proportional to the ADM mass ² ² 2 The ADM mass or ADM
energy of a spacetime was introduced in [ 114 ] . See also standard
texts, such as [ 113 ] . of the black hole . The @xmath Schwarzschild
black hole is obtained by dropping the @xmath -dependence in the @xmath
metric. In other words, it consists of the manifold @xmath with @xmath
and metric in the exterior region given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The exterior region is static with Killing vector field @xmath . An
event horizon is located at @xmath and the spacetime is regular across
the event horizon @xmath as is evident by introducing the
Eddington-Finkelstein time coordinate @xmath , where @xmath is the
tortoise coordinate. The surface gravity @xmath with respect to @xmath
satisfies the eigenvalue equation @xmath with solution @xmath .

Using @xmath we can perform the Kruskal extension of the Schwarzschild
spacetime. We introduce null coordinates in the exterior region @xmath .
We cover the region @xmath with the Kruskal-Szekeres chart @xmath . We
extend @xmath to cover four regions as indicated in Table 4.1 .

Figure 4.2 depicts the four regions in a conformal diagram. The new
manifold, @xmath , is the Kruskal extension of the Schwarzschild black
hole. The spacetime contains a bifurcate Killing horizon, @xmath , at
@xmath , generated by the Kruskal Killing vector @xmath . @xmath is
timelike in the regions I and III and spacelike in regions II and IV,
and takes the form @xmath in region I. We call @xmath , the null surface
generated by @xmath , the past horizon and @xmath , the null surface
generated by @xmath , the future horizon. We continue to denote the
extension by the pair @xmath . The metric is given locally by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the whole Kruskal manifold, except for @xmath , where the metric is
understood to be given by the limit of eq. ( 4.5 ). @xmath is located at
@xmath and @xmath is located at @xmath .

##### Geodesics

A revision of the geodesics in the Schwarzschild spacetime will be
useful for our computations below. If one starts out in region I and
falls freely into region II along a timelike trajectory, it is well
known that the geodesics, in Schwarzschild coordinates, are given by the
integral curves of

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The dot stands for a derivative with respect to the proper time along
the geodesic path, in region I. The sign of @xmath indicates that the
trajectory is falling into the black hole region. The solutions to ( 4.6
) can be continued to region II using appropriate coordinates, e.g. ,
Kruskal coordinates.

We recall a convenient parametrisation of the geodesic solutions. Let
@xmath , i.e. , the geodesic falls in from infinity with initial
non-vanishing speed @xmath with respect to the Killing vector @xmath .
The geodesic can be parametrised as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , so that the trajectory starts in the
asymptotic past as @xmath and approaches the singularity as @xmath ,
when the proper time of the observer @xmath . The horizon-crossing
occurs at @xmath . Eq. ( 4.7c ) only holds in region I and the
parametrisation in region II is obtained by introducing appropriate
coordinates.

Let @xmath , i.e. , the geodesic falls into the black hole from infinity
with initial vanishing speed with respect to @xmath . The solution to
the geodesic equations in region I ( 4.6 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , the horizon-crossing occurs at @xmath and the singularity
is approached as @xmath . The solution in region II is obtained by
introducing appropriate coordinates in eq. ( 4.8b ).

Let @xmath , i.e. , the geodesic attains a finite maximum radial
coordinate @xmath . The geodesic can be parametrised as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , so that the trajectory starts at the white hole
singularity as @xmath and ends at the black hole singularity as @xmath .
The trajectory reaches its maximum @xmath -value, @xmath at proper time
@xmath , and the total proper time elapsed between the singularities is
@xmath . The horizon-crossings occur at @xmath , where @xmath . Eq. (
4.9c ) only holds in region I and the parametrisation in region II is
obtained by introducing appropriate coordinates.

Finally, let @xmath , for the family of geodesics that stay in regions
IV and II only, crossing through the bifurcation point @xmath , which
are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and with @xmath and @xmath given by eq. ( 4.9a ) and (
4.9b ) respectively.

This concludes our discussion of the classical aspects of the @xmath
Schwarzschild black hole.

#### 4.1.3 The @xmath generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole

We introduce a class of @xmath -dimensional spacetimes that generalise
the Reissner-Nordström black hole. Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional
black hole spacetime with metric given in the exterior region by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a radial coordinate and @xmath is a time coordinate and
with @xmath a smooth, real-valued function ³ ³ 3 One does not need
impose such regularity conditions on @xmath , but for concreteness we
consider only smooth functions. satisfying in terms of the global @xmath
coordinate

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . The exterior region is static with Killing vector field
@xmath . Given that @xmath is continuous, the spacetime contains two
horizons, at @xmath and @xmath . The spacetime is regular across the
horizons @xmath and @xmath . This is evident by introducing the
Eddington-Finkelstein time coordinate @xmath , where @xmath is the
tortoise coordinate. The surface gravities associated to @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively, are @xmath . A primed quantity,
as usual, indicates a derivative with respect to the argument. A useful
piece of notation for computational purposes is to introduce the
functions @xmath and @xmath defined by @xmath . Notice that @xmath and
@xmath .

The details of the spacetime under consideration depend on the specifics
of the function @xmath . As an example, the @xmath non-extremal
Reissner-Nordström black hole is a member of this family with @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath is associated with the total mass of the
spacetime, @xmath is associated with the total charge and @xmath .
Specifying @xmath is not essential for our calculations and we shall
deal with the whole class of spacetimes at once.

Let us now perform the Kruskal extension of this spacetime. We continue
to call the extension @xmath with a slight abuse of notation, but we
believe that no confusion may arise from this. Let us start by
introducing null coordinates in the exterior region @xmath . One can
then cover the region @xmath by introducing the Kruskal-Szekeres chart
@xmath . The pair @xmath can be extended to cover four regions as
indicated in Table 4.2 .

The analytic extension contains the Killing vector @xmath . A bifurcate
Killing horizon is located at @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is
generated by @xmath and @xmath by @xmath (see Fig. 4.3 ). We refer to
the open subset of @xmath covered by the charts @xmath as @xmath .
Notice that @xmath is a spacetime on its own right, where the metric can
be written locally as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the metric at @xmath is understood in the limiting sense.

Moreover, it is globally hyperbolic and conformal to the @xmath
Minkowski spacetime with a conformal factor locally given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to cover the region @xmath one can introduce null coordinates
@xmath in region II, where @xmath is the tortoise coordinate of the
future increasing time coordinate @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a
spatial coordinate that increases towards the right. Then, the
Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates for @xmath are @xmath . The pair @xmath can
be used to cover the interior regions indicated in Table 4.3 .

The bifurcate Killing horizon at @xmath , @xmath , is generated by
@xmath and @xmath . The two sets of Kruskal coordinates relate neatly in
region II by the transition functions @xmath . In the case of
Reissner-Nordström, one can find a left timelike curvature singularity
at @xmath in region III and a right timelike curvature singularity at
@xmath in region III’ corresponding to the global coordinate @xmath .

The future region II”’ in Table 4.3 defines a white hole region
isometric to the region II’ described in Table 4.2 . The procedure now
can be repeated ad infinitum to obtain an infinite tower of copies of
the regions here described into the future. An analogous procedure
provides the extension into the past. See Figure 4.3 for details.

For the purposes of our analysis, we will make use of the
future-directed, left-moving geodesic equations. If one starts out in
region I and falls freely into region II and continues to region III
across the Cauchy horizon, the geodesic in region I is given by the
integral curve of

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the dot stands for a derivative with respect to the proper time
along the geodesic path. Eq. ( 4.15 ) are extended to regions II and III
using the appropriate coordinate charts. In particular, near the
horizon, the chart @xmath , defined in region II is more convenient. We
have that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The way in which we have defined the coordinates in region II is such
that the time coordinate @xmath increases towards the future and @xmath
represents spacelike hyperbolas, while @xmath increases towards the
right, with @xmath defining timelike hyperbolas.

An interesting property of the Reissner-Nordström spacetime in @xmath
dimensions and of the class of @xmath spacetimes that we describe here,
is that they are not globally hyperbolic. Indeed, many of the most
important solutions in General Relativity are not globally hyperbolic.
Notably, most members of the Kerr-Newman family are among these
solutions. Hence, understanding whether Cauchy horizons form by physical
processes is a long standing research topic in mathematical relativity.

If we consider a spacelike surface, @xmath , which connects @xmath in
region I, on the right, with @xmath in region I’, on the left, a future
Cauchy horizon separates region II from regions III and III’. More
precisely, the future Cauchy horizon, which we denote by @xmath , is
located at @xmath , where @xmath is the bifurcation point at @xmath .
The situation is similar in the past of region II’, where there is a
past Cauchy horizon @xmath , and the full Cauchy horizon is @xmath

Eq. ( 4.16 ) detector that approaches the future Reissner-Nordström-like
Cauchy horizon located at @xmath as it moves towards the left in region
II. It is useful to define @xmath as the left portion of the future
horizon, since we are interested in trajectories that cross this region
of @xmath . See Fig. 4.4 .

### 4.2 Quantisation in @xmath-dimensional black holes

Quantum field theory is under full control for free fields on globally
hyperbolic spacetimes. This means that when working on non-globally
hyperbolic spacetimes one has to be careful in defining a globally
hyperbolic region where a quantum field theory can be appropriately
constructed. If a timelike boundary is present, imposing boundary
conditions may suffice to supplement for the lack of global
hyperbolicity. In the case of the receding mirror, the introduction of
boundary conditions introduces distributional singularities to the
two-point function of the theory away from the short distance limit,
whenever two points are connected by a null ray that is reflected at the
boundary. In the @xmath Reissner-Nordström-like spacetime we perform the
quantisation in suitable globally hyperbolic submanifolds of the Kruskal
extension.

In each of the spacetimes introduced in Section 4.1 , we deal with a
massless, minimally-coupled scalar field. In the case of the receding
mirror spacetime, we construct the relevant state by imposing that the
state in the asymptotic past coincide with the Minkowski half-space,
subject to Dirichlet boundary conditions at the mirror.

For the Schwarzschild spacetime, we consider two relevant quasi-free
states that can be constructed. The first relevant state in the
Schwarzchild spacetime is the Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI) state [ 115 ,
116 ] , which is regular in the whole Kruskal manifold. For a massless
scalar field, the HHI state is obtained by imposing boundary conditions
for the field modes at the bifurcate Killing horizon, such that in
@xmath the modes are given by plane waves with respect to the affine
parameter of the horizon generators. This state was first rigorously
constructed by Kay and Wald in the seminal paper [ 117 ] . The second
relevant state is the Unruh state [ 29 ] . Let @xmath , where @xmath is
the bifurcation point of the bifurcate Killing horizon at @xmath . The
Unruh state is defined to be regular in the globally hyperbolic region
@xmath of the Kruskal manifold, but not in the whole Kruskal extension.
For a massless scalar field, one can construct this state by imposing
plane wave solutions at the Cauchy surface @xmath using the affine
parameter at the past horizon @xmath and the advanced time at past null
infinity. The Unruh state corresponds to a scalar field on a black hole
that has formed from collapse. See [ 118 ] for a recent rigorous
construction of the Unruh state.

In the case of the Reissner-Nordström black hole we also have suitable
HHI and Unruh vacua. We can define a Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI) state
to be regular in the globally hyperbolic submanifold @xmath , which we
have introduced above, equipped with the induced metric. Contrary to the
Schwarzschild case, the HHI state does not cover the full Kruskal
extension of the manifold ⁴ ⁴ 4 Another HHI state can be defined to be
regular in the region @xmath if appropriate boundary conditions are set
at @xmath to compensate for the fact that this region is not globally
hyperbolic. However, if we are concerned about an observer coming from
region I, the choice in the main text is the relevant one. . For the
Unruh state, we let @xmath , where @xmath is the bifurcation point of
the bifurcate Killing horizon at @xmath in the Kruskal extension of the
generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole. The Unruh state is defined to
be regular in the globally hyperbolic region @xmath , but not in the
whole globally hyperbolic submanifold @xmath . For a massless scalar
field, one can construct this state by constructing plane wave solutions
at the hypersurface @xmath , using the affine parameter at the past
horizon and the advanced time at past null infinity.

#### 4.2.1 Quantisation in the receding mirror spacetime

We wish to solve the boundary value problem on @xmath , where @xmath is
the manifold to the right of the moving mirror in Minkowski spacetime,
given by @xmath on @xmath , subject to Dirichlet boundary condition
along the mirror trajectory. The solution is @xmath subject to @xmath at
the mirror. A mode solution satisfying the boundary conditions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions, which we can take to be smooth.
We select the positive frequency subspace with respect to @xmath in the
asymptotic past, by introducing the complex structure @xmath , such that
@xmath , and selected the positive frequency modes as the subspace
@xmath , whereby we set @xmath .

Next, we normalise the modes by the Dirac orthonormality condition . To
this end, we introduce a wave-packet profile function in Fourier space.
Let @xmath be sharply peaked about @xmath and of unit-norm. Then,
setting @xmath , we write the solution to the boundary value problem as
linear combinations of Dirac-orthonormal wave packets of the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfying

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have introduced the canonical momenta @xmath .

The field quantisation prescription gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath               (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the CCR follow from ( 4.19 ).

The action of a creation operator on the vacuum state of the theory,
@xmath , produces a wave packet as in expression ( 4.18 ) in the
one-particle space, @xmath . The full Hilbert space of the theory is the
symmetric Fock space @xmath . The two-point function of the theory is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

understood in the distributional sense. The @xmath prescribes the
ultraviolet behaviour of the two-point function.

#### 4.2.2 Quantisation in the @xmath Schwarzschild black hole

We proceed to obtain the two relevant states for the Schwarzschild black
hole. The first one is the Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI) state, which is
regular in the whole Kruskal extension of the Schwarzschild spacetime.
The second one is the Unruh vacuum, regular in regions I, II and across
the future horizon.

##### Hartle-Hawking-Israel state

The Schwarzschild Kruskal extension is conformally flat in @xmath
dimensions. Let @xmath denote Minkowski spacetime. The map @xmath ,
@xmath is conformal with @xmath , where @xmath is understood in the
limiting sense. The Klein-Gordon equation for a minimally coupled @xmath
scalar field is conformal, and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Schwarzschild Kruskal coordinates.

The subspace of solutions of Dirac orthonormal left and right-moving
wave packets, which are of positive frequency with respect to the
generators of the bifurcate Killing horizon, contains elements of the
form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.24b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are sharply peaked around the values @xmath and
@xmath respectively. We have introduced the infrared cut-off @xmath in
eq. ( 4.24 ) because the integral is not defined all the way down to
@xmath . Linear combinations of @xmath and @xmath produce solutions,
@xmath , with left and right-moving contributions of positive frequency
with respect to @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The canonical quantisation produces operator valued distributions on the
left-moving sector

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and on the right-moving sector

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

generate the left and right CCR algebras. The full CCR algebra of the
theory is the tensor product of the algebras generated by ( 4.25 ) and (
4.26 ). The creation and annihilation operators are defined as explained
in Chapter 2 on each sector of the theory, @xmath , @xmath for
left-movers and @xmath and @xmath for right-movers. The annihilation
operators extend as @xmath and @xmath in the full CCR algebra and the
creation operators extend similarly.

The Fock space of the theory is defined from the action of the
(extended) creation and annihilation operators. The vacuum state of the
theory is defined by the condition @xmath . The action on the vacuum of
a creation operator, given by a linear combination of the extensions of
@xmath and @xmath , produces a wave packet with decoupled left and
right-movers, as in ( 4.24 ), in the one-particle Hilbert space of the
theory, @xmath . The wave packets propagate in the whole of the Kruskal
manifold. The full Hilbert space of the theory is the factorisable
symmetric Fock space @xmath .

Finally, the two-point function of the state can be obtained by the
conformal methods introduced in Chapter 2 , Subsection 2.2.3 , whereby
one obtains that

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.27)
  -- -- -- --------

where div is the infrared ambiguity for @xmath massless scalars. Because
the vacuum state is quasi-free, the two-point function determines the
state. The @xmath prescribes the ultraviolet behaviour and the branch of
the logarithm is understood as in our discussion in Chapter 2 . (See eq.
( 2.75 ).)

##### Unruh state

For the Unruh state, we restrict our attention to the submanifold @xmath
of the Schwarzschild Kruskal extension, which can be conformally
embedded in Minkowski spacetime. Thus, the conformal techniques are at
our disposal. The Klein-Gordon equation implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we take the subspace of plane wave solutions given by linear
combinations of

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.29b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Again, we have introduced the infrared cut-off @xmath in eq. ( 4.29 ).
Eq. ( 4.29 ) has left-travelling modes which are plane waves at past
null infinity and a red-shifted right moving contribution. The shift in
the right-moving mode is to be understood as the shift that a
Minkowskian mode would suffer after crossing the centre of a collapsing
star at late times. In the conformal diagram that we have presented
there is no such collapse, but the choice of modes provides the correct
mathematical description for intepreting these modes as coming from a
star at a late stage of the collapse. See the discussion below eq.
(2.29) in [ 29 ] .

The Dirac quantisation is as before and we obtain on the left-moving
sector

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and on the right-moving sector

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which generate the CCR algebra @xmath by the tensor product of the
algebras generated by ( 4.30 ) and ( 4.31 ).

As before, the vacuum state of the theory is defined by the condition
@xmath , and the one-particle Hilbert pace by the action of creation
operators on the vacuum, @xmath , with @xmath . The state produces a
wave packet that has a left-moving contribution indistinguishable from a
Minkowskian plane wave packet, and a shifted-frequency right-mover, as
discussed above. The waves move inside @xmath and do not reach regions
III and IV of the conformal diagram 4.2 . The full Hilbert space of the
theory is the factorisable symmetric Fock space @xmath .

The two-point function that determines the state can be obtained by the
conformal methods introduced in Chapter 2 , 2.2.3 , whereby one obtains
that

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.32)
  -- -- -- --------

where, again, div is the infrared ambiguity for @xmath massless scalars.
The awkwardness in the dimensions in eq. ( 4.32 ) stems from this
ambiguity.

#### 4.2.3 Quantisation in the @xmath generalised Reissner-Nordström
black hole

We proceed to obtain the HHI and Unruh states for the generalised
Reissner-Nordström spacetimes discussed above.

##### Hartle-Hawking-Israel state

The HHI state is regular in the submanifold @xmath , covered by the
Kruskal Reissner-Nordström-like coordinates, @xmath , defined in regions
I, I’, II and II’, and across the bifurcate Killing horizon that
separates these regions in Fig. 4.3 . The state is a conformal vacuum
with respect to the Minkowski vacuum, with conformal factor @xmath .
Once more, the Klein-Gordon equation for a minimally coupled @xmath
scalar field is conformal, and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subspace of solutions of Dirac orthonormal wave packets, with
left-moving component of positive frequency with respect to the
generator of the future horizon and right-moving component of positive
frequency with respect to the generator of the past horizon, is
generated by linear combinations of

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is an infrared cut-off. The left-moving contribution of the
wave-packages that propagate from region I into the future will
eventually reach the future horizon, @xmath , and escape into region
III, where the evolution of the wave will not be determined by data on
any Cauchy surface, @xmath , of the spacetime @xmath . This is so
because @xmath is not a Cauchy surface of the whole Kruskal extension.
Similarly, the right-moving contribution of the wave-packages that
propagate from region I’ into the future will eventually reach the
future horizon, @xmath , and escape into region III’.

The canonical quantisation produces operator valued distributions, which
map smooth functions with compact support on surfaces inside @xmath to
the operators

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

on the left moving sector, and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.36b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

on the right-moving sector. The tensor product of the left and right CCR
algebras, generated by the relations ( 4.35 ) and ( 4.36 ) respectively,
yields the algebra @xmath .

The annihilation operators define the vacuum by @xmath . The action of a
creation operator on the vacuum state of the theory, @xmath , produces a
wave packet in the one-particle Hilbert space @xmath . The waves
originate inside region @xmath and propagate towards the future. They
eventually cross the Cauchy horizon and escape into regions III and III’
of the conformal diagram 4.3 in such a way that the dynamical evolution
of the waves in the future of the Cauchy horizon is not determined by
initial data on @xmath . The full Hilbert space is the factorisable
symmetric Fock space @xmath .

Finally, the two-point function is defined in the interior of @xmath and
determines the HHI state. It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where div is the infrared ambiguity for @xmath massless scalars.

##### Unruh state

For the Unruh state, we restrict our attention to the submanifold @xmath
of the Kruskal extension in the Reissner-Nordström-like manifolds. The
Klein-Gordon equation implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we take the subspace of plane wave solutions given by linear
combinations of left-movers of positive frequency with respect to the
advanced time in the asymptotic past, and of right-movers of positive
frequency with respect to the generator of the past horizon,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Again, we have introduced the infrared cut-off @xmath in eq. ( 4.29 ).
The left-moving contribution of the wave packets that propagate from
region I into the future will eventually reach the future horizon,
@xmath , and escape into region III of Fig. 4.3 , where the dynamical
evolution of the wave will be undetermined by the initial conditions on
@xmath . Similarly, right-moving wave packets in region II can escape
into region III’.

The Dirac quantisation is as before and maps smooth functions with
compact support on surfaces inside @xmath to the operators

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

on the left moving sector, and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

on the right-moving sector. The tensor product of the left and right CCR
algebras, generated by the relations ( 4.40 ) and ( 4.41 ) respectively,
yields the algebra @xmath .

The annihilation operators define the vacuum by @xmath . The action of a
creation operator on the vacuum state of the theory, @xmath , produces a
wave packet in the one-particle Hilbert space @xmath . The waves
originate inside region @xmath and propagate towards the future,
enventually crossing the Cauchy horizon, as discussed above. See Fig.
4.3 . The full Hilbert space is the factorisable symmetric Fock space
@xmath .

Finally, the (quasi-free) state, which is regular inside @xmath , is
obtained from conformal methods from the two-point function, as before,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, the awkwardness in the dimensionality in eq. ( 4.42 ) stems
from the infrared ambiguity. This concludes our quantum field theoretic
constructions.

### 4.3 Quantum effects of black holes

In this section, we examine a series of quantum phenomena that occur in
the spacetimes introduced above, in strongly time-dependent situations,
such as along non-stationary trajectories and with non-stationary
boundary conditions. A large part of our computations deal with the
experience of observers, carrying particle detectors along their
worldlines, which register particles by interacting with quantum fields
in the states that we have constructed above. We also exemplify how the
rate of particle detectors is in agreement with our expectations by
analysing the local renormalised energy density, along the worldline of
an observer, and comparing this to the transition rate, in the context
of the generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole. Finally, we comment on
the dependence of our results on the spacetime dimension.

#### 4.3.1 Effects in the receding mirror spacetime

An interesting question to ask is how thermality arises during the
collapse of a star and eventual black hole formation for quantum fields
in the vicinity of the collapsing star. We examine this question in our
receding mirror model. We compute the instantaneous transition rate,
@xmath , of a derivative-coupling detector both in the asymptotic past
and in the asymptotic future. We anticipate that the rate in the
asymptotic past will be, to leading order, the rate of a detector in the
Minkowski half-space. In the asymptotic future, we shall verify that
right-moving modes coming from the mirror will be of thermal character
to leading order. We then study the interpolating behaviour numerically
to analyse the transient regime in the process of emergence of
thermality.

The main result of Section 4.2.1 provides the Wightman function in the
receding mirror spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the null coordinates are @xmath . The @xmath
prescription controls the ultraviolet behaviour. The @xmath -dimensional
infrared problems are cured by virtue of the Dirichlet boundary
condition and eq. ( 4.43 ) is free of infrared divergences.

We now examine the transition rate of a detector, switched on in the
asymptotic past, which follows a static trajectory along the integral of
@xmath .

##### Static with respect to mirror in the distant past

We consider a static detector at fixed distance @xmath from the mirror
in the asymptotic past, with trajectory @xmath . The pullback of the
twice-differentiated Wightman function along the worldline is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As above, primes denote derivatives with respect to the argument. Using
( 4.44 ) and ( 3.24 ), the transition rate is given by @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have removed the regulator from eq. ( 4.45a ) and ( 4.45b ) because
the integrand is free of singularities. In eq. ( 4.45c ) the @xmath
-prescription is kept due to the singularities that occur whenever two
timelike-separated points along the static trajectory are connected by a
null geodesic that is reflected at the boundary. This represents no
problem because the switch-on of the detector occurs in the asymptotic
past, so two points connected by a null ray reflected on the mirror can
never be endpoints of the worldline.

In Appendix B , we show that at early and late times along the detector
trajectory, the response function of the detector is respectively

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is odd that as @xmath one does not recover the Minkowski vacuum
spectrum. We suspect that this is due to the @xmath ambiguity of
massless fields.

##### Travelling towards mirror in the distant past

We now bring our attention to an inertial detector moving towards the
mirror, at speed @xmath , along the trajectory @xmath . It can be
verified from eq. ( 4.2 ) that the mirror trajectory and the detector’s
trajectory do not intersect and, thus, the detector never approaches the
boundary of the spacetime.

Using ( 4.44 ) and ( 3.24 ), the transition rate is given by @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As before, only eq. ( 4.47c ) needs the @xmath regulator. In Appendix B
we show that the response is at early and late times

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

##### Onset of thermality

We comment on the asymptotic form of the transition rates ( 4.46 ) and (
4.48 ).

For the detector that follows a static worldline with respect to the
mirror in the asymptotic past, we see that at early times the transition
rate is the same as in the Minkowski half-space with Dirichlet boundary
conditions ( 3.47 ) to leading order, with an exponentially suppressed
correction term. At late times, the contribution from the left-moving
field modes yields a Minkowskian spectrum, while the right-travelling
modes carry an energy flux to the right [ 18 , 41 , 42 , 111 , 112 ]
producing a Planckian spectrum at temperature @xmath . This result is
consistent with the one reported for the non-derivative Unruh-DeWitt
detector [ 18 ] .

For the detector that moves towards the mirror, the static distance is
replaced by the time-dependent distance @xmath , the energy is
blue-shifted by a Doppler factor @xmath , and the amplitude in the
oscillatory contribution to the response carries a factor @xmath . In
the asymptotic future, the temperature detected from the right-movers is
Doppler blue-shifted by the factor @xmath .

The onset of thermality from early to late times is examined numerically
in Figs. 4.5 and 4.6 , for the detector that is static in the asymptotic
past. Numerical analyses indicate that the late time rate is reached via
a ring-down oscillation with period @xmath , but we have not attempted
to examine this oscillation analytically. The proper time along the
detector worldline at which the transition rate oscillations become
important is in agreement with an increase in the stress-energy
radiation flux, which crosses the detector worldline, moving away from
the mirror,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

At late times, the radiation flux becomes constant and the transition
rate oscillations become damped, leading to a constant transition rate
at late times. Compare Figs. 4.5 and 4.6 with 4.7

#### 4.3.2 Effects in the @xmath Schwarzschild black hole

We consider the effect of a massless scalar field in @xmath
Schwarzschild spacetime in the Hartle-Hawking-Israel and Unruh vacua on
particle detectors. We shall briefly discuss the situation for a static
detector at fixed radius in the exterior region, switched on sharply in
the asymptotic past, which registers an Unruh temperature due to the
acceleration that it requires to remain static, which coincides with the
Hawking temperature weighted by the appropriate Tolman factor. A key
difference with @xmath black holes is that in @xmath dimensions there is
no black hole mining: The high energy modes of the quantum field are
radiated away, as there is no potential angular momentum barrier that
reflects back high angular momentum modes, as in the @xmath situation. ⁵
⁵ 5 The author thanks Prof. Adrian Ottewill for pointing this out. We
then proceed to inspect the interesting case of an inertial,
geodesically-infalling detector. First, we deal with the asymptotic rate
near the infinity. In this case, the detector registers an Unruh
temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, as in
the full @xmath case. In the case of the HHI state, the rate satisfies
the KMS condition, while in the Unruh state case only the modes coming
from the black hole are thermal. Next, we analyse the non-thermal,
divergent behaviour near the singularity and characterise the divergence
rate of the detector. The loss of thermality of the infalling detector
is computed numerically and we find that the thermal character of the
response is lost before the detector crosses the horizon. Finally, we
examine numerically the response of the detector that is switched on in
the white hole region, in the future of the white hole singularity, and
falls geodesically to the black hole through the bifurcation point in
the Schwarzschild spacetime. The rate diverges as the switch-on time
approaches the white hole singularity.

##### Static detector

Consider a detector following the trajectory @xmath in region I.
Calculating the derivatives of the pull-back of the Wightman function,
we can use formula ( 3.28 ) from Chapter 3 with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.50a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.50b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

in the HHI state and Unruh states respectively and along the static
trajectories, @xmath , @xmath .

In Appendix B we show that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in the appendix. Thus, in the HHI state, the
transition rate is thermal and satisfies the detailed balance condition
at local temperature @xmath , which is proportional to the surface
gravity of the black hole weighted by the local Tolman factor. The
detector coupled to the field in the Unruh state perceives a temperature
coming from the right movers, while the left moving modes detected are
indistinguishable from those in the Minkowski vacuum state.

##### Inertial detector near the infinity

We consider detectors falling geodesically from infinity with @xmath and
@xmath , eq. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.8 ) respectively, which have been switched
on in the asymptotic past. We consider the cases of interactions with
fields in the HHI and Unruh states. In this early time regime, we find
in Appendix B that the instantaneous transition rates are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52a)
     @xmath               (4.52b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Doppler-shifted local temperature measured by the
infalling detectors, with @xmath . In the case @xmath , @xmath , as
there is no Doppler shift experienced.

The results ( 4.52 ) conform fully with our expectations. The HHI
transition rate is in agreement with the rate of a detector immersed in
a heat bath in Minkowski spacetime ( 3.56 ), and satisfies the detailed
balance condition at the Hawking temperature, @xmath , at infinity. The
left-moving and right-moving contributions are Doppler-shifted to
account for the detector velocity at infinity.

The Unruh transition rate registers the Hawking effect coming from the
black hole, and contains a blue shift due to the ingoing velocity of the
detector. Left-moving modes coming from the asymptotic infinity are
indistinguishable from the Minkowski modes. The response of the detector
coincides with the late time asymptotic behaviour in the receding mirror
spacetime ( 4.48b ), confirming the interpretation that the Unruh state
is the state of a quantum field produced by the collapse of a star.

##### Inertial detector near the singularity

We consider the transition rate in the HHI and Unruh vacua as the
detector approaches the black hole singularity. We allow for all
non-negative values of @xmath and consider an arbitrary switch-on time.
For @xmath , the switch-on in the HHI vacuum takes place after the
detector has emerged from the white hole singularity and the switch-on
in the Unruh vacuum takes place after the detector has crossed the past
horizon.

We find in Appendix B that the near-singularity behaviour is, to leading
order

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.53)
  -- -- -- --------

for both the HHI and Unruh vacua. The leading divergence is generic. The
dependence on the trajectory enters as a subleading divergence. The
state-dependent part is @xmath . In terms of the proper time along the
trajectory, reaching the singularity at @xmath , the leading term is
@xmath .

##### Intermediate regime: loss of thermality

We consider the transition rate as a detector falls freely into the
black hole singularity from infinity, while interacting with fields in
the HHI or Unruh vacua. Numerical evidence of how the loss of thermality
takes place for the @xmath trajectory in the HHI and Unruh vacua is
presented in Figures 4.8 and 4.9 respectively. Our numerics show that
the Planckian form of the transition rate is lost already in region I,
well before the detector crosses the horizon.

The numerical evidence also confirms that the magnitude of the
transition rate increases as the detector falls into the black hole and
becomes unbounded as the detector falls into the singularity. Again, for
the @xmath infalling detector, our numerics agree with the asymptotic
divergent behaviour obtained for the transition rate near the
singularity. This is shown in Fig. 4.10 for the HHI vacuum.

Finally, let the field be in the HHI state, and consider the @xmath
trajectory that goes from the white hole region directly into the black
hole region through the bifurcation point. The geodesic equation is (
4.10 ), such that the parametrisation ( 4.9 ) holds with @xmath . We
consider a detector switch-on at parameter @xmath , near the white hole
singularity at @xmath . Fig 4.11 shows a perspective plot of the
transition rate as a function of the transition frequency and the proper
time along the trajectory. The plot shows an inverse linear divergence
as the proper time approaches the switch-on time (cf. eq. ( 3.21 )), as
well as the divergence that occurs as the detector approaches the black
hole singularity.

A final comment is due regarding numerical applications of the @xmath
derivative-coupling detector described in Chapter 3 . The regulator-free
formulas allow one to implement numerics directly at the level of the
responses and rates. If one seeks to examine the thermal character of a
response, it suffices to numerically compute the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is approximately constant for a range of values of @xmath at
fixed @xmath , the transition rate would approximately satisfy the KMS
condition in such range of @xmath -values, with, possibly @xmath
-dependent, approximate temperature @xmath .

We have performed this test in the case of the @xmath trajectory in Fig.
4.11 , and we have found no range of values at which @xmath would be
approximately independent of @xmath within our space of parameters.

#### 4.3.3 Effects in the @xmath generalised Reissner-Nordström black
hole

As we have discussed before, causality is protected by global
hyperbolicity. Thus, given that many important solutions in general
relativity are non-globally hyperbolic, it is not surprising that a
great deal of effort has been spent in understanding the stability of
Cauchy horizons in General Relativity.

Early attempts to understand this problem lead to the strong cosmic
censorship conjecture [ 119 ] , which states that for generic initial
data the spacetime is inextendible beyond the maximal Cauchy
development. It turns out the strong cosmic censorship conjecture is
incorrect. Given polynomially decaying initial data for a dynamical
Maxwell-Einstein-scalar system settling to a Reissner-Nordström black
hole, the spacetime is extendible with a @xmath -metric, falsifying the
conjecture. However, not all the physical invariants are finite and, in
particular, the Hawking mass goes to infinity. This is known as the mass
inflation scenario [ 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 ] . On the other hand,
Chandrasekhar and Hartle [ 125 ] have shown that the (electromagnetic or
gravitational) classical radiation felt by an observer diverges as the
Reissner-Nordström horizon is approached.

Thus far, all of the above is concerned with classical aspects of the
problem of causality. We wish to address the quantum experience of
observers as they attempt to cross a Cauchy horizon. In particular, we
consider the interaction of such observers with a scalar field, in the
limit of no back-reaction, as the observers attempt to cross the
horizon.

We analyse the experiences of an inertial observer who attempts to fall
through the Cauchy horizon in our @xmath -dimensional generalised
nonextremal Reissner-Nordström black hole. First, we compute the
transition rate measured by the derivative-coupling Unruh-DeWitt
particle detector that is coupled to a scalar field in the HHI or in the
Unruh state, as the observer carrying the detector approaches the future
Cauchy horizon. Second, we compute the local near-horizon renormalised
energy density along the infalling worldline. We shall find that both
quantities diverge proportionally to @xmath , where @xmath is the
observer’s proper time and @xmath is the value at horizon-crossing, for
the detector coupled to the field in the HHI and Unruh states, and for
the energy density in the HHI vacuum. This divergent behaviour is, in
both cases, independent of the initial conditions of the geodesic, and
similar to the one encountered above for the detector approaching the
@xmath Schwarzschild singularity ( 4.53 ).

##### Inertial detector near the Cauchy horizon in the HHI state

Let us start by computing the transition rate of the geodesic detector
(see ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.16 )) when the field is found in the HHI state.
Using the pullback along the geodesic of the HHI Wightman function (
4.37 ) in the transition rate formula ( 3.21 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have written @xmath .

All but the last terms on the right hand side of ( 4.55 ) are @xmath as
@xmath . Integrating the last term by parts one can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a fixed point along the trajectory inside region II and
the order @xmath is with respect to the quantity @xmath , which is small
as the detector approaches the Cauchy horizon at proper time @xmath . We
show in Appendix B that the contribution of the boundary terms is
important and scales as @xmath , near the Cauchy horizon,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the last line of eq. ( 4.57 ), the factor multiplying the integral
term contributes to leading order as @xmath . The integral term on the
last line of eq ( 4.57 ), which we denote

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

is estimated in Appendix B to be

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Collecting the terms together, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This concludes our computation for the detector interacting with the
field in the HHI state. It can be read off that the independence on the
geodesic parameter @xmath makes the result independent of the initial
details of the trajectory to leading order. This is a feature that is
shared with a geodesic detector approaching the spacelike Schwarzschild
curvature singularity in @xmath in the HHI vacuum. Moreover, the leading
degree of divergence is of the same order ( 4.53 ).

This calculation suggests that something special occurs whenever @xmath
as the coefficient in ( 4.60 ) becomes @xmath . This observation can be
strengthened. Indeed, a direct calculation shows that in this case
@xmath and the horizon can be crossed. Black holes with the property
@xmath are called lukewarm black holes. To achieve this feature one
relies of the fine tuning of the parameters of a de-Sitter
Reissner-Nordström black hole with the cosmological constant [ 126 ] .

Comments are in order concerning the cases @xmath and @xmath . It is
clear that for @xmath the situation is the same as above, except in this
case the divergence will arise from the right-moving sector of the
Wightman function. The case @xmath describes a straight-up trajectory
from the white hole into the black hole region crossing through the
bifurcation point of the bifurcate Killing horizon, located at Kruskal
coordinates @xmath . In this case, the rate of divergence is stronger,
and in fact twice as @xmath cf. eq. B.69 , as both the left-moving and
right-moving sectors of the field contribute strongly as @xmath .

##### Inertial detector near the Cauchy horizon in the Unruh state

We consider now the detector approaching @xmath , the left portion of
the future Killing horizon, along the left-moving inertial trajectory,
as it interacts with a field in the Unruh state. If @xmath , we consider
the switch-on time to take place at an arbitrary initial time @xmath .
If @xmath , the detector is switched on after it has left region II’. If
we consider @xmath as the proper time along the trajectory at a point
inside region II, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The integral on the right hand side of eq. ( 4.61 ) is finite by virtue
of the Hadamard property. Integrating by parts, the boundary values,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

give a term of order @xmath . The lower evaluation is understood as a
limit. Moreover, the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

is @xmath in @xmath near @xmath . Hence, the transition rate is the same
as in the Hartle-Hawking scenario, to leading order, and the transition
rate diverges, to leading order, at the same rate as the future horizon
is approached,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Local energy density near the Cauchy horizon

Having examined the transition rate of a sharply switched,
derivative-coupling detector in @xmath dimensions, let us turn to the
question of what the renormalised energy density, @xmath , along the
worldline of a geodesically-infalling observer is, as they approach the
region @xmath of the future Cauchy horizon.

###### Definition 4.4.

Let @xmath , be a timelike path, where @xmath is the proper time along
the worldline. The renormalised energy density along the worldline
@xmath is the observable defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a test function of compact support and @xmath is the
renormalised stress-energy tensor of the matter in the spacetime.

Typically, @xmath is considered to be smooth, but we shall deal with
both sharp and smooth test functions. If an observer is equipped with an
apparatus that measures the stress tensor along their worldline, the
switching profile controls the switch-on and switch-off of such an
apparatus. This can be considered a toy model of a detector that couples
to the stress-energy tensor of the matter field.

We are interested in computing @xmath in the massless scalar @xmath HHI
state along a geodesically infalling worldline that crosses the Cauchy
horizon across @xmath , given by the integral curve of eq. ( 4.15 ) and
( 4.16 ), in regions I and II respectively. We shall show that, along
this trajectory, there is no significant difference between the
estimates that we obtain for sharp or smooth test functions. In both
cases, the divergence will be inverse linear in proper time as the
observer approaches @xmath , with the coefficients differing by a
constant factor.

We remind ourselves, from Section 4.2 , that the region covered by the
coordinates @xmath in the generalised Reissner-Nordström is a spacetime
@xmath , which is conformal to Minkowski spacetime, with a metric given
by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the HHI state is a conformal vacuum with respect to the Minkowski
vacuum. Then, the stress-energy tensor can be obtained using the
conformal techniques in @xmath dimensions, developed by Davies, Fulling
and Unruh [ 127 ] and Wald [ 128 ] . The stress-energy tensor reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the null Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates, @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar.

###### Remark.

The generalised @xmath Reissner-Nordström black hole is not Ricci-flat.
The Ricci scalar, given in terms of the @xmath -coordinate by @xmath ,
is non-zero, but it is regular across the Cauchy horizon.

Using eq. ( 4.68 ), in the vicinity of the Cauchy horizon, the energy
density along the inertial worldline takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We consider the sharp function @xmath with compact support, @xmath , and
let @xmath with @xmath the Cauchy-horizon-crossing proper time along the
inertial worldline. We show in Appendix B that the energy density along
the worldline is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is inverse linear in the small quantity @xmath , positive and
independent of the initial details of the trajectory to leading order.

We now consider the smooth test function introduced in Chapter 3 ,
defined by eq. ( 3.19 ), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, we take the switching time to be the finite time interval
@xmath . As before, @xmath and @xmath are non-negative smooth functions
that satisfy @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The support of
the test function is @xmath . The switching time @xmath becomes short
(but finite), as the switch-off time @xmath approaches the
horizon-crossing time @xmath .

It is convenient to define the @xmath test functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.72a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.72b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and write @xmath . The energy density along the worldline is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contribution of @xmath and the contribution of @xmath is given by
eq. ( 4.70 ). The contribution of @xmath is calculated in Appendix B and
we obtain that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

As claimed, the inverse linear divergent behaviour is preserved. The
leading coefficient depends on the details of the switching and, in
particular, a rapid switching @xmath will give rise to a large constant
coefficient multiplying the leading divergence.

### 4.4 Spacetime dimension and the response function

In Section 4.3 we have studied several quantum effects that occur due to
the curvature of black hole spacetimes, including the stimulation of
particle detectors by black hole radiation in time-dependent situations,
as well as the divergence of the rate of inertial detectors as they
approach the Schwarzschild singularity ( 4.53 ), and the divergence rate
of detectors and of the renormalised local energy density of inertial
observers approaching the future Cauchy horizon in
Reissner-Nordström-type spacetimes ( 4.64 ) in the HHI and Unruh states.

We now discuss how the estimates that we have obtained in Section 4.3
depend on the spacetime dimension: The logarithmic singularity structure
of the twice-differentiated @xmath Hadamard two-point function, given by
the Hadamard parametrix ( 2.43 ), diverges as @xmath . In other words,
the singularity structure is of the same order of that of the @xmath
Wightman function. This means that the analytic results that we obtain
in @xmath dimensions does indeed contain qualitative information about
the full @xmath behaviour, and can be used as a reference for what to
expect in more complicated situations. Yet, concluding that our analysis
contains quantitative information about the @xmath is erroneous, as we
shall now demonstrate.

Consider a derivative-coupling detector following the static trajectory,
given in Minkowskian coordinates by @xmath , as it interacts with a
field in the Rindler state in the @xmath dimensional right Rindler
wedge, considered as a spacetime on its own right @xmath , with metric
@xmath , where the Rindler null coordinates @xmath are related to the
Minkowskian coordinates by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.75a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.75b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath is an arbitrary acceleration parameter.

Suppose the detector is switched on at time @xmath . The trajectory of
the switched-on detector will cross the future horizon of the Rindler
wedge at proper time @xmath , and the transition rate of such detector
can be computed analytically close to the horizon, at proper time @xmath
, to leading order in the small quantity @xmath . See Appendix B . The
result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar calculation can be performed in the @xmath (right) Rindler
spacetime, @xmath , with a metric given locally by @xmath . A detector
following the worldline defined by @xmath in Minkowskian coordinates,
which has been switched on at proper time @xmath inside the Rindler
wedge, and interacting with a field in the Rindler state, will cross the
future Rindler horizon at time @xmath . The transition rate close to the
horizon is [ 60 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

In view of equations ( 4.76 ) and ( 4.77 ) it is clear that the @xmath
detector model that we are considering diverges more rapidly than the
@xmath Unruh-DeWitt detector at the level of the transition rate.
Moreover, at the level of the transition probability

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.78a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.78b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath diverges logarithmically, while @xmath vanishes as the future
horizon is approached.

There exists the possibility that this behaviour may be an artefact of
the sharp switching of the detector that the computation of the
transition probability smeared with a smooth switching function will
resolve this awkwardness. A computation is, however, lacking, and this
is future work that deserves attention.

If the mismatch between the responses in @xmath and @xmath dimensions in
the Rindler space persists with a smooth switching function, one can
formulate the following conjecture: that the behaviour of the
instantaneous transition rate, when inertially approaching a Cauchy
horizon in a non-extremal @xmath -dimensional Reissner-Nordström, must
diverge at most inverse polynomial and, possibly, logarithmic in the
proper time of the detector.

An obstruction to this conjecture may come from the presence of highly
energetic modes due to the potential barrier on the radial equation in
@xmath -dimensional black holes, which is not present in @xmath
dimensional models, which may affect the response of a detector in
@xmath dimensions, but this effect cannot be registered in our @xmath
-dimensional analysis.

If the divergence in @xmath dimensions is indeed logarithmic or weaker,
then the detector can cross the horizon with a finite transition
probability. Nevertheless, our @xmath computation of the renormalised
energy density along the detector worldline suggests that the region
near the horizon is highly energetic. This is consistent with the
transition rate computed in @xmath dimensions.

## Chapter 5 Asymptotic time-scales in the Unruh effect

A property that is shared by both the Unruh ¹ ¹ 1 Rigorous proofs of the
existence of the Unruh effect in this setting are [ 129 , 130 ] . and
Hawking phenomena is that thermal phenomena can be detected only in
stationary situations and after an infinite interaction time has
elapsed. In the first case, the detailed balance condition at the Unruh
temperature, @xmath , is satisfied along the stationary orbit of a
uniformly accelerated detector that interacts with the field for an
infinite amount of proper time, as in our discussion in Chapter 3 . See
eq. ( 3.60 ). In the second case, the black hole radiation is measured
by a detector at asymptotically late times along a stationary trajectory
in the exterior region of the black hole, as in our discussion in
Chapter 4 . See eq. ( 4.52b ). Nevertheless, as we have discussed in
Chapter 2 , from an operational point of view, a detector should
interact with a quantum field through a smooth switching function of
compact support, @xmath , for a finite amount of proper time. Indeed, it
is the long term interactions that have lead us to work at the level of
the transition rate, and not the response, in the models that we
examined in Chapters 3 and 4 .

In this chapter, we work at the level of the response function with a
switching function of compact support. We wish to understand the
emergence of thermality, in the sense of the detailed balance condition
( 2.60 ), whenever the interaction between a detector and a field only
occurs for a finite amount of time. We address this question in the
context of the Unruh effect in @xmath dimensions. As a prototype, we
consider the idealised, point-like Unruh-DeWitt detector [ 30 ] ,
introduced in Chapter 2 , following a Rindler orbit, which is weakly and
linearly coupled to a massless scalar field through a smooth switching
function of the proper time with compact support, @xmath , along the
detector worldline.

The first objective of this chapter, which we accomplish in Section 5.1
, is to understand rigorously the equivalence of the detailed balance of
the response function and the KMS condition, when the interaction time
between a field and a detector becomes long. To this end, we shall
introduce a time scale in the problem, @xmath , that will rescale the
interaction proper time, in such a way that the switching function that
controls the interaction, as well as the response function, scale
together with @xmath . The equivalence between the response detailed
balance and the KMS condition is then obtained in the limit @xmath . We
then prove that this limit cannot be uniform in the detector transition
energy gap @xmath , under modest, physically motivated assumptions on
the (Fourier transform of the) two-point function. In particular, as
@xmath , the detailed balance condition cannot hold. This poses the
question, how long does one need to wait to detect the KMS temperature
in terms of the detailed balance condition up to the energy scale @xmath
?

This leads to the second objective, which we treat in Sections 5.2 and
5.3 , and which is to answer this question for the case of the
Unruh-DeWitt detector following a Rindler trajectory. After all, the
conventional wisdom states that such a detector will respond at the
Unruh temperature after it has interacted with the field for an infinite
amount of time.

The message that we wish to convey is that the thermalisation time scale
depends crucially on the details of the switching function of the
detector. To illustrate this point, we deal with two situations: First,
in Section 5.2 , we treat an adiabatic rescaling of the switching
function, which represents a slow and long switching. The main result of
this section is that there exist a class of switching functions, with
sufficiently fast Fourier decay, for which the detector thermalises at
the Unruh temperature in a time scale that is polynomial in the large
energy gap @xmath , i.e. , for which the response is polynomially
asymptotically thermal . Second, in Section 5.3 , we consider a
switching function that switches on for a fixed time, then interacts
constantly for a long time, and then switches off. The main result of
this section is that, if one only rescales the constant interaction time
to infinity, at large energy gap, @xmath , the detector cannot
thermalise in any time that is polynomial in @xmath . Thus, the
thermalisation time scale is in the details of the switching.

### 5.1 The KMS and the detailed balance conditions

We motivated the introduction of the detailed balance condition in
Chapter 2 as a condition that, if satisfied, allows a localised observer
to measure the temperature of a KMS state with the aid of particle
detectors. Nevertheless, we postponed a proof of the equivalence of the
KMS condition and the detailed balance of the detector response, and
relied on a heuristic argument to see that they are equivalent at a
formal level. In this section, we prove that, indeed, under a set of
technical conditions, the detailed balance of the detector response at
the KMS temperature is equivalent to the KMS condition for the Wightman
function.

We consider an stationary Unruh-DeWitt detector, coupled to a quantum
field through the interaction Hamiltonian ( 2.49 ). The interaction
occurs for a finite amount of time, and the smooth switching function of
compact support, @xmath , with @xmath , controls the interaction, such
that the interaction is switched on at detector proper time @xmath and
switched off at time @xmath . The response function is given by eq. (
2.59 ), which can be written along a stationary trajectory as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have written the (real) Fourier transform of the switching
function as @xmath . @xmath exists by virtue of the compact support of
@xmath . The equation above is to be understood in a distributional
sense, whenever the state is Hadamard, by an @xmath prescription, as we
have discussed above in this thesis.

The first step that we take towards showing the equivalence between the
detailed balance of the response and the KMS condition and the two-point
function comes from our heuristic discussion in Chapter 2 . Namely, we
look at the Fourier transform of the Wightman function.

###### Proposition 5.1.

Let @xmath be a stationary Wightman function that has the analyticity
properties of Definition 2.34 and, thus, defines a KMS state. Suppose
that the falloff of @xmath at large @xmath is so strong that the
integral formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the distributional singularities understood in the @xmath sense,
defines the Fourier transform of @xmath pointwise at each @xmath .
Finally, suppose that the integration contour in ( 5.2 ) can be deformed
to any line of constant @xmath , with the distributional singularities
at @xmath treated in the @xmath sense. Then @xmath satisfies the
detailed balance condition.

###### Proof.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the last equality we have deformed the contour of the @xmath
-integral to @xmath with @xmath , and the @xmath prescribes the
distributional singular behaviour. ∎

The next step is to scale the interaction time between the field and the
detector by a real positive parameter @xmath , such that, as @xmath ,
the interaction time becomes long. The way in which one introduces this
scaling is not unique. We present two important choices:

The first choice is the adiabatic scaling , whereby @xmath , which
represents a long and slow switching as @xmath . Under this scaling, the
adiabatically rescaled response function ( 5.1 ), @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the fact that @xmath is real-valued.

The second choice is the constant interaction scaling . In this case, we
consider the switching functions which consist of a switch-on profile of
duration @xmath , a constant interaction of duration @xmath and a
switch-off profile of duration @xmath . The specifics of this class of
switching functions allows us to treat the switching time and the total
interaction times independently. The constant interaction time scaling
sends the constant time @xmath . For simplicity, we consider @xmath ,
and we consider switching functions @xmath that are constructed by
integrating bump functions @xmath with support @xmath in the following
way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The switching function defined by ( 5.5 ) has @xmath and a switch-on
profile of duration @xmath , a constant interaction time of duration
@xmath and a switch-off profile of duration @xmath . It is clear that
different bump functions, @xmath , yield switching functions, @xmath ,
with different switching profiles. The scaling @xmath produces the
constant-interaction rescaled response function @xmath given by (see
Lemma C.1 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us collect our discussion in the following definition:

###### Definition 5.2.

We call the response @xmath , defined by ( 5.4 ), the adiabatically
rescaled response function . We call the response @xmath , defined by (
5.6 ), the constant-interaction rescaled response function .

We are ready to formulate the equivalence between the KMS condition and
the detailed balance of the response. Informally, we say that the
detailed balance of the response at the KMS temperature is equivalent to
the KMS condition if and only if, given a scaling @xmath , as discussed
above, @xmath satisfies the detailed balance condition. Let us state
this precisely in the form of two theorems:

###### Theorem 5.3.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath satisfy the technical assumptions of
Proposition 5.1 , i.e. @xmath and @xmath satisfy the KMS and detailed
balance conditions respectively. Further, suppose that @xmath is bounded
by a polynomial function of @xmath . Then the function defined by the
long time limit of ( 5.4 ), @xmath is defined for each @xmath . Further,
@xmath satisfies satisfies the detailed balance condition.

###### Proof.

By the polynomial bound on @xmath , there exist constants @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath such that for @xmath we have @xmath . As @xmath decays
at @xmath faster than any inverse power of @xmath , the integrand in (
5.4 ) is hence bounded in absolute value for @xmath by a @xmath
-independent integrable function, and the @xmath limit in ( 5.4 ) may be
taken under the integral by dominated convergence. Then, for each @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The term inside the parentheses is a constant and Proposition 5.1
completes the proof. ∎

###### Theorem 5.4.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath satisfy the technical assumptions of
Proposition 5.1 , i.e. @xmath and @xmath satisfy the KMS and detailed
balance conditions respectively. Further, suppose that @xmath is bounded
by a polynomial function of @xmath . Then the function defined by the
long time limit of ( 5.6 ), @xmath is defined for each @xmath . Further,
@xmath satisfies satisfies the detailed balance condition.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows from the decay properties of @xmath that @xmath has rapid
decay. Also, @xmath is bounded, hence we have @xmath . Eq. ( 5.6 ) can
be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , the integrand of @xmath can be bounded uniformly in @xmath
by the integrable function @xmath . An application of the dominated
convergence theorem yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term inside the parentheses is a constant and Proposition 5.1
completes the proof. ∎

We collect the results that we have proven in the following definition:

###### Definition 5.5.

If @xmath is the adiabatically rescaled response function of @xmath and
@xmath satisfies Theorem 5.3 , we say that @xmath is adiabatically
asymptotically thermal . If @xmath is the constant-interaction rescaled
response function of @xmath and @xmath satisfies Theorem 5.4 , we say
that @xmath is constantly asymptotically thermal .

#### 5.1.1 Non-uniformity of the asymptotic thermal limit

The next thing that we want to show is that the way in which the
asymptotic thermality of the response is achieved cannot be uniform in
@xmath .

The logarithmic form of the right hand side of the detailed balance
condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

shows that if @xmath is positive and @xmath is bounded above by a
polynomial in @xmath , @xmath can satisfy the detailed balance condition
at @xmath only if @xmath bounded by an exponentially decreasing function
of @xmath at @xmath . The following proposition shows @xmath ( 5.1 )
cannot decrease this fast under modest technical conditions on @xmath ,
and hence neither can @xmath ( 5.4 ) or @xmath ( 5.6 ).

###### Proposition 5.6.

Suppose @xmath is positive, @xmath is bounded from above by a polynomial
function of @xmath , and there exist positive constants @xmath and
@xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath ( 5.1 ) cannot fall off
exponentially fast as @xmath .

###### Proof.

We use proof by contradiction, showing that an exponential falloff of
@xmath at @xmath implies that @xmath is identically vanishing.

By the bound on @xmath from above, @xmath is well defined for all @xmath
. By the bounds on @xmath from below, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have first changed the integration variable by @xmath , then
restricted the integration range to @xmath , and finally used the
strictly positive bound below on @xmath .

Suppose now that there are positive constants @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath . From ( 5.12 ) we then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Inserting the factor @xmath under the integral in ( 5.13
) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Setting in ( 5.14 ) @xmath , @xmath , and summing over @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and since @xmath is even in @xmath , it follows that

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.16)
  -- -- -- --------

This implies that @xmath is in @xmath .

Let now

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are in @xmath . We may hence
define in the strip @xmath the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the inner product in @xmath . A straightforward
computation shows that @xmath is holomorphic in the strip.

Formulas ( 5.17 ) and ( 5.18 ) show that @xmath for @xmath . Since
@xmath is by assumption compactly supported on @xmath , the
holomorphicity of @xmath implies that @xmath vanishes everywhere. As
@xmath is by assumption nonvanishing somewhere, this provides the sought
contradiction. ∎

The content of Proposition 5.6 is that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath cannot
satisfy the detailed balance condition at high energies, @xmath .

#### 5.1.2 Example: The Unruh effect

We now wish to apply the general theory, thus far developed, to the
Unruh effect. We consider an observer, equipped with a particle
detector, which follows a Rindler orbit in @xmath Minkowski spacetime,
given in Minkowskian coordinates by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the proper acceleration of the detector, and @xmath and
@xmath are constants. The detector is coupled to a massless scalar
field, initially in the Minkowski vacuum state, through the interaction
Hamiltonian ( 2.49 ) for a finite amount of time, and the smooth
switching function of compact support, @xmath , with @xmath , controls
the interaction, such that the interaction is switched on at detector
proper time @xmath and switched off at time @xmath .

The response of the detector can be obtained from the two-point function
of the massless scalar field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the regularised Synge world function, as in ( 2.40 ) and
( 2.44 ). Using eq. ( 5.19 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using techniques as the ones that we have presented in @xmath dimension,
in the context of the derivative coupling detector in Chapter 3 , the
Fourier transform of ( 5.21 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The response function @xmath is given by ( 5.1 ). Theorems 5.3 and 5.4
apply, showing respectively that @xmath and @xmath are multiples of
@xmath . Hence, the response function @xmath is (both adiabatically and
constantly) asymptotically thermal at the Unruh temperature, @xmath .
This is the Unruh effect.

Nevertheless, the Unruh temperature is not achieved uniformly in @xmath
. To show that this is the case, we need to prove that @xmath is
positive and that @xmath is bounded above by a polynomial in @xmath .
That @xmath is positive follows from eq. ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.22 ). That
@xmath is bounded above by a polynomial follows from the following
proposition ² ² 2 We remind that reader that @xmath indicates the
quantity becomes suppressed faster than any positive power of @xmath as
@xmath .

###### Proposition 5.7.

Suppose that the spacetime dimension is four, that @xmath is stationary
and that @xmath is smooth in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath .

###### Proof.

The idea is to use the @xmath -dimensional version of eq. ( 3.17 ),
which can be obtained from equation (3.16) in [ 60 ] . We write the
response as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We use the stationarity of @xmath and interchange the integrals in the
last term. We note that @xmath , the function @xmath is an even smooth
function of compact support, and the function @xmath is an even smooth
function with falloff @xmath at @xmath . This allows us to write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the last term in ( 5.25 ), the leading coincidence limit singularity
of @xmath is cancelled by the additive term proportional to @xmath
because of the Hadamard property of the state, discussed in Chap. 2 ,
and by assumption @xmath has no other singularities. The result now
follows by applying to the second and third term in ( 5.25 ) the method
of repeated integration by parts [ 131 ] , integrating respectively the
trigonometric factor and the exponential factor. ∎

Thus, the Unruh effect is not achieved uniformly in @xmath for long
interaction times.

Given that the detailed balance condition fails as @xmath because of
Prop. 5.6 , is there a precise sense in which one can asymptotically
approach the Unruh temperature at finite time for a given large energy
gap @xmath ? We consider our two cases of interest, the adiabatic
scaling and the constant interaction scaling. We anticipate that the
answer depends crucially on the details of the switching. In the case of
the adiabatic scaling, subject to certain conditions on the Fourier
transform of the switching function that we describe below, we will find
that once the time has scaled by a factor @xmath , which is polynomial
in the large energy, the Unruh temperature will be asymptotically
registered by the detector. In the case of the constant scaling, we show
that the Unruh temperature cannot be achieved in a time scale that is
polynomial in the large energy.

The strategy to see how the Unruh temperature emerges is to obtain
bounds on how the detailed balance condition formula fails, as functions
of the time scale and the energy, @xmath and @xmath , such that these
bounds become suppressed as the time scale and energy become large.

###### Definition 5.8.

Let @xmath be the response of a stationary particle detector. Let @xmath
be an interaction time scale for the detector proper time, @xmath ,
which rescales the response function as in Def. 5.2 . The rescaled
response function, @xmath , is called polynomially asymptotically
thermal at temperature @xmath if, given @xmath a polynomial function of
the energy gap, such that @xmath as @xmath , there exist positive
functions @xmath and @xmath of the energy gap and the interaction time
scale such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath polynomially fast as @xmath and @xmath .

Let us discuss the relevance of distinguishing non-polynomially from
polynomially asymptotic thermality for the response function. Consider
an experiment in which one sought to verify the Unruh effect up to a
large energy gap scale, @xmath , then the waiting time is proportional
to the scale @xmath . If the asymptotic thermality condition were
satisfied only whenever @xmath is an exponential function of @xmath ,
then the waiting time for the detectors to thermalise at the Unruh
temperature would be exponentially large and impractical for all
purposes. The more interesting scenario is when the asymptotic
thermality condition is guaranteed at a time scale that is polynomial in
the energy gap. In other words, when the polynomially asymptotically
thermal detailed balance condition is satisfied.

In the following sections, we will show that the polynomially asymptotic
thermality condition is guaranteed for the adiabatic scaling, subject to
conditions on the Fourier transform of the switching function, but
cannot be satisfied if only the constant interaction part of a switching
function is scaled.

### 5.2 Approaching the Unruh temperature by adiabatic interaction

We have seen that a detector following a Rindler orbit detects the Unruh
temperature as the interaction time between the detector and the field
scales to infinity, at fixed energy @xmath . If the scaling of the
switching function is adiabatic, @xmath , by Theorem 5.3 and eq. ( 5.22
), the asymptotic response, as @xmath at fixed @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfies the detailed balance condition at a temperature
proportional to the acceleration of the orbit, which is the Unruh
temperature, @xmath . In this section, we denote @xmath by @xmath to
remind ourselves that this is the thermal limit (pointwise in @xmath ).
We also know, by Proposition 5.6 , that this limit cannot be uniform in
@xmath .

For a special class of switching functions whose Fourier transforms
decay sufficiently fast, the functions @xmath of Def. 5.26 exist, such
that the asymptotic polynomially asymptotic thermality condition holds.
Let us motivate the introduction of this class of switching functions.

From this point onward we shall consider @xmath . Lemma C.3 gives the
following estimate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.29b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is the @xmath norm with respect to the Lebesgue measure.
When @xmath is a polynomially increasing function of @xmath , @xmath as
@xmath , but @xmath . This means that the bound that we have provided in
( 5.29 ) is not sufficient to guarantee polynomial asymptotic
thermality. Yet, the presence of the switching function in eq. ( 5.29 )
indicates that @xmath must play a crucial role in the estimates. For
this reason, let us introduce a class of switching functions for which
an improved bound can be found.

###### Definition 5.9.

Let @xmath . If the Fourier transform of @xmath satisfies @xmath for
some positive constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and some
constant @xmath , we say that @xmath has strong Fourier decay . We
denote by @xmath the linear subspace of @xmath with strong Fourier
decay, and we refer to elements of @xmath as switching functions with
strong Fourier decay.

###### Remark.

The constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath may differ
from element to element in @xmath . The linear subspace property of
@xmath follows by applying the triangle inequality to @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath .

Now, we are ready to state the main theorem of this section, which
states that there exist switching functions with strong Fourier decay
such that the polynomial asymptotic thermality condition is satisfied
for adiabatic switchings.

###### Theorem 5.10.

Let @xmath be the response function given by eq. ( 5.4 ) for a linearly
uniformly accelerated detector, @xmath , with @xmath defined by eq. (
5.22 ). If the switching function @xmath has strong Fourier decay, with
Fourier transform satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for positive constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
where @xmath is a dimensionful positive constant, the response ( 5.4 )
is polynomially asymptotically thermal as @xmath whenever @xmath is
given by @xmath with the real parameters @xmath and @xmath satisfying
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Following Lemma C.3 , the response function satisfies @xmath . The idea
is to improve the result in Lemma C.3 for positive @xmath in order to
control @xmath (see eq. ( 5.29a )). Let us define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the scale @xmath , with the constants @xmath and @xmath as above.

The first step of the proof is to show that @xmath . To this end, we
define the function @xmath , with @xmath as defined in Lemma C.2 .
Symmetrising the integrals ( 5.4 ) and ( 5.27 ) it is clear that @xmath
, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a non-negative function for @xmath .

The second step of the proof is to show that @xmath is polynomially
bounded at large @xmath . This ensures that as @xmath , the rescaled
response @xmath sufficiently fast, so as to satisfy the polynomially
asymptotic thermality condition. We now address this issue. We define

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

such that @xmath .

The bounds are estimated in Appendix C , and collecting all the relevant
estimates ( C.22 ), ( C.31 ) and ( C.37 ), we have that as @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

At @xmath sufficiently large, @xmath is dominated by the first term. We
define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes polynomially as @xmath .

We have everything that we need to prove that the detailed balance
condition ( 2.60 ) holds. We have from Lemma C.3 and the estimate ( 5.34
) that as @xmath and for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.36b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It follows from equations ( 5.36 ) that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

from which eq. ( 5.26 ) follows at the Unruh temperature, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.38b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

∎

Theorem 5.10 is the main result of this section. Notice that the
correction terms @xmath and @xmath given in eq. ( 5.38 ) become
polynomially suppressed as @xmath . Let us summarise the physical
relevance of this result. In Minkowski spacetime, given a field in the
Minkowski state and a point-like probe along its timelike worldline that
are initially non-interacting, one can set the probe trajectory at
uniform acceleration @xmath at proper time @xmath and switch on the
interaction at time @xmath smoothly and slowly, such that the probe acts
like a particle detector with large energy gap @xmath , and keep the
interaction ongoing for a long time scale polynomially proportional to
the detector gap energy. Once the detector has been switched off
smoothly and slowly at time @xmath , the transition probability of the
detector will obey a thermal spectrum at the Unruh temperature.

To end this section, we provide an example of a switching function with
rapid Fourier decay and present the estimates for the polynomially
asymptotic thermality condition as an application of Theorem. 5.10 .

###### Example 5.11.

The idea is to cook up switching functions with rapid Fourier decay by
thinking of the Fourier transform as a boundary value along the
imaginary axis of the Laplace transform, @xmath .

Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive real constant with dimensions @xmath .

Given that @xmath decays as @xmath , it is integrable and its Fourier
transform exists. The Laplace transform is given by @xmath for any
@xmath with positive real part, taking the branch cut along the negative
real axis. The Fourier transform follows from dominated convergence and
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is bounded from above by @xmath . The function @xmath defined by
@xmath , has a Fourier transform given by the convolution theorem,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now verify that @xmath . It follows from the bound of @xmath that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have assumed @xmath without loss of generality and changed
variables to @xmath . The integral can be now split into the
subintervals @xmath . The integrals in the intervals @xmath and @xmath
are equal by symmetry and we have that

  ----- -------- -------- -- ---------
                             
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      (5.43a)
  and                        
                             
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      (5.43b)
  ----- -------- -------- -- ---------

Putting ( 5.43a ) and ( 5.43b ) together we see that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath has strong Fourier decay as in Def. 5.9 .

### 5.3 Approaching the Unruh temperature by constant interaction

We now bring our attention to a switching function of the form ( 5.5 )
that has @xmath , consisting of a switch-on profile of duration @xmath ,
a constant interaction time of duration @xmath and a switch-off profile
of duration @xmath . As we have seen above, the profile of the switching
tails is controlled by a bump function, @xmath .

We consider the case in which only the constant-interaction time is
rescaled by @xmath . The response rescales as shown in eq. ( 5.6 ),
whereby the response of the detector following the Rindler orbit
rescales as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this section, we denote @xmath by @xmath as a reminder that the
point-wise limit in @xmath as @xmath satisfies the detailed balance
condition at the Unruh temperature. Namely, using ( 5.4 ) and ( 5.22 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now show that the constant-interaction rescaled response function (
5.45 ) cannot satisfy the polynomially asymptotic KMS thermality
condition. In other words, there is no polynomial @xmath for which one
can find @xmath for Def. 5.26 .

###### Theorem 5.12.

Let @xmath be the response function given by eq. ( 5.45 ). There is no
scaling factor @xmath , with @xmath polynomially bounded,
differentiable, strictly increasing and strictly positive, for which
@xmath satisfies the detailed balance condition ( 5.26 ).

###### Proof.

A necessary condition for the polynomially asymptotic thermality
condition to be satisfied, is that the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

vanish as @xmath and @xmath grows polynomially as a function of @xmath .

It follows from the closed form of @xmath given by eq. ( 5.46 ) that
@xmath for @xmath only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . We will show that there is no polynomial function @xmath for
which the expression on the left of eq. ( 5.48 ) is @xmath . Setting
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , it follows from our assumptions that @xmath
is a polynomially bounded, differentiable, strictly increasing, strictly
positive function of @xmath and using these variables the left hand side
of eq. ( 5.48 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we will show that the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

is not bounded as @xmath . This implies that eq. ( 5.48 ) cannot hold
and the polynomially asymptotic thermality condition is not satisfied.
The strategy is to write the integral defined in eq. ( 5.50 ) in a form
that satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma C.5 , such that the application
of Corollary C.6 follows.

Defining @xmath by the convolution of @xmath with its reflection about
the origin, which we denote @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

it follows from the convolution theorem that @xmath has rapid decay.
From the definition of @xmath , we have that @xmath . Considering the
interval @xmath , one can obtain the estimate

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

using the fact that @xmath for @xmath and where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose that @xmath is a positive constant such that @xmath for all
@xmath . Now, let @xmath . @xmath is non-empty and unbounded from above.
In @xmath , ( 5.52 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In @xmath we hence have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Recalling that @xmath is even, we deduce that for any
@xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath holds for all @xmath .

Next, we show that the complement of @xmath in @xmath , @xmath is
contained within a suitable union of intervals. Using the bound @xmath ,
valid for @xmath , ( 5.53 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we have @xmath , and we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the definition of @xmath and ( 5.58 ) it follows that if @xmath ,
there exists a @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath .

Now, let @xmath , and for each @xmath , let @xmath be the unique
solution to @xmath . ( @xmath exists and is unique because @xmath is
strictly increasing and @xmath .) For @xmath , there hence exists a
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

using @xmath , and further

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

using @xmath .

Collecting, we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now apply Corollary C.6 . Since @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath ,
we have that @xmath and condition ( C.11 ) in Lemma C.5 holds with any
@xmath . Setting @xmath , we choose the set @xmath in Lemma C.5 so that
@xmath and @xmath .

The above observations about @xmath and @xmath then show that @xmath
satisfies the conditions of Corollary C.6 , by which @xmath must be
identically vanishing, and this contradicts the construction of @xmath .
Hence @xmath ( 5.50 ) cannot be bounded. This completes the proof. ∎

By the results of Theorem 5.12 one sees that scaling a constant
interaction time polynomially in the energy gap @xmath is not a
sufficient condition for obtaining polynomial asymptotic thermality as
@xmath .

In view of Theorems 5.10 and 5.12 , we see that in order to achieve
asymptotic thermality in a time scale @xmath which is a polynomial
function of the large energy @xmath the switching must be long and slow.
If the interaction is switched on once and for all, and the field and
the detector are left to interact constantly for a time @xmath before
switching off the interaction, we find that a polynomially long constant
interaction time does not suffice to thermalise the response as @xmath .
Thus, we conclude that the details of the thermalisation at the level of
the response function must be in the switch-on and switch-off.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

In this work, we have analysed the effects of quantum fields as
perceived by local observers in curved (and flat) spacetimes, with
emphasis in the Hawking and Unruh effects in time-dependent situations,
extensively using techniques from asymptotic analysis.

In the case of the Hawking effect, we have concentrated in @xmath
dimensions and considered a massless, minimally-coupled, free
Klein-Gordon field, which is, in turn, conformally coupled. The
conformal coupling enables us to compute interesting situations
analytically. Because the Wightman function of a massless @xmath scalar
field is ambiguous, in Chapter 3 we have employed a derivative-coupling
detector that is insensitive to the ambiguity, and for which the massive
to massless limit is continuous. We verified that this detector responds
appropriately to thermal phenomena, such as the Unruh effect. Moreover,
the response depends only on the twice-differentiated two-point function
in @xmath dimensions, which diverges at small distances as strongly as
the undifferentiated @xmath two-point function, rendering the @xmath
detector model into an attractive tool for obtaining intuition of @xmath
situations.

We have exploited the conformal symmetry of the theory in @xmath
dimensions to work out explicitly the field quantisation in lower
dimensional black hole spacetimes in Chapter 4 . First, we have studied
a receding mirror spacetime, which models the collapse of a star whereby
a black hole is formed at late times; second, we studied the @xmath
Schwarzschild spacetime and, third, a class of generalised @xmath
(non-extremal) Reissner-Nordström black holes. A spacetime belonging to
this class could include, for example, Reissner-Nordström black hole
with quantum gravity corrections near the singularity as in [ 132 , 133
] .

In the receding mirror spacetime, we have computed the transition rate
of a detector that is inertial in the asymptotic past, at early and late
times along its trajectory. At early times, the rate responds as if a
Dirichlet wall were present in the Minkowski half-space, whereas at late
times the right-moving modes carry a frequency shift, due to the motion
of the mirror, that satisfies, to leading order, the detailed balance
form of the KMS condition, with a temperature that depends on the
parameters of the mirror trajectory. The interpolating behaviour of the
rate was completed numerically. We have verified that the particle
detection is related to an outgoing positive energy flux moving away
from the mirror.

In the Schwarzschild black hole, we have studied the responses of
geodesic detectors that interact with fields in the Unruh and in the
Hartle-Hawking-Israel states. We have computed the asymptotic rates near
the infinity and near the black hole singularity. Near the infinity, the
Hawking temperature is imprinted on the detector, as it interacts with
the right-moving modes of a field in the Unruh state. This is the
Hawking effect. If the state is the HHI vacuum, the detector is
thermalised at the Hawking temperature. Near the singularity, the
transition rate of the detector diverges in a non-integrable fashion
proporitonally to @xmath as @xmath , meaning that the response diverges
logarithmically. We have computed numerically the transition rate of a
freely-falling detector from infinity and demonstrated that the rate
loses its thermal character as the detector closes into the black hole
from infinity. This is consistent with the fact that the detector is
only stationary with respect to the field modes coming from the black
hole in the asymptotic infinity region. For a detector coming from the
white hole region, interacting for a finite amount of time, our numerics
confirm that the transition rate is not thermal. A final comment is
that, for regular states across the black hole horizon, we have not
detected anything significant occurring at the black hole horizon. We
consider this relevant in the light of the information paradox
discussion [ 109 ] .

In our class of generalised Reissner-Nordström spacetimes, we have
studied the quantum effects near the future Cauchy horizon, as perceived
by a geodesically infalling observer. First, we have computed the rate
of a detector that falls across the horizon and towards the left part of
the Cauchy horizon, coupled to a field in the HHI or in the Unruh state.
We have found that the transition rate of such a detector diverges as
@xmath in their proper time, as they approach the horizon at proper time
@xmath . Because the rate of divergence of the transition rate is
non-integrable, the response of the detector also diverges. Then, we
analysed the local energy density, in the HHI state, experienced by such
geodesic infalling observer as they approach the future horizon. We
estimated, with the aid of conformal techniques, that, in the
near-horizon region, the local energy density too diverges
inverse-linearly.

We stress that @xmath dimensional models provide insight to the full
@xmath situations, but several technical points need to be discussed
carefully. As a way to exemplify this, we consider the sharp transition
rate of a derivative-coupling detector in @xmath dimensions interacting
with a field in the Rindler state. As an inertial detector leaves the
Rindler wedge and crosses to the full Minkowski spacetime, the
transition rate diverges faster for a @xmath derivative-coupling
detector than for a @xmath non-derivative Unruh-DeWitt detector. The
transition probability diverges in the former case, while it is finite
in the latter.

In Chapter 5 , we have studied the emergence of thermality for
(ensembles of) stationary detectors that interact for a finite amount of
time with a field in a KMS state and provided general results concerning
the non-uniformity in the long-time and large-energy limits. In
particular, we have shown that, for any thermal state (under reasonable
conditions), as the energy becomes large, the response of the detector
fails to satisfy the detailed balance form of the KMS condition
asymptotically. This leaves one with the question of how long one needs
to wait to register the KMS temperature up to a large energy scale,
@xmath , with particle detectors. In the case of the Unruh effect, we
have examined the emergence of the Unruh temperature, as registered by a
linearly uniformly accelerated detector that interacts with a @xmath
massless Klein-Gordon field in the Minkowski vacuum state for a finite
(but long) time. We have shown that the thermalisation time-scale
depends crucially on the details of the switching of the interaction
between the detector and the field. If the interaction switching scales
adiabatically to late times, then the waiting time is polynomial in the
large energy gap. However, we have proved that this situation does not
need to hold in general. The waiting time may need to be exponential if
the switching is not adiabatic.

We think that the analysis on Chapter 5 is relevant in the field of
analogue gravity. The estimates that we have obtained should be
interpreted in the following way: An experimentalist seeking to verify
the Unruh effect up to an energy @xmath in the spectrum registered by an
ensemble of detectors (or a multi-state detector) would need to switch
the detector-field interaction smoothly and slowly for a long time, and
only measure the state of the detector after a time that is polynomial
in the energy scale that they seek to test has elapsed. The spectrum
measured beyond the energy @xmath will not be thermally occupied, and,
thus, should be discarded when attempting to infer the (asymptotic)
temperature at which such ensemble of detectors thermalises, the Unruh
temperature. The intuition is that higher-energy occupation modes of an
ensemble of detectors take more time to populate than lower energy ones.
The key point for an experimentalist seeking to measure the Unruh effect
is not simply to conclude that the detector has been excited by its
interactions with the field, but to verify that the response of the
detector is thermal at the Unruh temperature. Here, we have prescribed
up to what energy scale this can be verified in terms of the interaction
time of the detector.

The work that we have presented in this thesis has several natural
extensions. The @xmath derivative-coupling detector model that we have
used and the techniques that we have presented can be exploited
extensively in several interesting situations in @xmath dimensions, e.g.
, in cosmological settings. Another situation of interest is that of a
derivative-coupling detector in an incoming mirror spacetime , which
produces a negative flux that can be detected. An analysis in @xmath
dimensions with a massless scalar can be carried out in the spirit of [
54 ] , where it is found that negative fluxes enhance the de-excitation
response of a detector. Another interesting scenario is to analyse the
response of detectors coupled to squeezed states, which can have
negative energy densities [ 134 ] . From such an investigation, a
connection with quantum inequalities in conformal field theory can be
drawn [ 135 ] .

An issue that we have left out of this work and that deserves attention
is that of back-reaction in suitable @xmath gravity theories with local
dynamics. Finally, it would be interesting to explore the issues of
thermalisation time scales, which we have presented for the Unruh
effect, in the context of black hole radiation.

## Appendix A Supplement to Chapter 3

### a.1 Massive field in Minkowski half space

We compute the transition rate @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath               (A.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We start by computing eq. ( A.1a ). Throughout our calculation, we
assume that @xmath . We start by rewriting ( A.1a ) in the form of (
3.28 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The branch of @xmath is as explained in the main text in terms of
derivatives of Hankel functions. See ( 2.74 ). The integral on the right
hand side of ( A.2 ) exists as a Riemann integral because of the
asymptotic behaviour of @xmath , @xmath as @xmath . Integrating by parts
twice, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the path @xmath extends along the real line, except that it dips
below the real line near @xmath . Moreover, because the singularity at
@xmath is logarithmic, we can perform the integration across @xmath ,
and using the analytic continuation formulas ( 2.74 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The strategy to integrate ( A.4 ) is to use the standard integral
(6.611.7) of [ 105 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for real @xmath . One then takes the imaginary part of the analytic
continuation of @xmath to @xmath , cf. ( A.4 ), and one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We refer to [ 65 ] for details.

We proceed to integrate the expression defined by @xmath . Integrating
by parts twice the right hand side of eq. ( A.1b ) and rearranging the
integration limits,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows from complex analytic integration techniques that we can
write ( A.7 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the path @xmath dips into the negative imaginary part of the
complex plane near @xmath . By deformation contour techniques and the
analytic continuation of the Bessel function, it follows that eq. ( A.8
) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using the identity [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a modified Bessel function of the first kind. The
integral on the right hand side of ( A.9 ) is standard (see [ 105 ]
formula 6.611.1) if we replace @xmath by the real parameter @xmath . The
analysis proceeds as before, and we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once more, we refer to [ 65 ] for details.

Putting the results ( A.6 ) and ( A.11 ) together, we obtain eq. ( 3.44
).

### a.2 Massless field in Minkowski half space

We wish to compute the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be achieved by elementary complex integration methods. Taking
the derivatives, and using Jordan’s lemma, we can write ( A.12 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the complex path from @xmath to @xmath along the real
axis and closes along an arc in the positive imaginary quadrants, and
@xmath is the complex path from @xmath to @xmath along the real axis
that then closes as an arc in the negative imaginary quadrants. Writing
the denominator as @xmath , it is clear that the contribution along
@xmath is zero. The contribution along @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the residues are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (A.15a)
     @xmath      (A.15b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This leads to eq. ( 3.47 ).

## Appendix B Supplement to Chapter 4

### b.1 The receding mirror spacetime

#### b.1.1 Static trajectory with respect to the mirror in the distant
past

We estimate the behaviour of the transition rate in the distant past and
the distant future.

##### Distant past, @xmath

We start out by estimating the behaviour of @xmath , defined by eq. (
4.45a ), as @xmath . We introduce the parameter @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The key point is that an expansion of @xmath at small @xmath can be made
uniformly in @xmath in such a way that the estimate can be inserted
inside the integral in ( B.1 ). One way to achieve this [ 65 ] is to
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

A Taylor expansion of the numerator of ( B.2 ) to quartic order in
@xmath shows that the second factor in ( B.3 ) is of the form @xmath ,
uniformly in @xmath , and yields for the first factor in ( B.3 ) an
estimate that can be applied under the integral over @xmath and whose
leading term is proportional to @xmath . We have that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The second line comes after verifying that the integrand above is @xmath
as @xmath .

The estimation of @xmath , defined by ( 4.45b ), is similar. The
asymptotic behaviour can be expressed in terms of the sine and cosine
integrals, and respectively in the notation of [ 103 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In terms of these integral formulas, we find.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We proceed to estimate @xmath , defined by ( 4.45c ). Integrating by
parts reduces the integral to a form that can be evaluated exactly in
terms of cosine and sine integrals. We find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . A small @xmath expansion in ( B.7 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Combining ( B.4 ), ( B.6 ) and ( B.8 ), we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which is eq. ( 4.46a ).

##### Distant future, @xmath

We start by estimating @xmath , defined by eq. ( 4.45a ). We introduce
the parameter @xmath , such that @xmath as @xmath . We add and subtract
@xmath inside the integrand, and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the last term in ( B.10 ), the integrand goes to zero pointwise as
@xmath . A monotone convergence argument shows that the integral is
@xmath as @xmath . The combination of half of the first term with the
second term is handled by the same techniques that we have encountered
in Chapter 3 , in the context of the Unruh effect and the thermal heat
bath, with the replacement @xmath . Hence, we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By monotone convergence arguments, we find that @xmath and @xmath .
Putting these results together,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.46b ).

#### b.1.2 Travelling towards mirror in the distant past

We estimate the behaviour of the transition rate in the distant past and
the distant future.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.13b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.13c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

##### Distant past, @xmath

We start by estimating @xmath , defined by ( B.13a ). We proceed as in (
B.1 )–( B.4 ) and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We proceed to estimate @xmath , defined by ( B.13b ). We introduce
@xmath as @xmath , whereby we write ( B.13b ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Whenever @xmath , we may bound the absolute value of @xmath by the
replacements @xmath and @xmath in ( B.15 ). The integral can be
evaluated in terms of sine and cosine integrals and one finds that
@xmath .

Finally, for estimating @xmath , defined by ( B.13c ), the integral can
be performed exactly, as in the static case. One finds that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath , we have @xmath , and using
formulas (6.2.17) and (6.12.3) in [ 103 ] gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining, we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in the distant past, which is eq. ( 4.48a ).

##### Distant future, @xmath

We carry out the estimates as @xmath . In the case of @xmath , defined
by ( B.13a ), we proceed as in the static case. Proceeding as in eq. (
B.10 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

To estimate @xmath ( B.13b ) we substitute @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , the absolute value of ( B.20 ) is bounded by the
replacement @xmath in the integrand. We then extend the integration
interval to the full real axis in @xmath . Elementary estimates then
show that the contribution from @xmath is @xmath and the contribution
from @xmath is @xmath . Hence @xmath .

Finally the asymptotic behaviour of @xmath ( 4.47c ) is obtained by
expanding the closed-form expression ( B.16 ). We obtain @xmath .

Combining, we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.48b ).

### b.2 The Schwarzschild black hole

#### b.2.1 Static detector

Using the static transition rate formula ( 3.28 ), eq. ( 4.50 ) and the
equations of motion, we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.22b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined the constant @xmath , which shall play the role of
the local temperature registered by the detector.

In the HHI vacuum, the left and right moving modes give identical
contributions. The fraction in eq. ( B.22a ) can be rendered in the form
of eq. ( 3.4 ), yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.51a ).

In the Unruh vacuum, the right-movers produce a thermal spectrum, while
the left-movers, coming from infinity, yield a Minkowski vacuum-like
term. We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.51b ).

#### b.2.2 Inertial detector near the infinity

The transition rate formula in the asymptotic past ( 3.24 ), together
with ( 4.50 ) along the infalling geodesic reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.26a)
     @xmath      (B.26b)
     @xmath      (B.26c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

along the trajectories defined by the integrals of

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.27a)
     @xmath      (B.27b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For example, along the trajectories ( B.27 ), @xmath reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.28)
  -- -- -- --------

The first observation that we make is that the point-wise asymptotic
past limits of eq. ( B.26 ), at fixed positive @xmath , are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.29b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.29c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we can replace eq. ( B.29 ) in ( B.25 ), we obtain the left and
right-moving thermal spectra in the HHI vacuum and the left-moving
Minkowski vacuum and the right-moving thermal spectrum in the Unruh
vacuum, to leading order at early times. What is left is to provide the
monotone convergence argument to replace the limits inside the integral.

Let us start by letting @xmath denote @xmath or @xmath . Letting @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , we write, @xmath and its time
derivative, @xmath , as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, in view of eq. ( B.26 ) and ( B.28 ), we neeed to show that the
expressions

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.32a)
     @xmath      (B.32b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are monotone in @xmath for all @xmath when @xmath is sufficiently large
and negative. Differentiating ( B.32 ) with respect to @xmath , it
suffices to show that each of the expressions

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.33a)
     @xmath      (B.33b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has a fixed sign for all @xmath when @xmath is sufficiently large and
negative. Introducing in ( B.33 ) a new integration variable by @xmath ,
we see that it suffices to show that each of the functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.34b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

defined on the domain @xmath , where @xmath is a parameter, has a fixed
sign when @xmath is sufficiently close to @xmath .

Consider @xmath . @xmath is a rational function whose sign can be
analysed by elementary methods, with the outcome that @xmath is negative
when @xmath is sufficiently close to @xmath . Hence @xmath is positive
when @xmath is sufficiently close to @xmath .

Consider then @xmath . When @xmath is sufficiently close to @xmath , an
elementary analysis shows that the second term in ( B.34b ) is negative
and strictly increasing, and there is a @xmath such that this term takes
the value @xmath at @xmath . With @xmath this close to @xmath , it
follows that @xmath is negative for @xmath , whereas for @xmath @xmath
has the same sign as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath can be analysed by the same methods as @xmath , with
the outcome that @xmath is negative when @xmath is sufficiently close to
@xmath . Collecting, we see that @xmath is negative when @xmath is
sufficiently close to @xmath .

This completes the monotone convergence argument and we find that, in
the HHI vacuum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.52a ), whereas in the Unruh vacuum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.52b ).

#### b.2.3 Inertial detector near the singularity

We consider the trajectories described by ( 4.7 ), ( 4.8 ), ( 4.9 ) and
( 4.10 ) in the HHI and Unruh vacua in Schwarzschild spacetime. We take
the switch-off to occur at time @xmath in region II and the switch-on at
time @xmath , which can be pushed to the asymptotic past when @xmath .
We call @xmath the proper time at which the trajectory hits the black
hole singularity. Let @xmath be a constant such that the detector is
somewhere in region II at proper time @xmath . As @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.38b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.39b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.39c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given by eq. ( B.26 ) along the
trajectories defined in region II by the integrals of

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.40a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.40b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

From eq. ( B.40a ), we have that, in the near-singularity regime, the
proper time and the Schwarzschild globally-defined coordinate @xmath are
related by the equation @xmath . This relation integrates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from eq. ( B.40b ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Appendix D of [ 78 ] , it is explicitly shown how to obtain the
asymptotic behaviour for @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We take the oportunity to illustrate how this is achieved for @xmath .
We seek to isolate the leading behaviour by integrating eq. ( B.39c ) by
parts

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath term is the boundary evaluation at @xmath . The limit
of the term in square brackets is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
     @xmath      (B.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eq. ( B.40b ), the @xmath is a quantity @xmath , and we have that
the limit is of order @xmath . From here, it follows that the integral
term in ( B.44 ) is @xmath and making an expansion of @xmath as a
function of @xmath , we have that @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the estimation of @xmath is identical to that of @xmath with
the replacement @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting our results together ( B.43 ), ( B.47 ) and ( B.48 ), we find
that for both the HHI and Unruh vacua,

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.49)
  -- -- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.53 ), and it follows from ( B.41 ) that the transition
rate diverges to leading term as @xmath .

### b.3 The generalised Reissner-Nordström black hole

We start this section by writing the geodesic equations in different
coordinate systems in region II. Starting from eq. ( 4.16 ) and the
definition of the coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.50a)
     @xmath      (B.50b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The Kruskal coordinates @xmath in region II are

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.51a)
     @xmath      (B.51b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The derivatives of ( B.50 ) and ( B.51 ) will be useful for our
asymptotic analysis:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.52a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.52b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.52c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.52d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### b.3.1 Boundary terms in eq. (4.56)

The boundary terms in eq. ( 4.56 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.53a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.53b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Let us start by estimating the order of @xmath . We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using eq. ( B.50 ) and ( B.51 ), we see that the @xmath -contribution of
@xmath is @xmath close to the Cauchy horizon. Then, the asymptotic
behaviour of eq. ( B.53a ) near @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.55)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The factor multiplying the brackets is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the equation of motion ( 4.15b ) in the last line.
The linear correction term in the expansion inside the brackets ( B.55 )
can be estimated as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a factor of order @xmath . We conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second boundary term, given by ( B.53b ), is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and can be estimated by the same methods to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting eq. ( B.58 ) and ( B.60 ) together, we obtain eq. ( 4.57 ).

#### b.3.2 Integral term in eq. (4.57)

We start by splitting the integration limits in eq. ( 4.58 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The second integral above is subleading because

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.62)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The first term on the right hand side of eq. ( B.61 ) can be estimated
by writing @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is positive and smooth
everywhere in our integration interval, including @xmath . In our case,
@xmath . We now make use of the dominated convergence theorem in order
to estimate the integral. Let @xmath , we are interested in the limit
@xmath of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

An integrable function that dominates this integrand can by found with
the aid of the following

###### Lemma B.1.

Let @xmath , let @xmath be @xmath , and let @xmath . Suppose @xmath for
@xmath . Then there exists a constant @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath
.

###### Proof.

Consider on @xmath the auxiliary function @xmath . As @xmath is
continuous, it attains on @xmath a maximum value, which we denote by
@xmath . Since @xmath for @xmath , it follows that @xmath for @xmath ,
and since @xmath and @xmath , it further follows that @xmath for @xmath
. Hence @xmath . From @xmath it follows that @xmath . Define now @xmath
. Then @xmath . Since @xmath for @xmath , it follows that @xmath for
@xmath . ∎

As @xmath is a strictly decreasing function of @xmath , Lemma B.1
provides a @xmath such that @xmath is a strictly deacreasing function of
@xmath over the domain of integration in ( B.63 ). We may hence
rearrange ( B.61 ) and ( B.63 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fixing a positive @xmath , the absolute value of the integrand in ( B.64
) is bounded for @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (B.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

which bound is independent of @xmath and integrable over the domain in (
B.64 ). By dominated convergence we may hence take the limit @xmath in
(B.64) under the integral, obtaining

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.59 ).

#### b.3.3 The @xmath geodesic.

The @xmath trajectory is given by the orbit of

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (B.67a)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The transition rate of a detector ( 4.56 ) along this trajectory can be
estimated near the horizon using the near-horizon relation @xmath ,
leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same techniques as above are applicable and we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### b.3.4 Local energy density near the Cauchy horizon

We compute the local energy density along the worldline of an infalling
observer approaching @xmath , to leading order, in the near-horizon
regime.

For the moment, we leave the test function, @xmath , unspecified, with
the requirement that @xmath is compact and its support lies in the past
of the future Cauchy horizon. We start by writing eq. ( 4.69 )
explicitly along the worldline in terms of the conformal factor and its
proper time derivatives succinctly as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.71a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.71b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In view of eq. ( B.71 ), we can define the @xmath smooth function @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.72)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Defining the functionals

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.73a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.73b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

we can write the local energy density as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading behaviour comes from the integral defining @xmath , while a
subleading divergent behaviour arises from @xmath . We now specify the
switching function and compute the leading behaviour.

##### Sharp switching function

Let us consider the sharp function @xmath . We start out by writing out
the integral in eq. ( B.73a ) in terms of the @xmath coordinate,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The leading singular behaviour can be obtained via integration by parts,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The contribution for @xmath is logarithmic and, hence, doesn’t need to
be estimated to leading order. In terms of the proper time difference,
@xmath , one obtains that eq. ( B.74 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.70 ).

##### Smooth switching function

In the case of the smooth test function, we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we wish to estimate @xmath as the switch-off time @xmath comes close
to the horizon-crossing time, @xmath .

The calculation boils down to estimating the quantity

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Integration by parts yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary term contributes as @xmath , while the integral term gives
rise to a linear divergence stemming from the derivation acting on the
argument of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The integral factor can be expressed more succinctly in terms of the
integration variable @xmath and one finds that, to leading order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is eq. ( 4.74 ).

#### b.3.5 The @xmath Rindler horizon

In this appendix we show that a detector following the trajectory @xmath
, as it interacts with a massless scalar in the Rindler state has an
instantaneous transition rate given by eq. ( 4.76 ) in the vicinity of
the future Rindler horizon.

The pullback of the Wightman function along the trajectory is @xmath ,
where the trajectory in Rindler coordinates is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.83a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.83b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

An integration by parts of the transition rate formula leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.84)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The leading contribution to the transition rate in eq. ( B.84 ) comes
from the left-moving sector. The boundary terms in eq. ( B.84 ) yield

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.85)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( B.85 ) strongly suggests that the divergent behaviour is linear,
as stated in chapter 4 , section 4.4 . In order to corroborate that this
is the case, one needs only estimate the second term on the right hand
side of eq. ( B.85 ) and verify that it is indeed subleading. The factor
multiplying the integral is @xmath . We now show that the contribution
from the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

is at most @xmath . Changing variables to @xmath and defining @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the upper limit of the integral above can be extended to @xmath
because

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, we bound the integral ( B.86 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the last line we have performed the change of variables @xmath
. This integral can now be written in terms of the exponential integral
Ei and the logarithmic integral li, whose asymptotic behaviour is known,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.90)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The estimate in eq. ( B.90 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.91)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is the transition rate near the @xmath Rindler horizon displayed
in eq. ( 4.76 ).

## Appendix C Supplement to Chapter 5

This appendix contains a series of technical results that are used
throughout the Chapter 5 .

### c.1 A collection of lemmas

In this section, we collect a series of useful lemmas.

###### Lemma C.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be related by eq. ( 5.5 ). Then the Fourier
transforms @xmath and @xmath are related by @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then also @xmath . It follows from integration by parts that
@xmath . Setting @xmath , it follows from @xmath that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Setting @xmath , a direct computation yields the desired result,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

∎

###### Lemma C.2.

Let @xmath be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the values at @xmath and @xmath are understood in the limiting
sense, @xmath is even in each of its arguments and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Evenness in each of the arguments is a direct computation. To prove that
@xmath , it suffices to assume @xmath , @xmath .

Firstly, notice that @xmath . Secondly, we have that @xmath . It hence
suffices to show that @xmath . Defining

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

one can write that @xmath . At fixed @xmath , we define the function
@xmath by @xmath , where @xmath is a root of @xmath . Verifying that
@xmath is equivalent to verifying that @xmath . We start by writing
@xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the intervals @xmath and @xmath . First, we see that @xmath . Second,
computing the derivative of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

we can verify that for @xmath , @xmath . To see this, one first verifies
that the term inside the big parentheses in ( C.6 ) is always negative.
¹ ¹ 1 To this end, first verify that the term in parenthesis is negative
at @xmath and as @xmath . Then, verify that the derivative vanishes only
at @xmath , and that the term in parenthesis evaluated at this (maximum)
point is a negative function of @xmath . Then, one realises that the
numerator multiplying the big parentheses is positive if @xmath and
negative for @xmath . Thus, the derivative ( C.6 ) is negative for
@xmath and positive for @xmath . Because @xmath , we conclude that in
the interval @xmath , @xmath .

For the interval @xmath , we first notice that, at fixed @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Then, by the sign analysis of eq. ( C.6 ) that we have
explained above, @xmath is a minimum of @xmath in the interval @xmath .
Hence, @xmath in this interval.

All that is left from the analysis above is to study the point @xmath at
the level of @xmath to verify that it has fixed sign. One finds that
@xmath , which concludes the analysis. ∎

###### Lemma C.3.

The response function ( 5.4 ), with @xmath defined as in eq. ( 5.22 ),
satisfies @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath norm with respect to the
Lebesgue measure.

###### Proof.

Symmetrising the integrals in ( 5.4 ) and ( 5.27 ), we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined as in eq. ( C.3 ). Using Lemma C.2 it follows
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can verify that @xmath , which implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

∎

###### Lemma C.4.

Let @xmath , where @xmath at @xmath is understood in the limiting sense.
@xmath is strictly decreasing in each of its arguments.

###### Proof.

It is immediate to see that @xmath is symmetric in the two arguments,
@xmath . Fix @xmath , then @xmath . Also, @xmath . It is left to show
that the partial derivative in @xmath is non-positive. The derivative is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

understood at @xmath in the limiting sense. An elementary analysis shows
that the numerator in ( C.10 ) is negative for @xmath , and examination
of the @xmath limit in ( C.10 ) (for example, by L’Hôpital’s rule) shows
that @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma C.5.

Let @xmath be a strictly positive sequence such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and let @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . Define @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is a locally integrable polynomially
bounded function with support @xmath , for some @xmath , then the
inverse Fourier transform of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is analytic in the strip @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is polynomially bounded, there exist @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath . We therefore have the estimates

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From ( C.11 ) it follows that @xmath as @xmath , and hence @xmath as
@xmath . If @xmath , for sufficiently large @xmath we may hence estimate
the terms in ( C.13 ) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that @xmath exists in the strip @xmath .

To show that @xmath is analytic in the strip @xmath , we may use the
inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

valid for @xmath , together with estimates similar to those above, to
provide a dominated convergence argument that justifies differentiating
( C.12 ) under the integral sign, with the outcome

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

###### Corollary C.6.

(Follows from Lemma C.5 .) Suppose @xmath obeys @xmath for some @xmath
and all @xmath , with @xmath the union of intervals as in Lemma C.5 .
Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the characteristic function of @xmath . Then @xmath
satisfies the conditions of Lemma C.5 and has an inverse Fourier
transform @xmath which is analytic on a strip, say @xmath , around the
real axis. As, @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath exists and is analytic on
a strip @xmath around the real axis. Thus, @xmath extends from the real
axis to an analytic function in the strip @xmath . But since @xmath has
compact support on the real axis, @xmath has to vanish everywhere. ∎

### c.2 Bounds for (5.33) in Theorem 5.10

We provide the following bounds:

#### c.2.1 Bound for @xmath

We estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

from above, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the time scale @xmath scaling as a function of @xmath by @xmath .

We bound @xmath , where we have set @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the last equality @xmath is assumed so large that @xmath .

On the last line, the term in the second parentheses is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the last line is hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this estimate in ( C.17 ), and extending the integration range in
@xmath to be @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### c.2.2 Bound for @xmath

We provide a bound of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

from above, with @xmath given by ( C.18 ).

We set again @xmath and @xmath and write the last factor under the
integral as @xmath . In this case, we have that @xmath . We start by
writing @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The second term is strictly decreasing in @xmath , thus bounded from
above by zero. Hence we have that.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Following Lemma C.4 , we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that the prefactor of the integral is of order @xmath . This is
easy to see as @xmath .

We split the integration in the subintervals @xmath , where @xmath . We
have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have extended the integration limits to obtain the @xmath norm
of @xmath .

We now proceed to estimate the contribution of the @xmath integration
interval to ( C.26 ). At this stage, we use the assumption that @xmath
is of strong Fourier decay, whereby

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we have that for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The first term in the exponent is negative and dominates at large
positive @xmath because @xmath and @xmath by our assumptions. Thus the
factor coming from the exponent dies off faster than any polynomial at
large @xmath . Furthermore, because the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

has only polynomial growth, the overall contribution in the @xmath
integration interval dies off faster than any polynomial.

Collecting the estimates,

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.31)
  -- -- -- --------

#### c.2.3 Bound for @xmath

We bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

from above, with @xmath given by ( C.18 ). We set again @xmath and
@xmath and write the last factor under the integral as @xmath . In this
case, we have that @xmath .

The steps ( C.24 ) - ( C.25 ) are applicable also for @xmath , and we
use the bound ( C.25 ) to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Set @xmath . There is a guarantee that such @xmath exists because, by
our hypotheses, @xmath . We split the integration interval as @xmath and
consider @xmath so large that @xmath . For the first interval, we have
by Lemma C.4 that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The factor multiplying the integral above is @xmath and the integrand
can be controlled in this interval as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We see from the last line of ( C.35 ) that the contribution in the
integration interval @xmath to ( C.33 ) decays faster than any
polynomial as @xmath , because the first term in the exponent is
dominating because @xmath and the parameters satisfy @xmath .

For the subinterval @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Considering that @xmath , the denominator in eq. ( C.36 ) is of order
unity. Therefore, we see that this piece contributes linearly in the
integration variable @xmath . We are left to estimate @xmath . The decay
properties of @xmath yield that, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

At large @xmath , the factor @xmath and the factor inside the exponent
is overall negative at large @xmath . Thus, the integrand is rapidly
suppressed and, collecting our results, @xmath dies off faster than any
polynomial in @xmath .