# Part II Towards realistic WIMP models

### Chapter 5 A first approach: simplified models \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

#### 5.1 Introduction

Little is, however, as of yet known about DM as a particle; any
candidate for (most of) the DM must nevertheless be consistent with the
following five observationally-motivated constraints:

-   The relic abundance of DM needs to account for the observed CDM
    abundance.

-   The DM particle should be non-relativistic at matter-radiation
    equality to form structures in the early Universe in agreement with
    the observation. As a result, if the DM was produced as a thermal
    relic in the early Universe, its mass cannot be arbitrarily light.
    Specifically, cosmological simulations rule out DM masses below a
    few keV [ Benson:2012su , Lovell:2013ola , Kennedy:2013uta ] .

-   The DM should be electromagnetically neutral, as a result of null
    searches for stable charged particles [ SanchezSalcedo:2010ev ,
    McDermott:2010pa ] as well as Direct Detection (DD) experiments,
    which we will review subsequently.

-   The DM particle must be cosmologically stable since its presence is
    ascertained today, implying that its lifetime is larger than the age
    of the Universe. Under certain assumptions, much stronger limits are
    applicable conservatively requiring a lifetime order of magnitude
    larger can be derived [ Queiroz:2014yna , Audren:2014bca ,
    Giesen:2015ufa , Mambrini:2015sia , Baring:2015sza , Lu:2015pta ,
    Slatyer:2016qyl , Jin:2017iwg ] .

-   Cluster collisions, such as the Bullet Cluster [ Clowe:2006eq ] ,
    constrain the level of self-interactions that DM particles can have
    (see however [ Hochberg:2014dra , Hansen:2015yaa ] for alternative
    scenarios).

Within the generous parameter space outlined by the observational
requirements listed above, we will argue below that the paradigm of
WIMPs [ Steigman:1984ac ] is one of the most compelling options for DM
as a particle. In order to maximally profit of the information from the
different kind of experimental searches we need an efficient interface
between the experimental outcome and theoretical models. The processes
responsible for the DM relic density and its eventual detection can be
described by simple extensions of the SM in which a DM candidate
interacts with the SM states (typically the interactions are limited to
the SM fermions) through a mediator state (dubbed portal). This idea is
at the base of the so-called ”Simplified Models” [ DiFranzo:2013vra ,
Berlin:2014tja , Abdallah:2014hon , Buckley:2014fba , Godbole:2015gma ,
Abdallah:2015ter , Duerr:2015wfa , Baek:2015lna , Carpenter:2016thc ,
Bauer:2016gys , Sandick:2016zut , Bell:2016uhg , Bell:2016ekl ,
Khoze:2017ixx , ElHedri:2017nny ] which are customarily adopted
especially in the context of collider studies, see e.g., Refs. [
Jacques:2015zha , Xiang:2015lfa , Backovic:2015soa , Bell:2015rdw ,
Brennan:2016xjh , Boveia:2016mrp , Englert:2016joy , Goncalves:2016iyg ,
DeSimone:2016fbz , Liew:2016oon , Kraml:2017atm , Bauer:2017ota ,
Albert:2017onk ] .

The first class of models which will be the object of study are the SM
Dark Portals ¹ ¹ 1 An analogous study has been performed in Ref. [
Escudero:2016gzx ] . Our results are in substantial agreement with the
ones reported in this reference. , i.e., models in which the DM
interacts with the SM state through the Higgs or the @xmath -boson. In
the case when the DM is a pure SM singlet, gauge invariant
renormalizable operator connecting the DM with the @xmath or the
SM-Higgs boson can be build only in the latter case and only for scalar
and vectorial DM. In the other cases one should rely either on higher
dimensional operators, or on the case that the coupling with the Higgs
and/or the @xmath is originated by their mixing with new neutral
mediators. The latter case can imply the presence of additional states
relevant for the DM phenomenology and will be then discussed later on in
the text. We will instead quote below some example of higher dimensional
operator but we will not refer to any specific construction for our
analysis.

The simplied models presented in the previous cases for the SM-Higgs and
@xmath -boson portals will be generalized and discussed in more details
in the case of generic BSM spin-0 mediator interacting with a pair of
scalar, fermion or vector DM fields. Contrary to the case of SM portals,
interactions of the mediator with the gauge bosons are not mandatory. We
will thus stick, in this chapter to the case, analogous to the so called
simplified models, in which the DM is coupled only to the SM fermions.

#### 5.2 Higgs portal

The most economical way to connect a SM singlet DM candidate with the SM
Higgs doublet @xmath is through four field operators built to connect
the Higgs bilinear @xmath , which is a Lorentz and gauge invariant
quantity, with a DM bilinear. Assuming CP conservation, the possible ² ²
2 We limit, for simplicity, to the lowest dimensional operators. Higher
dimensional operators are discussed, for example, in Ref. [
Greljo:2013wja ] . operators connecting the SM-Higgs doublet with
scalar, fermion and vector DM are given by [ Silveira:1985rk ,
McDonald:1993ex , Burgess:2000yq , Kim:2006af , Andreas:2010dz ,
Kanemura:2010sh , Lebedev:2011iq , Mambrini:2011ik , Djouadi:2011aa ,
LopezHonorez:2012kv , Djouadi:2012zc ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, in the unitary gauge, @xmath with @xmath denoting the physical SM
Higgs boson, Vacuum Expectation Value (VEV) and @xmath in case the DM is
(not) its own antiparticle. We have indicated a scalar, fermionic and
vectorial DM as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. From Eq. (
5.1 ) note that stability of the DM is protected either by a discrete
@xmath and when @xmath ) or by a @xmath symmetry. In the case of a
scalar and vectorial DM it is possible to rely on a dimension-4
renormalizable operator. On the contrary, a fermionic DM requires at
least a dimension-5 operator which depends on an unknown Ultra-Violet
(UV) scale @xmath . After EW symmetry breaking (EWSB), trilinear
couplings between the Higgs field @xmath and DM pairs are induced. In
the case of fermionic DM it is possible to absorb the explicit @xmath
dependence by a redefinition of the associated coupling, i.e., @xmath as
@xmath , so that it does not appear explicitly in computations.

The models defined by Lagrangians of Eq. ( 5.1 ) have only two free
parameters, the DM masses @xmath and couplings @xmath with the SM-Higgs.
The constraints on these models can be then easily summarized in
bi-dimensional (i.e., DM mass vs its coupling with the SM-Higgs) planes.

In Fig. 5.1 we summarize our results for scalar, fermionic and vectorial
DM, respectively. All the plots report basically three set of
constraints ³ ³ 3 We will report in the main text just the results of
the analysis. Analytical expressions of the relevant rates are
extensively reported in the appendix. . The first one (red contours) is
represented by the achievement of the correct DM relic density ⁴ ⁴ 4 In
the mentioned figure and throughout all this thesis we will, as
convention, use the label ”Planck”, as the corresponding experiment, for
iso-countours corresponding to the correct DM relic density. . The DM
annihilates into SM fermions and gauge bosons, through s-channel
exchange of the SM-Higgs boson, and, for higher masses, also into Higgs
pairs through both s- and t-channel diagrams (in this last case a DM
particle is exchanged). Since the coupling of the SM-Higgs with SM
fermions and gauge bosons depends on the masses of the particles
themselves, the DM annihilation cross-section is suppressed, at the
exception of the pole region @xmath , until the @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath final states are kinematically accessible. Even in this last
case, the cosmologically allowed values for the couplings are in strong
tension with the constraints from DD of the DM, which for all the
considered spin assignation of the DM, arise from SI interactions of the
DM with the SM quarks originated by t-channel exchange of the SM-Higgs
boson. As can be easily seen that the entire parameter space
corresponding to thermal DM is already ruled out, at the exception,
possibly, of the pole region, for DM masses at least below 1 TeV.
Eventual surviving resonance regions will be ruled-out in case of
absence of signals at the forthcoming XENON1T, assuming a two years of
exposure time. As expected, the most constrained scenario is the
fermionic DM one because of the further suppression of the p-wave
suppression of its annihilation cross-section.

Notice that, scalar and vectorial DM, due to the s-wave annihilation
cross-section, might also be probed through ID. The corresponding limits
are nevertheless largely overpower by the ones from DD and hence, have
been then omitted for simplicity. The limits from DD experiments are
complemented at low DM masses, i.e., @xmath , by the one from invisible
decay width of the Higgs. Indeed this constraint would exclude DM masses
below the energy threshold of DD experiments. Our findings are in
agreement with the other recent studies in the topic [ Cline:2013gha ,
Queiroz:2014pra , Buckley:2014fba , Dutra:2015vca , Freitas:2015hsa ,
Anchordoqui:2015fra , Fedderke:2015txa , Duch:2015jta , Abdallah:2015ter
, Chen:2015dea , Abercrombie:2015wmb , Kumar:2015wya , Han:2016gyy ,
He:2016mls , Bambhaniya:2016cpr ] .

#### 5.3 @xmath portal

An interaction between the @xmath -boson and a SM singlet DM candidate
is not gauge invariant for any dimension-4 operators. In the case of
scalar and fermionic DM models, the simplest option is to consider a
dimension 6 operator ⁵ ⁵ 5 Similar to the case of the Higgs portal we
just quote, as an example, the lowest dimensional operator. This is
however, not the only possible option. [ Cotta:2012nj , deSimone:2014pda
, Kearney:2016rng ] . In the case of scalar DM it is of the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which give rise to a trilinear interaction between the @xmath -boson and
a DM pair once the SM-Higgs field in the Lagrangian is replaced by its
VEV, so that @xmath . @xmath is again the relevant cutoff scale of the
effective theory. Similar to the case of a fermionic DM in Higgs portal
we can absorb it in the definition of a dimensionless coupling as @xmath
. In addition, after EWSB, an effective dimension-4 interaction like
@xmath can emerge from the dimension-6 SM gauge invariant operator
@xmath @xmath @xmath such that @xmath . For simplicity we maintain a
rescaling with powers of the @xmath gauge coupling @xmath . The
interaction Lagrangian for the DM, along with the relevant SM parts, can
thus be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is Weinberg angle [ Amsler:2008zzb ] and @xmath
generically refers to a SM fermion. Note that we have used a
normalization of @xmath throughout in analogy to the SM @xmath
couplings. The interaction Lagrangian for fermion DM is built in a
similar fashion as the scalar case. In the case of Dirac DM the starting
operator is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which, after the EWSB, together with the apposite SM part leads to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . In the case of Majorana DM @xmath and we
rescale the remaining DM coupling by a factor of @xmath . In the case of
spin-1 DM we will consider two possible kind of interactions, namely,
self- (Abelian) and not self-conjugated (non-Abelian) DM, respectively.
For the latter, along with the necessary SM parts, we can write the
following Lorentz invariant interaction:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represent the respective field strengths. In Eq. ( 5.3 )
the @xmath coupling is normalized as @xmath while the model specific
information are parametrized as @xmath . In the case of self-conjugate
spin-1 DM, an interaction with the gauge boson can be built through the
Levi-Civita symbol as Ref. [ Mambrini:2009ad ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similar to the previous cases the coupling @xmath in Eq. ( 5.7 ) encodes
a cut-off scale (see e.g., Refs. [ Anastasopoulos:2006cz ,
Antoniadis:2009ze , Dudas:2009uq , Dudas:2013sia ] for the construction
of effective theories). The theoretical derivation of Eq. ( 5.3 ) is
however, more contrived. Further, similar to the Higgs portal, the
@xmath -portal models are fully defined by two parameters so that one
can repeat the same kind of analysis performed in the previous
subsection. The results are summarized in Figs. 5.2 ⁶ ⁶ 6 Similar to the
SM-Higgs portal case we will report in the main text only the main
results while discussing the computation in more detail in the appendix.
.

As evident, in all but the Majorana @xmath -portal case, thermal DM is
already excluded, even for masses above the TeV scale, by current
constraints from XENON1T. These constraints are even stronger with
respect to the case of the SM-Higgs portal. This is because, apart from
the lighter mediator, the scattering cross-section on Xenon nuclei is
enhanced by the isospin violating interactions of the @xmath with light
quarks. Low DM masses, possibly out of the reach of DD experiments, are
instead excluded by the limit on the invisible decay width of the @xmath
-boson. As already pointed out, the only exception to this picture is
represented by the case of Majorana DM where the SI component of the DM
scattering cross-section is largely suppressed due to the absence of a
vectorial coupling of the DM with the @xmath . This scenario is
nevertheless already (partially) within the reach of current searches
for a SD component of the scattering cross-section. The increased
sensitivity of XENON1T will allow to exclude DM masses below 300 GeV,
except the “pole” region. The latter, however, will meet the same fate
from a projected future LZ sensitivity.

#### 5.4 Scalar portal

##### 5.4.1 Scalar Dark Matter

We will consider the following Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a real scalar field and @xmath denotes the normalization
factor, accounting, similar to the previous section, for the case when
the DM coincides (or not) with its own antiparticle. In the case of SM
fermions we have assumed a Yukawa-like structure of the couplings with
the mediator while for the scalar DM @xmath we have parametrized all the
information, including possible normalization factors (e.g., factor of
@xmath in the second term of Eq. ( 5.8 )), in the respective couplings.
Note that @xmath parameter has the dimension of mass. Unless differently
stated we will assume @xmath with @xmath being a dimensionless coupling
and @xmath as the mass of @xmath . We will also add self interaction
term for the scalar field given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The assignation for the dimensional couplings, as well as the
introduction of the Lagrangian term in Eq. ( 5.9 ), are inspired to
scenarios in which the scalar field @xmath acquires a VEV. In this setup
the Lagrangian of Eq. ( 5.9 ) originates from the quartic term in the
scalar potential whose presence cannot be forbidden by any symmetry
argument. In the same fashion a quartic interaction term @xmath with the
SM-Higgs doublet, responsible for a mixing of the @xmath and @xmath
states, should also be included. For simplicity we will assume here that
the coupling of this last operator is negligible ⁷ ⁷ 7 The most general
case is dicussed in Sec. 8.3.2 .
Contrary to the case of the SM portals, which have only the DM mass and
its coupling as free parameters, we have expressed, as reported on Fig.
5.3 , our main results in the bi-dimensional plane @xmath for the three
free coupling assignations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Figure 5.3 hence
shows the comparison between current DD limits, as well as the projected
sensitivities from XENON1T and LZ, and the requirement of the correct DM
relic density. The results reported in Fig. 5.3 can be explained as
follows. A t-channel exchange of the scalar mediator induces SI
interactions of the DM, which are written, in the case of the proton as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath represent, respectively, the atomic and proton
number of the material constituting the detector, @xmath denotes reduced
mass of the WIMP-proton system with @xmath representing the mass of the
latter while @xmath and @xmath represent the effective couplings of the
DM with protons and neutrons. In the case of a scalar mediator we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the form factor whose physical meaning is associated
to the contribution from all the six quark flavours (up, down and
strange quark flavours) to the mass of the proton and the neutron. The
contribution of the heavy quarks in @xmath is described by a unique form
factor @xmath (in Eq. ( 5.11 ) we have implicitly summed over the three
heavy quark flavours). For their numerical values we have adopted the
default assignations by micrOMEGAs. Notice that the factor @xmath is
actually a rescaling factor which is introduced for a consistent
comparison with the experimental limits which customarily assume @xmath
[ Feng:2013fyw ] . This assumption is justified in the case of the
spin-0 mediator since @xmath and @xmath differ only by the contributions
of up and down quarks which are sub-dominant with respect to the
contribution from the strange quark (and then from the heavy quarks, see
Eq. ( 5.11 )), which is the same for proton and neutron. In the
following numerical estimates we will then automatically set @xmath
@xmath . For spin-1 mediators one expects in general @xmath and this
often translates into an enhancement of the cross-section and, hence,
stronger limits on the model parameters. This can be already noticed by
comparing the limits in the case of the SM-Higgs and @xmath -boson
portals. Current limits exclude then low values for both the mass of the
DM and the one of the mediator. These limits will become, of course,
progressively stronger, in case of absence of signals at XENON1T and/or
LZ.

Concerning the DM relic density for @xmath the DM annihilation
cross-section is suppressed by Yukawa structure of the couplings so that
the correct relic density is obtained only around the resonance region
@xmath . This corresponds to the wide region between the two lines in
Fig. 5.3 . This region is of course determined by @xmath and is then the
same as shown in the left and right plots of Fig. 5.3 . The difference
between these two figures is the disappearance of the region
corresponding to the @xmath final state (see right plot) where,
annihilation cross-section is proportional to @xmath (see Eq. ( 5.14 )).
This channel is then not sufficient to avoid an over-density of the
Universe for @xmath . In the middle plot, the pole region is enlarged,
to the point of covering almost all the parameter space, even joining
the @xmath final state at @xmath TeV. For higher DM masses, instead, the
correct relic density is achieved also far from s-channel resonances
through either the @xmath channel or the @xmath channel, whether
kinematically open. In such a case, the following analytical estimates,
through the conventional velocity expansion, of the DM annihilation
cross-section, can be obtained in the case where @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the case where @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As evident that both the @xmath and @xmath cross-sections are s-wave
dominated and thus, velocity independent. As a consequence residual
annihilation would occur at present times which can be probed by DM ID
strategies. Similar to the case of the SM-Higgs portal, DD limits are
much more competitive with respect to the ones from ID, hence the latter
have not been explicitly exhibited on Fig. 5.3 . We also notice that the
dominant contribution of the annihilation cross-section into @xmath
depends only on the @xmath coupling; as a consequence the scalar
self-coupling @xmath does not play a relevant role for DM phenomenology
⁸ ⁸ 8 This statement is strictly valid in the case, considered here, of
@xmath . In the case @xmath the contribution of the trilinear couplings
@xmath to the annihilation cross-section into @xmath might be sizable
and event dominant. However, we expect in such a case, since the
annihilation cross-section would scale at least as @xmath , the DM to be
in general overabundant. .

##### 5.4.2 Fermionic Dark Matter

The interaction of a fermionic DM and a scalar s-channel mediator can be
described by the following phenomenological Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 5.9 ). Contrary to the case of a scalar
DM, the operator @xmath is of dimension 4, so that @xmath is already a
dimensionless parameter. Note that similar to Eq. ( 5.8 ) we have
parametrized @xmath to contain all the information of the @xmath vertex
including a normalization factor. One could think that an eventual VEV
of the scalar mediator @xmath can be the origin of the DM mass, so that
@xmath , with @xmath being the VEV of @xmath [ Kim:2008pp , Kim:2009ke ,
Kim:2016csm ] . We won’t make this assumption in this work and regard
@xmath as a generic dimensionless constant. The main results of our
analysis have been summarized in Fig. 5.4 . We have once again
considered the DM and scalar masses as free parameters and an analogous
assignation of the couplings as in the previous subsection.

The results shown in the figure can be described analytically as
follows: the DD of the DM is again principally determined by SI
interactions whose cross-section is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes reduced mass of the associated WIMP-proton system.
As evidenced from Fig. 5.4 , DM masses even above the TeV scale, are
excluded by current DD limits for @xmath . Values below the TeV scale
for both the DM and mediator masses will be excluded in the absence of
signals from the next generation experiments. The correct DM relic
density can be achieved, without relying on s-channel resonances, only
when at least one between the @xmath and @xmath final states is
kinematically accessible. In such a case the DM pair annihilation
cross-section can be approximated in the case where @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the case where @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath . We notice again that in the limit @xmath , the scalar
self-coupling @xmath does not influence the DM relic density. The
dependence on the couplings between the three plots of Fig. 5.4 is the
same as of the scalar case. However contrary to the case of scalar DM,
all the annihilation channels are now velocity suppressed, hence cannot
account for a sizable ID signals.

##### 5.4.3 Vector Dark Matter

For the description of the vectorial DM case we consider the following
Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is inspired by the construction proposed in Refs. [ Gross:2015cwa
, Arcadi:2016kmk ] . Note that the first three terms of Eq. ( 5.19 )
appear after the spontaneous symmetry breaking, once the portal field is
expanded as @xmath with @xmath as the concerned VEV. The quantity @xmath
is expressed as @xmath . A similar construction is also possible from a
gauge invariant @xmath operator for a complex scalar field @xmath with
@xmath . However, in this scenario the third term of Eq. ( 5.19 ) would
require new BSM charges for the SM fermions.

This scenario has been analyzed with the same procedure as the scalar
and fermionic DM cases. The results, reported in Fig. 5.5 appear not to
be very different from what obtained in the case of a scalar DM in Fig.
5.3 . This can be explained by the fact that a massive vectorial DM can
be viewed as three scalar degrees of freedom. The DM scattering rate on
protons and its most relevant annihilation channels are described by the
following analytical expressions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath @xmath / @xmath as usual represents reduced mass of
the relevant WIMP-proton system and in the case where @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.5 Conclusion

In the light of extensive programme of direct DM searches, we assessed
the status of the WIMP paradigm in the context of simplified models,
accounting for the current and projected limits. In the minimal
simplified models, the particle spectrum of the SM should be
complemented by just a new state, i.e., the DM candidate, since portal
interactions can be mediated either by the SM-Higgs or by the @xmath
-boson, although in the last case a theoretically consistent
construction is more contrived. In the case of SM-Higgs portal, for all
the DM spin assignations, SI interactions with nucleons are induced. The
consequent very strong limits, due to the light mediator, are
incompatible with the thermal relic density ad exception of DM masses
above the TeV scale or the “pole”, i.e., @xmath , region. This last
scenario would nevertheless be ruled out in the absence of signals at
XENON1T (assuming a 2 years of exposure time) and LZ. In the @xmath
-portal scenario current limits on the SI cross-section already exclude
the pole region. These strong limits can nevertheless be partially
overcome in the case where fermionic DM possesses only axial couplings
with the @xmath boson, as naturally realized in the case of a Majorana
fermion DM. In this particular case, the thermal DM with mass of a few
hundreds GeV would remain viable even in the absence of signals at the
next generation detectors.

The SM-Higgs and @xmath -portal setups are easily extended to the cases
of BSM scalar mediator. Despite of the different velocity dependencies
of the annihilation cross-sections, the regions of the correct DM relic
density are then mostly determined by Yukawa structure of the couplings
between the mediator and the SM fermions. The correct DM relic density
is indeed obtained, far from the resonance regions, only when the @xmath
and/or @xmath annihilation channels are kinematically open. Given the
several free parameters, for clarity of the picture, we have focused our
investigation on the masses of the new particle states and fixed the
couplings to be close to @xmath . The current limits still allow masses
of a few hundreds GeV for both the DM and the mediator while XENON1T, in
the absence of signals after 2 years of exposure, will exclude mediator
masses up to approximately 1 TeV and DM masses up to a few TeV. As a
consequence, in this setup, the thermal DM is achieved in the most part
of the parameter space, in the pole region which requires particular
fine tuning because of the typical small decay width of the scalar
mediator.

In conclusion, simplified models are quite appealing and extremely
predictive as WIMP constructions as only a few number of extra degrees
of freedom need to be invoked and because of the posibility to confront
these models with existing constraints from direct detection. However,
we have shown that upcomming constraints from future experiments will
completely exclude or push the viable values of some parameters of the
most simplified model in a corner of the parameter space, resulting in
the need to introduce extra degrees of freedom to evade the future
bounds from DD experiments. As new degrees of freedom have to be
introduced, the simplicity of such constructions might become
questionable and one would need more elaborated and motivated models to
explain the presence of Dark Matter in our universe in the WIMP
paradigm, while facing all the current experimental constraints and
theoretical consistency of these models.

### Chapter 6 @xmath portal through Chern-Simons interaction
\pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

#### 6.1 Introduction

As discussed in Chapter 5 , in the simplest WIMP realization, a Dark
Matter candidate is introduced, typically a scalar of fermion, and is
assumed to be singlet under the SM gauge group, featuring interactions
with the SM states mediated by the @xmath or the SM-Higgs boson. Similar
theoretical frameworks have also been addressed considering a vectorial
DM [ Hambye:2008bq , DiazCruz:2010dc , Mizukoshi:2010ky ,
Bhattacharya:2011tr , Farzan:2012hh , Baek:2012se , Carone:2013wla ,
Chen:2014cbt , Graham:2015rva , Chen:2015dea , DiFranzo:2015nli ,
Bambhaniya:2016cpr , Barman:2017yzr ] .

Unfortunately, such simple models, except for a very few exceptions, are
critically challenged by the existing and expected upcoming DM searches
from the direct, indirect and collider probes. However, to ensure
elucidate predictions, it is nevertheless necessary to investigate
theoretical competence of these simplified setups [ Kahlhoefer:2015bea ,
Englert:2016joy , Bell:2016uhg , Goncalves:2016iyg , Bell:2016ekl ] ,
i.e., for example, whether they have consistent unitarity behaviours,
reasonable Ultra-Violet (UV) completion and how they can be embedded
into unified theory frameworks.

In the simplified model framework, the easiest solution to account for
the DM stability is to assume an additional discrete symmetry. From the
Standard Model, we know that the typical structure of such global
symmetries is intimately connected to gauge symmetries as in some cases,
global symmetries can be remnants of spontaneously broken gauge
symmetries for instance. In such cases, the Dark Matter stability could
naturally emerge as a consequence of a more complex broken gauge
structure which would naturally embed supplementary degrees of freedom
that could mediate interactions between the dark sector and the SM
particle content. The case of spin-1 mediators deserves serious
attentions as phenomenological study of these frameworks reveals
intricate complementary aspects of DM searches with relevant collider
observations (see Ref. [ Arcadi:2017kky ] for a thorough discussion). An
intriguing origin of such spin-1 mediator(s) can arise as gauge boson(s)
of some beyond the SM (BSM) gauge group(s), Abelian or non-Abelian, that
simultaneously assigns non-zero gauge charge(s) also for the DM
candidate. A spin-1 mediator, maintaining gauge invariance and
renormalizability, can couple to the SM Electro-Weak (EW) gauge boson,
and thus, subsequently to other SM particles, in a few different ways, ¹
¹ 1 A BSM spin-1 mediator can couple to the SM EW gauge bosons also via
the well-known spontaneous symmetry breaking and Higgs mechanism,
provided that the SM-Higgs doublet has non-zero charges under the BSM
gauge groups. Spontaneous symmetry breaking in the BSM sector is
triggered with new SM singlet scalar which may or may not mix with the
SM-Higgs. We do not consider this possibility in our analysis. e.g., via
a kinetic mixing ² ² 2 A kinetic mixing, from the principle of gauge
invariance, is allowed only between the vector bosons of Abelian groups.
[ Holdom:1985ag , delAguila:1988jz , delAguila:1995rb , Foot:1991kb ] or
using a Chern-Simons (CS) interaction [ Dudas:2009uq , Mambrini:2009ad ,
Dudas:2012pb , Dudas:2013sia ] . The former can either appear naturally
in Lagrangian preserving the gauge invariance and renormalizability of
the SM [ Holdom:1985ag , delAguila:1995rb , Foot:1991kb ] or can be
generated after integrating out the heavy fermionic degrees of freedom [
Holdom:1985ag , delAguila:1988jz ] charged under both the SM and BSM
gauge groups. The latter can also arise in an analogous way after
integrating out such heavy degrees of freedom, as extensively studied in
Ref. [ Anastasopoulos:2006cz ] . The presence of these new fermionic
degrees of freedom, if chiral under some representations, introduces new
challenges to construct an anomaly free model framework ³ ³ 3 One can
always consider these new fermions to transform vector-like with respect
to the SM gauge groups such that no new chiral anomalies appear in the
SM. . This goal is customarily achieved by arranging anomaly
cancellation in the chiral sectors of the theory, by assigning specific
couplings/charges for the involved particle species, e.g., by
considering distinct couplings between the SM chiral fermions, and
possibly also the DM, with the BSM spin-1 mediator as discussed in Ref.
[ Arcadi:2017atc ] in the context of unified theories. Some classes of
anomalies, like the triangle ones involving Abelian, non-Abelian or a
mixture of the two gauge groups can, alternatively be cured through the
Green-Schwarz mechanism [ Green:1984sg , Green:1984ed ] .

In this chapter, we consider specific frameworks that are inspired by
the Green-Schwarz mechanism (see also Refs. [ Dudas:2009uq ,
Dudas:2012pb ] ), i.e., the connection between the DM and the @xmath is
mediated by a CS interaction. The vectorial DM can be identified as the
cosmologically stable gauge boson of a new BSM symmetry group while the
@xmath can arise from another BSM Abelian or non-Abelian gauge groups.
Confining within the framework of Abelian theory, we will explore two
possibilities of how a @xmath can coordinate with the SM: (1) gauge
invariant renormalizable kinetic mixing between the field strength of
@xmath with @xmath , the SM hypercharge field strength and, (2) a second
CS interaction involving @xmath and the SM hypercharge vector @xmath .
For both these scenarios we extensively investigate the impact of
measured relic density [ Ade:2015xua ] as well as the existing and
anticipated sensitivity reaches from Direct Detection (DD) and Indirect
Detection (ID) experiments on the associated model parameter spaces. We
also explore relevant theoretical constraints like EW Precision Tests
(EWPTs), UV completion etc. for these setups. Finally, for completeness,
we also discuss the possible pertinent collider aspects of these models
such as invisible @xmath -decay width, mono- X , dijets or dilepton
searches.

#### 6.2 Chern-Simons couplings

In this section we briefly review some relevant aspects of anomalies in
gauge theories and the role of Chern-Simons terms in anomaly
cancellation mechanisms. Sec. 6.5 and B.1 are devoted to the
construction of a specific framework giving rise to the Chern-Simons
couplings considered in this chapter.

##### 6.2.1 Anomalies in gauge theories

Anomalies are non-conservation of a symmetry of the classical action
that can arise from quantum corrections in theories comprising chiral
fermionic content. As gauge invariance is an essential ingredient of the
Standard Model by ensuring its renormalizability and unitarity, the
presence of anomalies could have severe consequences and jeopardize the
gauge invariance, rendering the theory completely inconsistent. In order
to understand how anomalies can arise in gauge theories, consider the
following QED Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This Lagrangian is invariant under a global vector @xmath and
non-invariant under a global axial @xmath transformations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can associate a conserved Noether current @xmath to the vector
symmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Axial symmetry is not a symmetry of the QED Lagrangian but is restored
in the limit where the mass is sent to @xmath as only a mass term
involves two different chiralities. The corresponding current @xmath can
be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

However as discussed further on, even in the limit where @xmath ,
divergences of the axial and vector current can be generated from loop
diagrams involving three external gauge bosons and a triangular loop of
fermions. For instance consider the 3-point correlation function, as
depicted in Fig. 6.1 , involving a loop of fermions in presence of
background fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The amplitude can be written as a sum of two terms corresponding to the
diagrams represented in Fig. 6.1 as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the limit of vanishing external momenta and mass the amplitude reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The high energy behavior of the integrand shows that each diagram
present a divergence linear in the energy cutoff @xmath . However, the
value of linearly divergent integrals depends explicitely on the shift
of the momentum to be integrated over. For instance, shifting the
momentum @xmath of a linearly divergent integral by a vector @xmath
would result in a different value for the integral of a factor @xmath
which can be schematized as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the integrand function. Shifting the integrand would
change the value of the linearly divergent integral independently of
fermion masses. Therefore we can compute the amplitude in Eq. ( 6.7 ) by
setting @xmath and by shifting the momentum @xmath in the first diagram
and shifting @xmath in the second diagram, by requiring Bose symmetry.
The divergences of the currents are thus given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result, there is no choice of the parameters @xmath and @xmath that
allows for a simultaneous conservation of the axial and vector currents.
In order to preserve the gauge invariance, and since the axial symmetry
is already broken by fermion masses, we choose @xmath , in which case:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

showing explicitely the non-invariance under an axial transformation
which is the prize to pay to restore the gauge symmetry of QED at least
to the one loop level. Another way to understand the non-conservation of
the axial symmetry is to look at the effect of a chiral transformation
on the path integral measure in QED

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes after the transformation @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which gives after integrating by parts, dropping the surface terms and
performing an expansion in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula matches the expression found in Eq. ( 6.10 ) and it can be
shown that higher orders in perturbation theory does not contribute to
the axial or vector anomalies implying an exact determination at the one
loop level. This unique effect is due to the very specific topology of
triangle diagrams involving fermions in four dimensions. Therefore,
controlling divergences of the currents at the one loop level suffices
to ensure the validity of the corresponding symmetries at all orders in
perturbation theory.

##### 6.2.2 Anomaly cancellation and Chern-Simons couplings

In QED it is always possible to choose a shift vector to ensure the
conservation of the vector current. However in chiral theories, the
left- and right-handed fermionic components do not interact identically
with gauge fields, therefore the previous statement is not always
verified. For instance, in the Standard Model, fermions charged under
the electroweak gauge group @xmath possesses chiral couplings, thus one
could expect anomalies arising from diagrams with @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 Notation
corresponding to diagrams with two @xmath and one @xmath gauge fields as
external legs. gauge fields as external legs. One can generalize
anomalies to non-abelian gauge theories with the following currents:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the group generators. In this case, the divergence of
the current is generated by triangle diagrams, as depicted in Fig 6.1 ,
connected to non-abelian gauge fields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the representation of the chiral fermion running in
the loop and the sum as to be performed over all possible left- and
right-handed states. It can be shown that all the possible anomalous
terms @xmath in the Standard Model cancel out. For instance the lepton
contribution @xmath in the @xmath anomalous term is cancelled by the
quark contribution @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the hypercharges of leptons and quarks. These
fine-tuned cancellations might seems mysterious and actually set strong
constraints on theories involving more complex gauge structures. Another
possibility to ensure gauge invariance if these cancellations does not
occur naturally in a theory, is to rely on the Green-Schwarz mechanism [
Green:1984sg ] . Consider a theory respecting several abelian gauge
symmetries indexed by @xmath with corresponding gauge fields @xmath .
Assuming that these symmetries are realized a la Stueckelberg with
axions named @xmath . Below the symmetry breaking scales of the @xmath
gauge groups considered, if the charge assignment of the fermions does
not allow the anomalous term in Eq. ( 6.15 ) to vanish, the set fermions
is said to be anomalous ⁵ ⁵ 5 Defined as a set of fermions for which the
value of @xmath computed using Eq. ( 6.15 ) and as a result the gauge
variation of the effective Lagrangian generated by triangle diagrams
involving those fermions would not vanish

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, in this setup, one would expect effective couplings between
axions and gauge fields in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the breaking scale of @xmath . As the gauge variation of
the axion @xmath under a @xmath transformation @xmath is @xmath , where
@xmath is the mass of @xmath , the gauge variation of @xmath does not
vanish. In order to restore the gauge symmetry and ensure the validity
of the theory, one can consider additional so-called Generalized
Chern-Simons (GCS) [ Anastasopoulos:2006cz ] terms ⁶ ⁶ 6 abusively
called Chern-Simons in the following for simplicity. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

These local terms are not gauge-invariant but the idea behind the
Green-Schwarz mechanism is that the total gauge variation of the
triangle, axion and GCS contributions cancels out:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

rendering the low-energy theory anomaly free and consistent. GCS terms
can arise from string constructions or can be generated in quantum field
theory, as a low energy remnant term generated by a set of heavy
anomalous fermions. In the former case, one interesting point regarding
GCS terms is that their effective couplings are expected to depend on
the heavy fermion masses. However, gauge variations of the GCS terms do
not depend on any energy scale allowing to cancel anomalies of light
fermions in spite of several orders of magnitude of difference between
the heavy and light fermion mass scales. More details regarding GCS
terms can be found in [ Anastasopoulos:2006cz ] and in Sec. 6.5 and B .

#### 6.3 Scenario-I: @xmath-@xmath interaction via Kinetic mixing

In this section we study the aforesaid type-I scenario when the ”dark
sector”, comprised of a vectorial DM @xmath and a spin-1 vector boson
@xmath , is ”secluded” from the visible sector, i.e., there exists no
direct coupling between this dark sector and the SM fermions ⁷ ⁷ 7 The
other possibility, i.e., the dark sector has direct couplings with the
SM fermions is reviewed recently in Ref. [ Arcadi:2017kky ] . . These
@xmath and @xmath , for example, can appear as the gauge bosons of some
BSM @xmath and @xmath groups and we consider a CS interaction to connect
them together. A bridge between the dark sector and the SM now appears
via a kinetic mixing of @xmath and @xmath , the field strengths
associated with BSM @xmath and the SM @xmath gauge group, respectively.
A similar kinetic mixing between @xmath and @xmath , being
renormalizable and allowed by the SM gauge invariance, should also be
included in a general Lagrangian. However, we do not consider this
possibility for the stability of the DM and postpone further discussion
in this direction till Sec. 6.5 . The relevant phenomenology of the said
model can be described by the following low-energy effective Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

here @xmath is the kinetic mixing parameter and @xmath represents the
effective coupling of CS operator. @xmath gives the field strength of
@xmath group and @xmath represent mass terms of the mediator and the DM.
Thus, one gets a set of four free inputs, namely, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath whose ranges will be tested subsequently imposing a series of
theoretical and experimental constraints. The presence of kinetic mixing
in eq. ( 6.3 ) implies non-canonical kinetic term for @xmath and also
for @xmath . In order to generate diagonal kinetic terms in the physical
or mass basis one should invoke three different rotations [ Babu:1997st
, Chun:2010ve , Mambrini:2010dq , Mambrini:2011dw ] . The first
rotation, involving then angle @xmath , takes @xmath to a basis (say
@xmath ) with diagonal kinetic terms. The second rotation, after EW
symmetry breaking (EWSB), via angle @xmath , takes this @xmath together
with @xmath to the intermediate @xmath basis. Finally, the third
rotation through another angle @xmath , leaving the massless photon
aside, takes @xmath to the @xmath basis where @xmath are associated with
the physical @xmath and @xmath boson. In summary, the initial @xmath
basis can be related to the physical @xmath basis in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath . The quantities @xmath do not represent the measured values
of Weinberg angle and @xmath -boson mass [ Olive:2016xmw ] but are
related to them as will be explained later. The masses of @xmath and
@xmath are written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives @xmath in the experimentally favoured limit @xmath , along
with @xmath . Notice that the transformation used in Eq. ( 6.22 ) is
valid only if one of these two conditions is met:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One should note that the transformation of Eq. ( 6.22 ) does not change
the photon coupling [ Babu:1997st ] , implying the following identity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are associated with the measured value of Weinberg angle
@xmath [ Olive:2016xmw ] . @xmath is the fine structure constant at the
energy scale @xmath and @xmath represents the Fermi constant [
Olive:2016xmw ] . One should also consider the invariance of @xmath
-boson mass under the transformation of Eq. ( 6.22 ), i.e., @xmath which
allows us to express the @xmath parameter [ Olive:2016xmw ] as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the experimental measured value given by @xmath [ Olive:2016xmw ] .
Further, from the EWPT one can consider a simple and conservative limit
on @xmath as [ Kumar:2006gm , Chun:2010ve ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now apparent that one can use Eq. ( 6.26 ), Eq. ( 6.27 ) and Eq. (
6.28 ) to discard experimentally disfavoured values of the kinetic
mixing parameter @xmath . Further constraints on @xmath can emerge from
various other experimental observations. The mixing among @xmath and
@xmath (see Eq. ( 6.22 )), couples the SM fermions and the DM with the
@xmath boson. The latter coupling implies an enhancement of the
invisible @xmath decay width for @xmath . Hence, the parameter @xmath ,
along with @xmath , will receive constraints from a plethora of
different collider searches like dileptons @xmath @xmath , @xmath [
Aaboud:2016cth , Khachatryan:2016zqb , ATLAS:2017wce ] , dijets @xmath [
Khachatryan:2015dcf , ATLAS:2015nsi , Sirunyan:2016iap , Aaboud:2017yvp
] , mono- X @xmath with @xmath [ Sirunyan:2017hci ] , @xmath [
Aaboud:2016qgg ] , @xmath [ Aaboud:2016qgg , CMS:2016hmx ] , @xmath [
Aaboud:2016uro , CMS:2016fnh , Aaboud:2017dor ] , SM-Higgs [
ATLAS:2017uwx , ATLAS:2017pqx , Sirunyan:2017hnk ] , etc., invisible
@xmath decay width [ Olive:2016xmw ] and a few others. The dijets and
mono- X searches also restrict the parameters @xmath . Finally, the DM
phenomenology, i.e., the correct relic density, DD and ID results will
also put limits on the parameters @xmath and @xmath . We note in passing
that for numerical analyses we have traded the parameter @xmath with the
physical mass @xmath using Eq. ( 6.24 ). In the mass basis, the
Lagrangian relevant for our subsequent analysis is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

here @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling of @xmath , @xmath is the @xmath
component of the weak isospin, @xmath are hypercharge of the left- and
right- chiral fermions, @xmath is the @xmath gauge coupling.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

here @xmath is the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the SM-Higgs
doublet and a factor ‘ @xmath ’ appears in @xmath vertices due to the
presence of identical particles. For the @xmath term, considering the
following momentum assignments @xmath one can use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

for subsequent relevant analytical formulae like DM pair annihilation
cross-section etc. Once again the factor ‘ @xmath ’ appears due to
identical particles. Lastly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these analytical expressions now we will discuss the DM
phenomenology of this framework in the next subsection.

##### 6.3.1 Dark Matter Phenomenology

In this subsection we discuss the DM phenomenology in the light of
various constraints coming from the requirement of correct relic density
and consistency with the existing and/or upcoming DD and ID results. The
DM is produced in the early Universe according to the WIMP paradigm. We
will subsequently discuss how these observations can affect the
accessibility of the chosen set-up at the present or in the near future
DM detection experiments, assuming projected search sensitivities.
Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, we will also qualitatively
discuss the complementary limits arising from the EWPT, collider
searches, etc. We start our discussion in the context of accommodating
correct relic density and successively will address the restrictions
coming from direct and indirect DM searches.

###### Relic density

In the chosen framework, the DM pair can annihilate into the SM fermions
@xmath and @xmath , as well as in @xmath and @xmath final states,
through s-channel exchange of the @xmath boson, and into @xmath and
@xmath final states, through t-channel exchange of a DM state.
Approximate analytical expressions of the corresponding annihilation
cross-sections are obtained through the expansion @xmath with @xmath [
Gondolo:1990dk , Jungman:1995df ] , @xmath being the temperature. We
remind, however, that the aforesaid approximation is not reliable over
the entire parameter space [ Griest1991c ] , e.g., the pole regions
@xmath . Hence, all results presented in this chapter are obtained
through full numerical computations using the package micrOMEGAs [
Belanger:2006is , Belanger:2008sj , Belanger:2013oya ] , after
implementing the model in FeynRules [ Christensen:2008py ,
Alloul:2013bka ] . The DM annihilation cross-sections in the possible
final states are given as:

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (6.35)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    where we have written not only the leading @xmath (p-wave) term but
    also the second order @xmath (d-wave) one which appears to be the
    dominant one since the first one is suppressed by the square of SM
    fermion mass @xmath . The parameter @xmath denotes colour factor
    with a value of @xmath for quarks (leptons).

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

As evident from the above expressions that annihilation channels
originated by s-channel exchange of the @xmath feature a suppressed
annihilation cross-section, at least p-wave or even d-wave in the cases
of @xmath and @xmath final states (see Eq. ( 6.36 ) and Eq. ( 6.3.1 )).
For the latter a p-wave contribution is also present but it is helicity
suppressed. The t-channel induced annihilations feature, instead, a
s-wave cross-section. The cross-section into @xmath pairs (see Eq. (
6.39 )) is anyway suppressed by an higher power of the kinetic mixing
parameter @xmath , with respect to the other annihilation channels.

The DM pair annihilation cross-section, as depicted in Fig. 6.2 ,
typically lies much below the thermally favoured value, i.e., @xmath ,
ad exception of the pole regions @xmath , or DM masses above several
hundreds of GeV so that at least annihilations into @xmath final state
appears kinematically accessible.

###### Indirect Detection

At the moment, the strongest limits come from searches of the gamma-rays
produced in the DM annihilations. For DM masses below a few hundred
GeVs, these limits are set by the FERMI satellite [ Ackermann:2015zua ]
and exclude the thermally favoured values of @xmath for @xmath GeV. For
higher values of @xmath the best sensitivity is achieved by HESS [
Abramowski:2011hc ] which has put a limit @xmath for @xmath ,
considering a Einasto density profile for the DM.

As shown earlier while discussing the relic density that most of the DM
annihilation processes have a p-wave (or even d-wave) annihilation
cross-section, i.e., they are velocity dependent. As a consequence the
DM annihilation at present times is suppressed by several orders of
magnitude with respect to its value at the thermal freeze-out and thus,
limits from DM ID are actually not effective. ID can probe the WIMP
paradigm for the DM relic density only when the latter is mostly
determined by processes with an s-wave (i.e., velocity independent)
annihilation cross-section. In our setup this requirement is fulfilled
by annihilation into @xmath and @xmath states (see Eq. ( 6.41 ) and
Eq. ( 6.40 )). The other s-wave dominated annihilation into @xmath final
state (see Eq. ( 6.39 )), as already addressed, is insignificant as it
is suppressed by the fourth power of kinetic mixing parameter @xmath .

We have thus compared the DM annihilation cross-section into @xmath and
@xmath final states with the limits derived from combined analysis of
the MAGIC and FERMI-LAT observations (abbreviated as FERMI-MAGIC) of the
dwarf spheroidal galaxies (dSphs) [ Ahnen:2016qkx ] . We also consider
limits from @xmath years of observations towards the inner galactic halo
by HESS [ Abdallah:2016ygi ] . In the absence of a dedicated analysis
for the considered final states we have applied the limit for gamma-rays
originating from @xmath pairs. This choice is reasonable since the
@xmath decays efficiently into hadrons as the SM gauge bosons. Any mild
change in the limits as a result of this assumption is beyond the scope
of our current work.

Results concerning changes of the DM pair annihilation cross-section at
thermal freeze-out with the DM mass @xmath are reported in Fig. 6.2 for
specific assignations of the other relevant inputs. As evident from this
figure that the impact of ID limits from FERMI-MAGIC (magenta coloured
region) and HESS (blue coloured region) appears to be rather limited.
This can be understood by looking at this simple analytical estimate for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that a value of the cross-section equal or bigger than the
thermal expectation i.e., @xmath , can be achieved only for masses of
the @xmath not exceeding a few hundreds of GeV and/or @xmath . Such
value of @xmath , however, is somewhat extreme since this coupling is
expected to have a radiative origin as will be discussed later. The
impact of possible limits from ID will be anyway increased in the near
future by Cherenkov Telescope Array a.k.a. CTA [ Doro:2012xx ,
Pierre:2014tra , Wood:2013taa , Silverwood:2014yza , Lefranc:2015pza ,
Lefranc:2016dgx ] which is reported (purple coloured region) in Fig. 6.2
, assuming a projected limits from @xmath h of observation towards the
galactic center.

###### Direct detection

In the case of Spin Independent (SI) interactions of the DM with nuclei,
a cross-section @xmath , for DM mass of @xmath GeV, has been excluded by
the LUX [ Akerib:2016vxi ] , PandaX [ Tan:2016zwf ] and Xenon1T [
Angle:2007uj ] experiments. In the chosen setup (see Eq. ( 6.3 )),
scattering of the DM with nucleons is originated, at the microscopic
level, by an interaction between the DM and the SM quarks mediated via
t-channel exchange of the @xmath boson. An interaction of this kind, in
the non-relativistic limit, is described by the following effective
operator [ Belanger:2008sj ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , which corresponds to a SD interaction with
squared amplitude:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath denoting the mass of a nucleon @xmath while @xmath
represents the contribution of the quark @xmath to the spin of the
nucleon @xmath . The SD scattering cross-section can be
straightforwardly derived, taking into account the multiple isotopes
present in the detector material as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the reduced mass for the DM-proton system and @xmath .
Here @xmath represents the contribution of protons and neutrons to the
spin of a nucleus with atomic number @xmath while @xmath represents the
relative abundance of a given isotope of the element constituting the
target material. Notice that the result is almost independent of the DM
mass since the only dependence through @xmath will vanish for @xmath
giving @xmath . A simple estimate of @xmath can be performed assuming
@xmath as:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.46)
  -- -- -- --------

which gives values of @xmath well below the current maximal sensitivity
( @xmath ), and remains also beyond the reach of next generation
detectors for the chosen set of parameter values, consistent with other
existing constraints.

##### 6.3.2 Collider phenomenology

Phenomenological models, where the DM candidate interacts with the SM
fields through a spin-1 mediator typically posses a rich collider
phenomenology. In the case when on-shell production of a @xmath is
kinematically accessible in proton-proton collision, detectable signals
can appear from the decays of @xmath into SM fermions, showing a new
resonance in the invariant mass distribution of dijets [
Khachatryan:2015dcf , ATLAS:2015nsi , Sirunyan:2016iap , Aaboud:2017yvp
] or dileptons [ Aaboud:2016cth , Khachatryan:2016zqb , ATLAS:2017wce ]
as well as from possible decay of a @xmath into DM pairs which can be
probed through mono- X searches ( X = hadronic jets, photon, weak gauge
bosons, SM-Higgs) [ Sirunyan:2017hci , Aaboud:2016qgg , Aaboud:2016qgg ,
CMS:2016hmx , Aaboud:2016uro , CMS:2016fnh , Aaboud:2017dor ,
ATLAS:2017uwx , ATLAS:2017pqx , Sirunyan:2017hnk ] accompanied by
moderate/large missing transverse energy/momentum. Interestingly, the
relative relevance of these two kinds of searches, i.e., resonances and
mono- X events, is mainly set by the invisible decay branching fraction
(Br) of the @xmath which, in turn, is constrained by the DM observables
that primarily appears from the requirement of correct relic density for
the chosen framework.

The impact of experimental limits from resonance searches is depicted in
Fig. 6.3 where, for simplicity, we consider @xmath to forbid @xmath DM
pairs process. For these analyses we consider all possible quark
flavours including top for @xmath regime while @xmath and @xmath only.
Here we have compared the results of numerical simulations for the
chosen setup with the experimental ones including @xmath variations of
the production cross-sections as observed in Refs. [ Khachatryan:2015dcf
] and [ ATLAS:2017wce ] , respectively. Since the @xmath -SM fermions
mixing (see Eq. ( 6.3 )) appears from an effective @xmath - @xmath
mixing, both @xmath and Br( @xmath ) are sensitive to the parameter
@xmath . The resultant @xmath dependence thus, hints diminishing @xmath
values for decreasing @xmath values, as also reflected in Fig. 6.3 . It
is evident from Fig. 6.3 that once values of the kinetic mixing
parameter @xmath smaller than @xmath are considered to comply with the
theoretical and EWPT (see Eq. ( 6.28 )) constraints, only the limits
from dileptons resonance searches remain effective. For @xmath , values
of @xmath below 2 TeV are ruled out while for @xmath , a much weaker
lower bound of approximately 300 GeV is obtained on @xmath . For further
lower values of @xmath , very small @xmath dependence ⁸ ⁸ 8 Holds true
for a resonant production with no/suppressed invisible decay of @xmath .
makes @xmath unconstrained from the aforesaid searches.

In the presence of a non-zero and sizable invisible branching fraction
for @xmath , i.e., Br( @xmath DM pairs), the production cross-sections
of dijets/dileptons get suppressed by the enhanced decay width of @xmath
. In such a scenario, the cross-section corresponding to mono- X signals
might become sizable, possibly providing complementary constraints. We
preserve the discussion of such complementary signals for the next
subsection.

##### 6.3.3 Results

In this subsection we report the impact of various constraints, as
mentioned in the previous subsections, on the parameter space of the
model. As already pointed out the effect of DD and ID constraints on our
model framework is substantially negligible. Concerning the DM
phenomenology, the only relevant constraint comes from the requirement
of the correct relic density. We have then conducted a more extensive
analysis, with respect to the one presented in Fig. 6.2 by performing a
scan over the four free input parameters in the following ranges:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and retaining the model points featuring the correct DM relic density ⁹
⁹ 9 We consider points corresponding to @xmath variation. and
respecting, at the same time, constraints from the EWPT, SM @xmath
-parameter measurement as well as reproducing experimentally viable mass
and width for the @xmath -boson. The ensemble of points respecting these
aforementioned constraints has been reported in Fig. 6.4 , in the @xmath
- @xmath bi-dimensional plane with a colour code showing variations in
@xmath values.

As evident from Fig. 6.4 , in agreement with the general discussion of
Sec. 6.3.1 , that the correct relic density can be achieved either in
the ”pole” region @xmath or for @xmath , when the process @xmath is
kinematically allowed.

We have successively examined the impact of collider constraints on our
construction in Fig. 6.5 . For a better and elucidate illustration of
our findings, we have considered three fixed assignations of @xmath ,
namely @xmath and @xmath and the same for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
keeping @xmath and @xmath as the two free varying input parameters. The
relevant results are reported in the three panels of Fig. 6.5
corresponding to the three different values of @xmath , namely @xmath
(top-left), @xmath (top-right) and @xmath (bottom) where isocontours of
the correct DM relic density are shown for the three assignations of
@xmath parameter using three different representations (purple coloured
dot-dashed line for @xmath , solid red coloured line for @xmath and
magenta coloured dashed line for @xmath ). These isocontours have been
compared with the limits from dilepton resonances and mono-jet searches.
The former is evaluated in a similar fashion as of Fig. 6.3 by computing
the associated cross-section, as a function of the input parameters
@xmath and @xmath using the package MadGraph5 @xmath aMC @xmath NLO [
Alwall:2014hca ] and compared with the relevant experimental
observations. Contrary to what we did earlier, now we have also
accounted for the possibility of a sizable invisible branching fraction
of @xmath by suitably rescaling the experimental limit according to the
procedure illustrated in Ref. [ Arcadi:2013qia ] .

As evidenced from the top-left panel of Fig. 6.5 that the previously
quoted limit of approximately 2 TeV (see Fig. 6.3 , right panel plot)
for @xmath is actually effective only when @xmath . When decay of a
@xmath into DM pairs is kinematically accessible, i.e., @xmath , and
@xmath , the lower limit on @xmath can be reduced even to a few hundreds
of GeV. The mono-jet limits have been derived by evaluating the
production cross-section times the detector efficiency and acceptance in
the selection of the final state by generating and analyzing events,
corresponding to the process @xmath , through the combination of
MadGraph5 @xmath aMC @xmath NLO [ Alwall:2014hca ] (matrix element
calculation) PYTHIA 8 [ Sjostrand:2014zea ] (event generation and
hadronization) and DELPHES 3 (fast detector simulations) [
deFavereau:2013fsa ] . The selection acceptance for the generated events
has been determined by imposing a minimal value of 500 GeV for the
missing transverse energy. The mono-jet limits have been determined by
imposing an upper bound of @xmath fb on the product of production
cross-section, signal acceptance and the detection efficiency [
Sirunyan:2016iap ] Our procedure has been validated by reproducing the
excluded region for the benchmark model adopted in Ref. [
Sirunyan:2016iap ] .

It is apparent from Fig. 6.5 that both kinds of the collider limits,
i.e., dileptons and mono-jet, are essentially effective for large and
moderate values of @xmath , i.e., significant for @xmath (top-left
panel) and moderate for @xmath (top-right panel). These behaviours, as
already stated, are expected since the parameter @xmath determines the
production vertex of a @xmath as well as its decay rate into the SM
fermions. Hence, collider production cross-section suppresses very fast
as the kinetic mixing parameter decreases. On the contrary, the
requirement of the correct relic density is more moderately affected by
the decrease in the value of the kinetic mixing parameter. This happens
because the correct relic density is achieved mostly through the
annihilation into @xmath final states, whose rate does not depend on
@xmath , or in the “pole” region, where variations of the couplings can
be compensated by slight changes of @xmath .

Among the different collider constraints the most effective ones are the
ones which emerge from searches of dilepton resonances, even if the
invisible decay channel for a @xmath is taken into account. Using the
invariant mass distribution of the heavy dilepton resonance, peaked at
the @xmath mass, one can discriminate the signal from the background
nicely and for this reason the dilepton channel is considered to be a
very good probe for these kinds of models.

As evidenced from the two top-row plots of Fig. 6.5 that these searches
exclude most of the viable thermal DM region, leaving just a small
portion of the parameter space around the @xmath pole region. On the
contrary, the impact of the mono-jet constraints is much more moderate
and exists only for the light DM masses. The collider constraints, as
already discussed, disappear very fast as the value of the kinetic
mixing parameter @xmath decreases. For @xmath , (top-right panel of Fig.
6.5 ), compared to the @xmath scenario, a much smaller portion of the
parameter space remains excluded from the dileptons and mono-jet
constraints. All the collider constraints disappear for @xmath (bottom
panel of Fig. 6.5 ) where the only constraint on the model parameter
space comes from the requirement of the correct DM relic density.

#### 6.4 Scenario-II: @xmath-@xmath interaction via a second
Chern-Simons term

In this section, just like Sec. 6.3 , we consider a CS term to connect a
vectorial DM with a @xmath . However, unlike Sec. 6.3 the coupling
between the @xmath mediator and the neutral EW gauge bosons arises via a
second independent CS term. Being guided by our previous approach, we
will address the phenomenological implications of this setup as the
result of a numerical scan over the free inputs after a brief
illustration of the model followed by concise discussions on the
constraints of correct relic density and different DM searches.

##### 6.4.1 The Lagrangian

The Lagrangian describing the low-energy phenomenology of the
aforementioned setup can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath and @xmath coupling constants,
respectively. @xmath denotes the field strength of the SM hypercharge
gauge field. The origin of the coupling @xmath is the same as of section
6.3 which will be discussed later in appendix B.1 . The second CS
coupling @xmath is non-invariant under the SM gauge group
transformation. Nevertheless, as pointed out in Ref. [ Dudas:2012pb ] ,
it could be generated by considering the following gauge invariant
effective operator obtained after integrating out some heavy degrees of
freedom:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the covariant derivative of Stueckelberg axion
@xmath while @xmath denotes the usual covariant derivative of the
SM-Higgs doublet. @xmath are the charge and VEV of the associated
complex scalar field and @xmath is the gauge boson of the concerned
@xmath group with @xmath as the gauge coupling. After the EWSB and
choosing unitary gauge for the @xmath group (such that @xmath ,
connected to the phase of an associated heavy Higgs field, gets “eaten”
by the longitudinal component of @xmath ), we recover the operator
considered in Eq. ( 6.48 ).

The structure of Eq. ( 6.48 ) contains two CS couplings, namely @xmath
and @xmath . The former is the same as of Eq. ( 6.3 ) whose origin is
explained in the appendix B.1 while the latter appears from Eq. ( 6.49
). Given that the relevant charges are @xmath (see Eq. ( B.21 ), the
parameter @xmath from the associated pre-factor goes as @xmath . On the
other hand, from Eq. ( 6.49 ) the pre-factor for @xmath varies as @xmath
with @xmath as the cut-off scale of the theory, related to the mass of
the associated heavy BSM fermions. Now assuming other relevant
parameters as @xmath , even when @xmath , one gets @xmath . Hence, for
@xmath GeV) and @xmath TeV) (this conservative limit is consistent with
the hitherto undetected evidence of BSM physics at the 13 TeV LHC
operation), @xmath or @xmath . It is thus apparent that in general a
hierarchy between the values of two CS couplings is rather natural as
they have two different theory origins. In our analysis we, however,
also consider the possibility of @xmath .

##### 6.4.2 Relic density

In the case of double CS terms, unlike the kinetic mixing scenario, the
number of accessible DM pair annihilation channels is limited just to
three options, i.e., @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The first two are
induced by s-channel exchange of the @xmath while the third one is
induced by t/u channel exchange of a DM state. Simple analytical
approximations of the corresponding DM pair annihilation cross-sections
can be derived, as usual, through the customary velocity expansion:

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The behavior of the DM pair annihilation cross-section, as function of
its mass, is reported in Fig. 6.6 . Similar to the scenario discussed in
Sec. 6.3 , the DM pair annihilation cross-sections are typically
velocity suppressed except the s-wave annihilation channel into @xmath
final states.

As evidenced from Fig. 6.6 that value of the thermally averaged DM pair
annihilation cross-section can match the experimentally favoured value
only at @xmath , (i.e., pole region), and for @xmath , so that the DM
pair annihilation into @xmath pairs is allowed. Furthermore, to avoid
overproduction of the DM, @xmath values at least @xmath are needed.

##### 6.4.3 Indirect detection

Possible prospects of ID rely, as the kinetic mixing scenario, mostly on
the detection of gamma-rays produced after the DM pair annihilation into
@xmath pairs which subsequently decay into hadrons. Indeed the other two
annihilation channels, i.e., @xmath and @xmath have p-wave (velocity
dependent) annihilation cross-sections lying several orders of magnitude
below the present and the near future experimental sensitivities [
Hooper:2012sr , Gomez-Vargas:2013bea , Ando:2013ff ,
Gonzalez-Morales:2014eaa , Queiroz:2014yna , Li:2015kag ,
Mambrini:2015sia , Massari:2015xea , Queiroz:2016zwd , Profumo:2016idl ,
Adams:2016alz , Archambault:2017wyh , Khatun:2017adx , Campos:2017odj ]
. That said, similar to the previous case, we assumed that the
annihilations into @xmath pairs lead to a gamma-ray yield comparable to
the @xmath final state. Therefore, one can use CTA sensitivity to DM
annihilations into the @xmath channel to constrain the model as can be
seen in Fig. 6.6 . It is clear that only CTA is expected to mildly probe
this setup for DM masses above @xmath TeV.

##### 6.4.4 Direct Detection

In the case of double CS interactions, the @xmath has no
direct/tree-level couplings with the SM-quarks (or the gluons) and
hence, no operators relevant for DD is induced at the tree-level.

##### 6.4.5 Collider phenomenology

In the scenario with double CS interactions, the @xmath is directly
coupled only with the @xmath -boson and the photon. Tree level
production of the @xmath at the LHC, nevertheless, is possible through
vector boson fusion (VBF) in association with two hadronic jets. The
production cross-section, however, is more suppressed compared to the
case of a single CS interaction with kinetic mixing (see Sec. 6.3 )
which has direct couplings with quarks at the tree level ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A
richer collider phenomenology could appear in extensions of the proposed
scenario in which the @xmath has direct coupling with the @xmath -boson
and the gluons as studied in Refs. [ Antoniadis:2009ze , Bramante:2011qc
, Kumar:2012ba , Dudas:2013sia , Ducu:2015fda ] . .

We have reported in Fig. 6.7 the expected @xmath production
cross-section at the LHC for 13 TeV centre-of-mass energy as a function
of the mass of @xmath @xmath for three values of parameter @xmath and
@xmath , depicted with solid red coloured line, dashed blue coloured
line and dot-dashed orange coloured line, respectively. The
cross-section has been computed using the procedure illustrated in Ref.
[ Kumar:2007zza ] where discovery prospects of a @xmath , produced via
@xmath -fusion and decaying to four leptons final states, i.e., @xmath ,
have been investigated. These kinds of signals could be probed at the
LHC with 14 TeV centre-of-mass energy provided that @xmath . It is now
apparent from Fig. 6.7 that a future @xmath discovery would appear
feasible only for @xmath with @xmath TeV. For lower values of @xmath the
production cross-section, goes as @xmath , would appear very suppressed
to escape detection at the LHC unless (possibly) one considers higher
luminosity. One should, however, remain careful about @xmath value of
the parameter @xmath as this would indicate a scale for the associated
heavy fermion mass @xmath (see discussions after Eq. ( 6.49 )) well
within the reach of ongoing LHC operation where, unfortunately, no
evidence of BSM physics has been confirmed till date.

Notice that in the above discussion we have implicitly assumed that
invisible decay of the @xmath is kinematically forbidden, i.e., @xmath .
If this was not the case, the production cross-section of @xmath final
states would be suppressed further by the non-zero invisible branching
fraction of the @xmath . On the other hand, a sizable invisible
branching fraction for @xmath might offer meaningful detection prospects
for @xmath process. Investigation of such signature would require a
dedicated study which is beyond the scope of this work.

##### 6.4.6 Results

Similar to the first model considered in this work, we perform a scan in
the parameter space over @xmath and @xmath and represent our findings in
Fig. 6.8 showing the phenomenologically viable model points. One should
note that, contrary to the kinetic mixing scenario, the absence of
tree-level @xmath couplings with the SM fermions appears useful to
efface a set of constraints coming from the precision @xmath -physics
and collider observations. The scan is performed in the following
ranges:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected, the left panel of Fig. 6.8 , representing the viable model
points in the bi-dimensional plane @xmath , shows, similar to the
kinetic mixing scenario, a sensitive preference for configurations with
@xmath , for which the correct relic density can be more easily achieved
through the velocity unsuppressed annihilation rate into @xmath pairs.
This is further evidenced by the right panel of Fig. 6.8 , investigating
the bi-dimensional plane @xmath ) for a fixed @xmath . Indeed, most of
the points approximately trace isocontours with a shape independent of
@xmath , unless this coupling is much bigger than @xmath . This behavior
would be exactly expected in the case when the DM relic density is
mostly accounted by the annihilation into the @xmath final state since
the corresponding rate depends only on @xmath (see Eq. ( 6.52 )). One
must note that the demand of @xmath is theoretically challenging since
normally one would expect @xmath as already discussed in the context of
Eq. ( 6.49 ).

It is curious to note the apparent conflicts among the DM detection
prospects in DD, ID and collider experiments with @xmath searches at the
collider and theoretical consistency of the studied framework. For
example, from Fig. 6.7 it is evident that a @xmath discovery at the LHC
with 13 TeV centre-of-mass energy would require @xmath and @xmath TeV.
Such high value of @xmath , as already mentioned, is hard to accommodate
phenomenologically. Pushing @xmath towards its natural regime, i.e.,
@xmath , on the other hand, would predict a @xmath to retain some of the
viable points, notably for log @xmath , as shown in the left plot of
Fig. 6.8 to respect the DD, ID and relic density constraints. Now
keeping in mind the radiative origin of @xmath , as explained in the
appendix B.1 , such high values of @xmath would require either a
pathologically behaved strongly coupled theory or unnatural high values
for the associated charges. Lower and rather natural @xmath values,
e.g., @xmath , can ameliorate such theoretical shortcomings and one can
still get viable points consistent with the DM observables in the region
of log @xmath . The associated low @xmath values, however, failed to
produce detectable @xmath signals at the LHC as already shown in Fig.
6.7 . Similar contradictions also appear for the right plot of Fig. 6.8
which, keeping in mind the collider detection prospect of a @xmath ,
predicts @xmath for @xmath GeV. This range of the parameter @xmath once
again either requires moderate values of the involved charges or asks
for a strongly coupled model frameworks. In a nutshell, keeping in mind
the detection possibilities of the BSM physics, either in DM or in
collider searches, together with an elegant theoretical construction,
the scenario with two CS interactions is less appealing compared to a
scenario with one CS interaction and a kinetic mixing. Such simple
conclusion, however, is not obvious when a scenario with two CS
interactions involves non-Abelian gauge groups.

#### 6.5 Generation of a Chern-Simons coupling from a UV complete model

In this section we propose a UV complete model that can address the
origin of CS and kinetic mixing terms. The generation of a generalized
CS interaction term between the gauge boson of a BSM @xmath group and
the SM gauge bosons has already been proposed in Refs. [
Anastasopoulos:2006cz , Dudas:2009uq , Antoniadis:2009ze ] . The
effective CS coupling is originated from the triangle loops involving
BSM heavy fermions, charged under both the SM @xmath and a BSM @xmath
symmetry groups, after integrating out the heavy degrees of freedom. In
this work we consider a similar construction where a CS interaction term
is generated between the gauge bosons of two new BSM symmetry groups
labeled as @xmath (associated to the DM) and @xmath (associated with
@xmath ), respectively ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 For the convenience of reading note that
in scenario-I, @xmath denotes the gauge field of @xmath which, after
diagonalization of the flavour basis Lagrangian, is written as @xmath
while in scenario-II the kinetic and mass terms are already diagonalized
and hence, @xmath . .

Concerning the origin of kinetic mixing, in the most general scenario,
i.e., when the new BSM fermions are charged ¹² ¹² 12 One could expect
the BSM fermions to have an impact on the DM decoupling process from the
SM thermal bath, however, since the freeze out occurs only when the DM
particles are non-relativistic, the BSM fermions would have already
decoupled and their density would be exponentially suppressed due to
Boltzmann factor. under the BSM gauge groups @xmath as well as with
respect to @xmath of the SM, one can radiatively generate three possible
kinetic mixing terms like @xmath and @xmath with ¹³ ¹³ 13 Such terms,
being Lorentz invariant, renormalizable and invariant under the SM gauge
groups, can directly appear in Lagrangian. We, however, do not consider
such possibility and confine our discussion on scenarios where such
interactions are radiatively generated. appropriate field strengths of
the involved Abelian groups. The coefficients for these terms emerge as
a result of integrating out the aforesaid heavy BSM fermionic degrees of
freedom and also include associated gauge charges. One should remain
careful at this stage as a kinetic mixing like @xmath triggers a mixing
between the DM @xmath and @xmath which would subsequently allow the DM
to decay into the SM fermions and thereby, spoiling its stability. A
similar situation can also appear for @xmath , given that @xmath is
somehow, e.g., via a second kinetic mixing @xmath , decaying into the SM
particles. It is thus important to assign gauge charges for the BSM
fermions in an elegant way such that the stability of the DM remains
preserved.

We denote new BSM fermions as @xmath ( @xmath ), chiral with respect to
@xmath ( @xmath ) while vector like compared to @xmath ( @xmath ) as
well as to the SM [ Antoniadis:2009ze ] . This way no new chiral
anomalies are introduced in the SM while one can find suitable charge
assignments for these BSM fermions to efface new anomalies. Regarding
the mass generation of these new fermions the most plausible option is
represented via Yukawa interactions with two BSM complex scalar fields
@xmath . The relevant Lagrangian is written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents generic Yukawa couplings ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We, without
the loss of generality, consider identical Yukawa couplings for all the
BSM fermions for simplicity since the final results are independent of
them. . The complex scalar fields @xmath , @xmath can be written using
the following parametrization as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath denoting the corresponding VEVs and the Higgs
fields. Here @xmath are Stueckelberg axions [ Stueckelberg:1938zz ,
Kors:2004dx ] . Investigating the kinetic terms for these scalars with
suitable BSM covariant derivatives, one gets, for example, for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as the gauge coupling of the @xmath gauge group and @xmath
as the charge of @xmath with respect to this group. The DM mass thus, is
generated via the Stueckelberg mechanism [ Stueckelberg:1938zz ,
Kors:2004dx ] . The masses for the new BSM fermions, @xmath , are also
generated after the spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) in the @xmath
sector. In fact, after SSB one ends up with the following tree-level
realizations for various masses:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quartic coupling of the @xmath potential and the
notation @xmath is used to represent generic BSM fermion masses. A
similar construction holds for @xmath with @xmath and @xmath as the
appropriate replacements. We further consider the following hierarchy
among the various couplings: @xmath . Such choice implies @xmath for
@xmath with @xmath . Hence, at an energy scale @xmath , the new scalars
@xmath are nearly decoupled from the theory given that @xmath are
reasonably high. In this limit one can use the following approximations
@xmath and @xmath which help to recast Eq. ( 6.54 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The structure of Yukawa couplings of the new fermions, as well as the
requirement of anomaly cancellations, restrict the possible charge
assignments under the BSM @xmath groups. A set of assignations complying
with these two requirements is reported in Table 6.1 . As evident from
Table 6.1 that this kind of charge assignations allows natural
cancellations of the @xmath anomalies, independently for the @xmath and
@xmath sectors, irrespective of the values of @xmath charges ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
One could see from Table 6.1 that the sum of all left- and right-chiral
charges for @xmath and @xmath vanishes for @xmath while for @xmath it is
@xmath . If we also set this sum to be zero, as expected from the
requirement of gauge-gravity anomaly cancellation for an Abelian group,
we can recast Eq. ( 6.59 ) as @xmath . .

The cancellation of the mixed anomalies, e.g., @xmath , is instead
achieved in a non-trivial way. This, indeed, requires the following
relation between the charges:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, the charge assignments of Table 6.1 predicts a vanishing
kinetic mixing between @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath representing appropriate charges shown in the Table 6.1 .
This, as discussed already, is crucial since a mixing between @xmath and
@xmath , in the presence of a kinetic mixing between @xmath , can
trigger a subsequent mixing between @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath
can decay into the SM fermions and thereby, the stability of the DM gets
spoiled.

We show in detail later in appendix B.1 that when Eq. ( 6.59 ) is
satisfied, it appears feasible to construct an anomaly free theory where
the following effective operator emerges after integrating out heavy
fermionic degrees of freedom from the triangular loops:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are Stueckelberg axions of the @xmath groups and @xmath ,
and @xmath with @xmath as gauge bosons of the concerned @xmath groups,
respectively. Eq. ( 6.61 ) is invariant under the following gauge
transformations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath as the transformation parameters. The same
equation, after considering unitary gauge, leads to the following
operator as introduced earlier in Eq. ( 6.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can define an effective charge @xmath to get a simple relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly @xmath @xmath @xmath (see Eq. ( 6.47 )) or @xmath @xmath (see
Eq. ( 6.53 )) corresponds to a @xmath value of the effective charge
@xmath for one generation of the BSM fermions.

Note that the CS coupling @xmath has no explicit dependence on the BSM
fermion mass, i.e., it seems to remain finite as @xmath , the relevant
heavy fermion mass, @xmath and thereby, resembles a non-decoupling
effect. This is a consequence of the assumption @xmath , as considered
earlier, which makes @xmath independent of @xmath as long as @xmath such
that the adopted effective approach remains justified for an energy
scale @xmath below the mass of the “lightest” BSM fermion of the theory.
The parameter @xmath (see Eq. ( 6.49 )), on the contrary, vanishes as
the associated BSM fermion masses @xmath , as expected according to the
decoupling effect.

One should further note that as the effective charge @xmath includes the
gauge couplings in its definition, @xmath implies either @xmath or a
large multiplicity of the BSM fermions having gauge charges @xmath .
However, as mentioned previously, the aforementioned theoretical
construction relies on the assumption of @xmath which, for @xmath ,
hints towards a strongly coupled theory. In this regime one would
encounter several theoretical issues like the vacuum instability, etc.
which might spoil viability of the effective approach. However, from the
view point of a radiative origin, @xmath is unnatural.

The kinetic mixing parameter @xmath (see Eq. ( 6.3 )), as already stated
in the beginning of this section, can get generated at the loop level
from two sets of the BSM fermions (preferably vector-like to avoid new
anomalies in a trivial way) charged under the SM @xmath and BSM @xmath
groups and having masses @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The parameter
@xmath is then estimated as @xmath [ Holdom:1985ag ] with @xmath as the
relevant combination of gauge charges and gauge couplings of the
associated gauge groups. Assuming these gauge charges and couplings, as
well as log @xmath , to be @xmath , one would expect natural range of
@xmath as @xmath . This range, as evident from Eq. ( 6.64 ) and Eq. (
B.21 ), is almost the same as of @xmath , considering @xmath values of
the involved gauge charges. Both these natural ranges of CS coupling
@xmath and kinetic mixing parameter @xmath are connected with their
radiative origins.

#### 6.6 Conclusion

In this chapter, we discussed the theoretical framework related to CS
couplings and we scrutinized experimental viability and theoretical
consistency of the WIMP DM models comprised of an Abelian vectorial DM
@xmath and an Abelian @xmath portal, coupled through a CS interaction.
Regarding the DM phenomenologies we investigated the detection prospects
in the light of accommodating the correct relic density and sensitivity
reaches of the various existing as well as anticipated upcoming DD and
ID experiments. Concerning collider probes we examined the observational
aspects of these models from the view point of dijet, dilepton
resonances and mono- X searches using the 13 TeV LHC data. Further, we
also studied the viable ranges of the associated parameters focusing on
the possible theoretical and/or “well-measured” experimental
constraints, mainly for the kinetic mixing scenario, arising from the
EWPT, @xmath -parameter, @xmath -mass, total and invisible @xmath -decay
widths, etc. Finally, we also explored possible origins of a kinetic
mixing term and a CS interaction term, arising via a set of heavy BSM
fermions running in the triangle loops, from the standpoint of an UV
complete theory. A radiative origin for CS coupling @xmath , from the
perspective of an UV complete construction, predicts a natural range for
@xmath as @xmath whereas discovery/exclusion prospects, with the
existing and near future experimental setups, favour @xmath . Such
@xmath values, along with a @xmath of similar order, can accommodate the
correct relic density rather easily and can be probed/excluded from DD,
ID and collider (via mono- X ) searches. An @xmath value of @xmath ,
just like the kinetic mixing parameter @xmath , is hard to explain with
a radiative origin unless more families of the BSM fermions are
included. Any such non-minimal constructions, i.e., large number of BSM
fermions to increase @xmath and/or @xmath value(s) or a multi-component
DM to account for the correct relic density with “natural” @xmath values
would reduce the model predictivity.

Experimental attainments of the second case study with two CS couplings
are more contrived due to the absence of a tree-level mixing between the
@xmath and the SM fermions, unlike the first case study with one CS
coupling and a kinetic mixing. Missing tree-level couplings between
@xmath and the SM fermions conceal this framework from constraints like
the EWPT, @xmath -parameter, precision @xmath physics, etc. which offer
notable effects on the model parameter space for scenario-I. In this
framework, DD prospects are missing at the tree-level and ID
sensitivities remain orders of magnitude below the ongoing and upcoming
experimental reaches. Further, by construction, in general one expects
@xmath which indicates natural range of @xmath in the ballpark of @xmath
. Thus, this scenario remains practically hidden from the collider
searches, even considering the high-luminosity LHC or a @xmath TeV
proton-proton collider. The trick of pushing @xmath values upwards by
adding more BSM fermions is rather intricate compared to the kinetic
mixing scenario.

### Chapter 7 Flavourful @xmath portal for Dark Matter and @xmath
\pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

#### 7.1 Introduction

Recently, the phenomenological motivation for considering non-universal
@xmath models has increased due to mounting evidence for semi-leptonic
@xmath decays whose rates and differential distributions are
inconsistent with those predicted by the Standard Model [
Descotes-Genon:2013wba , Altmannshofer:2013foa , Ghosh:2014awa ] . In
this chapter we investigate the phenomenology of such a @xmath playing
the role of mediator between the Standard Model and a Dark Matter
candidate. Over the past years, the LHCb Collaboration has reported a
number of deviations from @xmath - @xmath universality in @xmath decays.
Since Flavour-Changing Neutral Current (FCNC) processes are forbidden in
the Standard Model at tree level, such decays have to occur through loop
induced processes, causing the precise value of these decay rates to be
extremely sensitive to contributions from beyond-the-standard-model
physics featuring tree-level FCNC interactions. The ratios of @xmath to
@xmath final states, @xmath and @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

have the advantage that some hadronic uncertainties cancel out rendering
the theoretical computations of these ratios sufficiently reliable to
probe deviations from the Standard Model predictions. In order to reduce
contamination from @xmath resonance @xmath , these ratios have been
measured in the energy bins @xmath for @xmath [ Aaij:2014ora ] and
@xmath for @xmath [ Aaij:2017vbb ] to be about @xmath of their expected
values:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

each displaying a @xmath deviation from the SM prediction. Combining
that with the input from other @xmath processes, the SM is disfavored by
@xmath to @xmath standard deviations [ Capdevila:2017bsm ,
Altmannshofer:2017yso ] . The @xmath and @xmath anomalies could be the
first evidence of New Physics (NP). The relevant Hamiltonian describing
a NP contribution to @xmath , providing an effective approach holds, can
be parametrized in a model-independent way as [ Altmannshofer:2017yso ]
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are a set of effective operators defined at a scale @xmath
, including relevant lepton-universality violation four-fermion contact
interactions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding Wilson coefficients are denoted @xmath . A number of
recent phenomenological analyses, see e.g. [ Capdevila:2017bsm ,
Altmannshofer:2017yso , Ciuchini:2017mik , Hiller:2017bzc , Geng:2017svp
, Ghosh:2017ber , Bardhan:2017xcc , DAmico:2017mtc , Alok:2017sui ] ,
conclude that these data can be well fit when the low-energy Lagrangian
below the weak scale contains a new physics operator of the @xmath form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a flavourful @xmath model, the new physics operator in Eq. ( 7.5 )
will arise from tree-level @xmath exchange: @xmath , where @xmath is the
flavour-violating @xmath coupling to left-handed b- and s-quarks and
@xmath is the couplings to left-handed muons, as represented on the
right pannel of Fig. 7.1 . There is already a vast literature discussing
the @xmath explanation of the B-anomalies and phenomenological
constraints on the parameter space of such models, see e.g. [
Gauld:2013qba , Buras:2013qja , Altmannshofer:2014cfa ,
Crivellin:2015mga , Crivellin:2015lwa , Niehoff:2015bfa , Celis:2015ara
, Greljo:2015mma , Niehoff:2015iaa , Altmannshofer:2015mqa ,
Falkowski:2015zwa , Carmona:2015ena , GarciaGarcia:2016nvr ,
Megias:2016bde , Chiang:2016qov , Altmannshofer:2016oaq ,
Boucenna:2016qad , Foldenauer:2016rpi , Kamenik:2017tnu ,
Chivukula:2017qsi , Faisel:2017glo , Ellis:2017nrp , Alonso:2017uky ,
Carmona:2017fsn , Dalchenko:2017shg , Raby:2017igl , Bian:2017rpg ,
Bian:2017xzg , Alok:2017jgr , Fox:2018ldq , Chala:2018igk ] . In
realistic models of this kind, the coupling @xmath is strongly
constrained by precision measurements of the @xmath meson mass
difference. Taking that into account, one can derive the constraint
@xmath TeV, implying that @xmath must be close to the weak scale in
weakly coupled models. The corollary is that the @xmath is in the
correct mass range to act as mediator between the SM and thermally
produced Dark Matter [ Sierra:2015fma , Belanger:2015nma , Celis:2016ayl
, Altmannshofer:2016jzy , Baek:2017sew , Cline:2017qqu , Fuyuto:2017sys
] . In this chapter we further pursue this direction, and discuss a
@xmath model that can account for the B-anomalies and, simultaneously,
explain the observed relic abundance via a weakly interacting massive
particle (WIMP) communicating with the SM through the same @xmath .

We follow Ref. [ King:2017anf ] , which introduces a fourth vector-like
family with non-universal gauged @xmath charges. The idea is that the
@xmath couples universally to the three chiral families, which then mix
with the non-universal fourth family to induce effective non-universal
couplings in the physical light mixed quarks and leptons. Such a
mechanism has wide applicability, for example it was recently discussed
in the context of F-theory models with non-universal gauginos [
Romao:2017qnu ] . Two explicit examples were discussed in [ King:2017anf
] . Firstly an @xmath model, where we identified @xmath , which however
was subsequently shown to be not consistent with both explaining @xmath
and respecting the @xmath mass difference [ Antusch:2017tud ] . Ref. [
King:2017anf ] also discussed a fermiophobic model where the gauged
@xmath charges are not carried by the three chiral families, only by
fourth vector-like family. In the absence of mixing, the @xmath is
fermiophobic, having no couplings to the three chiral families, but does
couple to a fourth vector-like family. Due to mixing effects, we shall
suppose that the @xmath gets induced couplings to second family
left-handed lepton doublets (containing the left-handed muon and its
neutrino) and third family left-handed quark doublets (containing the
left-handed top and bottom quarks). Including only such couplings is
enough to address the B-anomalies, in analogy to related scenarios where
new vector-like fermions mix with the SM ones [ Niehoff:2015bfa ,
Niehoff:2015iaa , Carmona:2015ena , Boucenna:2016qad , Megias:2016bde ,
Carmona:2017fsn , Raby:2017igl , Chala:2018igk ] . In addition, this
set-up provides a natural WIMP Dark Matter candidate: the neutrino
residing in the fourth family. We are interested in the parameter space
of this model where both B-anomalies and the relic abundance of Dark
Matter are simultaneously explained. We show that this can be achieved
without conflicting a myriad of direct and indirect Dark Matter
constraints as well as experimental constraints such as @xmath mixing,
LHC searches, neutrino trident, and so on. The requirement to satisfy
all these constraints in a natural way points to a specific corner of
the parameter space, with @xmath TeV, Dark Matter heavier than a TeV,
and a narrow range of possible @xmath couplings.

In Sec. 8.3 we define the gauged @xmath model with a vector-like fourth
family. The @xmath couplings relevant for the subsequent analysis are
summarized in Eq. ( 7.33 ) . In Sec. 7.3 we discuss the constraints
these parameters need to satisfy in order to address the B-anomalies
without conflicting other experimental results. In Sec. 7.4 we turn to
the Dark Matter sector, and identify the masses and couplings of the
vector-like fourth family singlet Dirac neutrino which lead to a correct
relic density, while evading all indirect and direct searches so far.
The main results are contained in Sec. 7.5 , where we put together the
requirements imposed by the B-anomalies and by the relic density, and
identify the viable parameter space where both are satisfied.

#### 7.2 The model

We consider a model in which, in addition to the SM with the usual three
chiral families of left-handed quarks and leptons, including the
right-handed neutrinos, we add a dark @xmath gauge symmetry and a fourth
vector-like family of fermions. The idea is to have the SM quarks and
leptons neutral under the @xmath while the vector-like family has the SM
quantum numbers and is charged under the @xmath , leading to a Dark
Matter candidate and flavour-changing @xmath operators after the
vector-like fermion mass term mix with the SM fermions.

Table 7.1 shows all the particle content and their corresponding
representations and charges. The non-universal @xmath charges forbid
mixing between the fourth family and the chiral families via the usual
Higgs Yukawa couplings. Therefore, we need to add new singlet scalars,
with appropriate @xmath charges, to generate mass mixing of quarks and
leptons with the vector-like family. The @xmath is broken by the VEVs of
the new Higgs singlets @xmath to yield a massive @xmath .

The Higgs Yukawa couplings of the first three chiral families can be
written in a @xmath matrix notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are @xmath matrices
with the fourth row and columns consisting of all zeros, since the
fourth family does not couple to the Higgs doublets. The @xmath charges
allow Yukawa couplings between the singlet fields @xmath , the fourth
family @xmath and the first three chiral families @xmath . Furthermore,
there is an explicit mass term between the opposite chirality fourth
family fields @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The fourth-family vector-like singlet neutrinos @xmath are special since
we don’t have a singlet field @xmath that couples them to the other
families, which is why such terms are absent in the above equation. This
implies that @xmath are absolutely stable, with their stability
guaranteed by an unbroken global @xmath and, since they do not carry any
Standard Model quantum numbers, they may play the role of Dark Matter.
Note that we also impose lepton number conservation @xmath for all four
families of leptons which forbids Majorana mass terms. Hence all
neutrinos (including those in the fourth vector-like family) will have
purely Dirac masses. ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively it is possible to introduce
various seesaw mechanisms into this kind of model, leading to Majorana
masses, as recently discussed [ Antusch:2017tud ] . However in this work
we only consider Dirac neutrinos.

After the singlet scalar fields @xmath obtain a non-zero vacuum
expectation value (VEV), we may rewrite the Lagrangian in terms of new
mass parameters @xmath , similarly for the other mass parameters, such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . We may diagonalize the mass matrix before electroweak
symmetry breaking, when only the fourth family is massive

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The prime states for the heavy mass basis where only the fourth family
has explicit vector-like Dirac mass terms and it’s related to the
original charge basis by unitary mixing matrices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the neutrino states @xmath and @xmath the original and the
mass basis coincides. In this basis, the Yukawa couplings in Eq. ( 7.6 )
become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that there is a coupling between the heavy fourth family and
the Higgs due to their mixing with the first three chiral families.
However, this coupling will be small since the original @xmath @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath contain zeroes in the fourth row and column and they are
mixing suppressed. Therefore, we can integrate out the fourth family and
look at the low energy effective theory by simply removing the fourth
rows and columns of the primed Yukawa matrices in Eq. ( 7.11 ). The
three massless families, below the heavy mass scale, are described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . The Yukawa matrices for the quarks and charged leptons can
be now diagonalized

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The unitary CKM matrix is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of neutrinos, since we are forbidding Majorana masses, the
light physical neutrinos have Dirac mass eigenvalues given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lepton mixing matrix or PMNS matrix can be constructed from the
transformations in Eqs. ( 7.15 ) and ( 7.17 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

To look at the Lagrangian involving the SM gauge couplings, we emphasize
that all the four families have the same charges under the SM. The
unitary transformations in Eq. ( 7.10 ) cancel as in the usual GIM
mechanism and the gauge couplings in the heavy mass basis remains the
same as in the SM. After integrating out the fourth family and
electroweak symmetry is broken, and the light Yukawa matrices are
diagonalised, the couplings to the @xmath gauge bosons are

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the usual @xmath gauge coupling. For the couplings to
the @xmath gauge boson, the same happens, the charges are the same for
the fourth families and the transformations in Eq. ( 7.10 ) cancel, such
that in the heavy mass basis, after electroweak symmetry breaking, we
are left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The electric charge of the fermions is denoted by @xmath and @xmath are
the eigenvalues of @xmath . The couplings to the @xmath boson are
flavour diagonal, even after diagonalization of the light fermion mass
matrices, due to the unitary transformations cancelling. The
interactions will be the same as in Eq. ( 7.20 ), replacing the fields
@xmath by their three family mass eigenstates.

In the case of the couplings to the @xmath gauge bosons, we have
non-universal couplings that lead to flavour changing. In the original
basis, after the @xmath symmetry is broken, we have diagonal gauge
couplings between the massive @xmath gauge boson and the four families

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition there are the fourth family couplings involving the opposite
chirality states @xmath . Using the transformations in Eq. ( 7.10 ), we
get the @xmath couplings in the diagonal heavy mass basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and similarly with @xmath , etc. Ignoring phases, these
matrices can be parametrized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath refer to @xmath and @xmath (we have also
suppressed the superscript in the angles @xmath for simplicity). Since
the @xmath charges differ for the fourth family, the unitary
transformations do not cancel and the matrices @xmath , etc., are not
generally diagonal. Therefore, @xmath exchange can couple to light
families of different flavour.

We are interested in the @xmath and @xmath couplings, needed for the
@xmath anomaly. Assuming that only the mixing angles @xmath and @xmath
are different from zero ² ² 2 A more natural possibility would be to
assume that the new vector-like fermions have a large mixing only with
the 3rd generation of the SM doublet, that is with taus instead of
muons. Then the coupling to muons could arise due to a mixing between
the SM charged leptons, as in [ King:2017anf ] . However, explaining the
B-meson anomalies in such a set-up runs in conflict with the strong
bounds from non-observation of @xmath . the mixing mass matrices become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the rest of them being zero. In the low energy effective theory,
after integrating out the fourth heavy family, the @xmath couplings to
the the three massless families of quarks and leptons are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Using now the diagonalization of the Yukawa
matrices in Eq. ( 7.15 ), we can expand the primed fields in terms of
the mass eigenstates,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For simplicity, we assume that the charged lepton mass matrix is
diagonal so that we may drop the primes on the muon field so that @xmath
. Under this assumption, in the lepton sector, the @xmath only couples
to muon mass eigenstates @xmath and muon neutrinos @xmath , where the
latter are related to neutrino mass eigenstates by the PMNS matrix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the hierarchies of the CKM matrix, we will assume similar
hierarchies of the rotation matrix elements:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector-like neutrino @xmath is not charged under the SM and it is
considered as a Dark Matter candidate. The portal that allows it to
annihilate into ordinary matter is the @xmath mediator. The explicit
coupling between the @xmath and the Dark Matter candidate @xmath is

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.32)
  -- -- -- --------

where the Dirac Dark Matter field is given by @xmath with a Dirac mass
@xmath where we have defined @xmath .

We finish this section by summarizing all non-SM interactions that will
later be relevant for the phenomenological analysis, introducing the
notation that we shall subsequently use:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We expect
@xmath , where @xmath is the 3-2 entry of the CKM matrix, as otherwise
unnatural cancellations would be required. It follows that @xmath ; in
the following for simplicity we assume @xmath , and that @xmath and
@xmath have the same sign. Thus, the relevant parameter space is
5-dimensional: 3 couplings ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) and 2 masses (
@xmath and the Dark Matter mass @xmath ). From the theory point of view
these are all essentially free parameters, although one naturally
expects @xmath in the absence of large mixings or large hierarchies of
@xmath charges. These parameters are then constrained by flavour
physics, multiple low-energy precision measurements, colliders, and Dark
Matter detection experiments. In the following sections we work out
these constraints, and identify the regions of the parameter space where
both the B-anomalies and the Dark Matter relic abundance can be
explained without conflicting any existing experimental data. We note
that @xmath models simultaneously addressing the B-anomalies and Dark
Matter have been previously discussed in Refs. [ Sierra:2015fma ,
Belanger:2015nma , Celis:2016ayl , Altmannshofer:2016jzy , Baek:2017sew
, Cline:2017qqu , Fuyuto:2017sys ] . In particular, Ref. [
Altmannshofer:2016jzy ] performed a detailed analysis of collider,
precision, Dark Matter constraints in a similar model based on gauged
@xmath symmetry. The main practical difference between the considered
setup and that model is the presence of @xmath couplings to b-quarks in
Eq. ( 7.33 ), which affects the LHC phenomenology as well as direct and
indirect detection signals.

#### 7.3 @xmath anomalies and flavour constraints

In this section we review and update the constraints on the parameter
space of @xmath models motivated by the current B-meson anomalies. One
possible explanation of the @xmath and @xmath measurements in LHCb is
that the low-energy Lagrangian below the weak scale contains an
additional contribution to the effective 4-fermion operator with
left-handed muon, @xmath -quark, and @xmath -quark fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Above, the numerical value of the effective coefficient corresponds to
the best fit quoted in Ref. [ Altmannshofer:2017yso ] . In the
considered model, this operator arises from tree-level @xmath exchange
and it dominates over the analogous operator with @xmath replaced by
@xmath according to Eq. ( 7.31 ). We can express the coefficient @xmath
as function of the couplings in Eq. ( 7.33 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together, Eqs. ( 7.34 ) and ( 7.35 ) imply the constraint on the
parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are additional constraints on these parameters coming from flavour
physics and low-energy precision measurements. In the following we
determine the region of the parameter space where the @xmath anomalies
can be explained without conflicting other experimental data.

###### @xmath mixing:

The @xmath coupling to @xmath leads to an additional tree-level
contribution to @xmath mixing. Low-energy observables are affected by
the effective operator arising from integrating out the @xmath at tree
level:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a new contribution is highly constrained by the measurements of the
mass difference @xmath of neutral @xmath mesons. In this work we follow
the recent analysis of Ref. [ DiLuzio:2017fdq ] which, using updated
lattice results, obtains a stronger bound on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting constraints in the @xmath plane are shown as the light
blue region in Fig. 7.2 . The updated constraint is particularly strong
for the models that generate a strictly positive @xmath [
DiLuzio:2017fdq ] (as is the case in @xmath models) due to the @xmath
discrepancy between the measured @xmath and the updated SM predictions
which favors @xmath . As a consequence, @xmath models explaining the
B-meson anomalies required @xmath TeV, assuming weak coupling @xmath .
For easy reference, we also show the @xmath mixing constraints based on
the previous SM determination of @xmath [ Artuso:2015swg ] , @xmath ,
see the dark blue region in Fig. 7.2 labeled “ @xmath mixing 2015”.

###### Neutrino trident:

The @xmath coupling to left-handed muons leads to a new tree-level
contribution to the effective 4-lepton interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

This operator is constrained by the trident production @xmath [
Geiregat:1990gz , Mishra:1991bv , Altmannshofer:2014pba ] . Using the
results of the global fit in Ref. [ Falkowski:2017pss ] , the bound on
the effective coefficient is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The limits in the @xmath plane are shown as the orange region in Fig.
7.2 . Since the trident constraints probe much lower scales than the
@xmath mixing, a much larger @xmath coupling to muons is allowed, @xmath
for a heavy enough @xmath . Nevertheless, together with the @xmath
mixing constraints, the trident leaves only a narrow sliver of the
parameter space that could address the @xmath meson anomalies.

###### LHC searches:

Further constraints on this model come from collider searches. For light
@xmath masses, the LHC measurements of the Z decays to four muons, with
the second muon pair produced in the SM via a virtual photon [
CMS:2012bw , Aad:2014wra ] , @xmath , sets relevant constraints in the
low mass region of @xmath models, @xmath GeV. The @xmath constraints on
the magnitude of the @xmath coupling to muons were analyzed in Refs. [
Altmannshofer:2014cfa , Altmannshofer:2014pba , Altmannshofer:2016jzy ]
. Projecting these results onto this model, the excluded parameter space
is marked as the pink regions in Fig. 7.2 and in the upper-left panel of
Fig. 7.3 . All in all, the @xmath constraint is non-trivial but for any
@xmath mass it always leaves some available parameter space to explain
the B-meson anomalies.

For a heavier @xmath , the strongest constraints comes from LHC dimuon
resonance searches, @xmath , see also [ Dalchenko:2017shg ] . In this
model the @xmath is dominantly produced at the LHC through its couplings
to bottom quarks, @xmath . The cross section @xmath from @xmath
collisions is taken from Fig. 3 of Ref. [ Faroughy:2016osc ] . The
contribution of bottom-strange collisions, which is subleading in this
model, is estimated using Madgraph [ Alwall:2014hca ] . The @xmath boson
can subsequently decay into muons, muon neutrinos, bottom or strange
quarks, and also into top quarks and Dark Matter when kinematically
allowed. The partial decay widths are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we calculate @xmath analytically. Then @xmath is estimated
using the narrow-width approximation, and compared with the limits from
the recent dimuon resonance search by ATLAS [ Aaboud:2017buh ] , which
allows us to constrain @xmath mases between @xmath GeV and @xmath TeV.
We verified that the analogous Tevatron analyses give weaker
constraints, also in the low mass regime. Fig. 7.3 shows the ATLAS
constraints for specific @xmath masses (200, 500 and 1000 GeV) with Dark
Matter couplings set to zero and arbitrary @xmath couplings. Fig. 7.2
shows the same limits for the @xmath mass fixed in function of @xmath by
the condition in Eq. ( 7.36 ). We conclude that in the parameter space
of the model relevant for explaining the B-meson anomalies the ATLAS
dimuon limits are always weaker that the new @xmath mixing constraints.

###### Other constraints:

Finally we comment on other precision observables which yield subleading
constraints on the model.

The contribution of @xmath to the muon magnetic moment is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The measured discrepancy of the muon magnetic moment is @xmath [
Jegerlehner:2009ry ] . This sets weaker limits on the ratio @xmath than
the trident production.

Next, @xmath exchange generates the effective interaction between
b-quarks and muons:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used Eq. ( 7.36 ). The operator in Eq. ( 7.43 ) is constrained
by lepton flavour universality of upsilon meson decays [ Aloni:2017eny ]
. Focusing on the @xmath state, given the measured ratio [ Olive:2016xmw
]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the SM prediction is @xmath , one finds the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is automatically satisfied in this model in the parameter space
where the @xmath anomalies are explained.

#### 7.4 Dark Matter

This model comprises a fourth neutrino ( @xmath ) which possesses all
the properties of a viable Dark Matter candidate. Indeed, @xmath is an
electrically neutral particle interacting weakly with the SM sector
through an exchange of @xmath . Furthermore, charge assignments under
the local symmetries forbid any mixing with other fields such as the SM
neutrinos. Therefore, conservation of fermion number in the dark sector
can be effectively seen as a @xmath symmetry forbidding the Dark Matter
from decaying and as a consequence ensuring its stability. In this
section we discuss in some detail the generation of the Dark Matter
relic density and show the constraints from indirect and direct Dark
Matter searches. For brevity, in the following the Dark Matter candidate
is simply denoted as @xmath .

##### 7.4.1 Relic abundance

The Dark Matter candidate is a weakly interacting massive particle
(WIMP) whose relic abundance can be generated via the well studied
freeze-out scenario [ Bertone2005a , Arcadi:2017kky ] . We will fit the
parameters to reproduce the present Dark Matter density measured by the
Planck collaboration: @xmath [ Ade:2015xua ] . In this model the Dark
Matter particles can annihilate to ³ ³ 3 Since @xmath , we can safely
ignore annihilation to @xmath and @xmath . @xmath , and possibly to
@xmath , if kinematically accessible:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can derive an analytical approximation of @xmath by expanding it in
powers of @xmath around the typical freeze-out temperature @xmath . Away
from the pole and thresholds, each component of @xmath can be
approximated by the s-wave expression:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a color factor. One can see that the annihilation cross
section grows as @xmath for small Dark Matter masses, and evolves as
@xmath for large Dark Matter masses. Therefore, for fixed couplings and
@xmath , there are typically two possible values of @xmath reproducing
@xmath , as illustrated in Fig. 7.4 . For small couplings, @xmath , the
annihilation cross section is substantially lower than the thermal one
except in the pole region, and the two solutions approach @xmath . As
demonstrated in [ Griest1991c ] , the presence of a pole in the
annihilation cross section may invalidate the @xmath expansion. In such
a case one cannot use Eqs. ( 7.4.1 ) and instead one has to rely on
numerical evaluations using Eq. ( A.30 ). In order to explore the
complete available parameter space, we compute the relic density and
@xmath numerically using the package micrOMEGAs [ Belanger:2013oya ]
after implementing the model in FeynRules [ Alloul:2013bka ] . For
higher values of the couplings, @xmath , the correct relic density can
be achieved away from the pole region where Eqs. ( 7.4.1 ) are adequate.

##### 7.4.2 Indirect detection constraints

In the WIMP framework, Dark Matter annihilations to SM states occurring
inside large astrophysical structures such as the galactic center, dwarf
spheroidal (dSphs) galaxies or galaxy clusters might be relatively
frequent at the present time. This could lead to indirect Dark Matter
observation by detecting the by-products of these annihilations in
high-energy cosmic rays [ Gaskins:2016cha ] . In this model @xmath is
approximately velocity independent in the non-relativistic limit,
therefore the same value of order @xmath required to match the relic
density is also relevant for indirect detection. The two annihilation
channels most relevant for indirect detection are @xmath and @xmath . In
the parameter space where @xmath (and possibly to @xmath ) dominates,
the best current limits on @xmath are derived by the Fermi-LAT
collaboration from a combined analysis of 15 Milky Way dSphs and
excludes Dark Matter masses @xmath GeV [ Ackermann:2015zua ] , assuming
the Navarro-Frenk-White profile [ Navarro:1995iw ] . For larger Dark
Matter masses stronger constraints on the same annihilation channel come
from the HESS experiment [ Abdallah:2016ygi ] , however the typical
limits are @xmath and therefore cross sections of order @xmath are not
probed. In the future, sensitivity of the Cherenkov Telescope Array
(CTA) might be sufficient to probe annihilation the thermal cross
section for @xmath GeV [ Wood:2013taa , Pierre:2014tra ,
Silverwood:2014yza , Lefranc:2016dgx , Lefranc:2015pza ] . The current
and future constraints in the @xmath annihilation channel are
illustrated in Fig. 7.4 , where we also show predictions of this model
for two particular points in the parameter space.

As can be seen in Fig. 7.2 , given the newer @xmath mixing constraints
the allowed parameter space has @xmath , and therefore annihilation into
@xmath (and the corresponding neutrinos) dominates. In such a case, the
indirect detection limits on @xmath are substantially weaker, such that
the thermal annihilation cross section is allowed for Dark Matter masses
above a few GeV [ Ackermann:2015zua ] . For this reason, the indirect
limits are not relevant in most of the interesting parameter space of
this model. However, for small Dark Matter masses @xmath annihilation
into leptons at redshift @xmath can be constrained by CMB spectrum
observations, as it could modify the ionization history. For the thermal
annihilation cross section, the Planck collaboration constraints on CMB
spectrum distortions exclude Dark Matter masses below @xmath GeV [
Slatyer:2015jla ] , as illustrated in Fig. 7.4 . We note that
annihilation into leptonic final states can be relevant for experiments
such as AMS-02 measuring cosmic-ray positrons and electrons, from which
several studies have obtained strong constraints on @xmath [
Kopp:2013eka , Bergstrom:2013jra , Ibarra:2013zia , Lu:2015pta ] .
However these constraints are subject to strong dependence on the
propagation model and uncertainties regarding cosmic-ray propagation in
the interstellar medium, and for this reason we do not include them in
the following. All in all, in this model Dark Matter masses @xmath GeV
are excluded by the Planck collaboration results. Moreover, in the
parameter space where annihilation into @xmath dominates, Dark Matter
masses below 100 GeV are excluded by the Fermi-LAT results, although
that parameter space is also disfavored by the recent @xmath mixing
constraints.

##### 7.4.3 Direct Searches

Sensitivity of Direct Detection (DD) experiments has improved by several
orders of magnitude during the past decade, and currently the
xenon-based experiments LUX [ Akerib:2016vxi ] , PandaX [ Tan:2016zwf ]
and Xenon1T [ Aprile:2017iyp ] probe Dark Matter spin-independent (SI)
scattering cross section of the order of @xmath for Dark Matter masses
of the order of 100 GeV.

In this set-up, integrating out the tree-level @xmath exchange between
Dark Matter and the SM leads to the following effective operators at the
scale @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where again one can neglect the effective coupling to @xmath . Below the
scale @xmath , vector-like Dark Matter couplings to light quarks are
induced via renormalization group (RG) running:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The complete RG equations can be found e.g. in [ DEramo:2014nmf ] ;
schematically, one has @xmath . Other tensor structures beyond that in
Eq. ( 7.49 ) also appear but they give subleading effects in direct
detection. Finally, at @xmath GeV the couplings in Eq. ( 7.49 ) can be
mapped to momentum- and spin-independent non-relativistic interactions
of Dark Matter with protons and neutrons:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We evaluate numerically the one-loop RG
evolution of effective couplings. To this end, above @xmath we use the
RunDM package [ DEramo:2016gos , DEramo:2014nmf , Crivellin:2014qxa ] ,
while running below @xmath and the coefficients @xmath are obtained by
DirectDM [ Bishara:2017nnn ] . For example, for @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for @xmath TeV:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coupling to neutrons vanishes within the approximation @xmath . For
@xmath a non-zero @xmath can be generated, and is dominated by the top
Yukawa contributions to the RG running. The Dark Matter-nucleon
spin-independent cross section can be straightforwardly derived from
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compare with experimental bounds, which typically assume equal cross
section on protons and neutrons, for a target nucleus with @xmath
protons and @xmath neutrons we introduce the averaged cross section

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the allowed parameter space relevant for the B-meson anomalies we
have @xmath . Assuming that hierarchy, and also @xmath , for xenon
targets an approximate expression for the averaged cross section reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 7.5 we depicted the values of the @xmath coupling satisfying the
requirement of having the observed Dark Matter density as well at the
correct value of the couplings @xmath and @xmath explaining the @xmath
discrepancy. The left panel of that figure illustrates that, for low
@xmath , the Xenon1T collaboration excludes Dark Matter masses away from
the @xmath pole but still allows for low Dark Matter masses @xmath GeV.
However, as discussed in the previous subsection, such low masses are
excluded by the indirect Planck constraints, therefore the
complementarity of direct and indirect detection searches indicates that
the Dark Matter mass has to be close to the pole @xmath . For larger
@xmath , Dark Matter masses away from the pole region are allowed, see
the right panel of Fig. 7.5 .

#### 7.5 Discussion and Conclusion

The main results are shown in Figs. 7.9 - 7.10 which show for which
parameters this model can address the B-meson anomalies while satisfying
all experimental and cosmological constraints. As discussed below Eq. (
7.33 ), the relevant parameter space is effectively five-dimensional,
and spanned by the @xmath couplings to Dark Matter ( @xmath ), muons (
@xmath ), and @xmath quarks ( @xmath ), and by the masses of Dark Matter
( @xmath ) and the @xmath vector messenger ( @xmath ). We display it in
the @xmath , @xmath plane for several representative values of @xmath .
For each @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is fixed according to Eq. ( 7.36 )
to the best fit value reproducing the @xmath measurements.

Then @xmath is fixed by the requirement of reproducing the correct relic
abundance of Dark Matter. There are typically two distinct solutions for
@xmath satisfying @xmath , therefore for each @xmath in the left (right)
panel we display the solutions with @xmath ( @xmath ). These solutions
are color coded in Figs. 7.9 - 7.10 , from smaller (blue) to larger
(red) @xmath . The white regions are where we find no parameters choice
to tune the annihilation cross section to the thermal value. The
continuously gray-shaded regions are excluded by direct detection,
indirect detection, @xmath mixing, dimuon searches at the LHC, @xmath
decay to four muons and/or muon trident constraints. However, we choose
not to shade the region excluded by the recent update of the @xmath
mixing constraints in [ DiLuzio:2017fdq ] , and instead represent those
by a dashed blue line labeled “ @xmath mixing 2017”. The region
represented on the left of this line is excluded by these constraints.
For any value of the @xmath mass in the considered range there exists a
range of parameters reproducing the @xmath anomalies and the relic
abundance, and passing all experimental constraints to date. However,
for lower @xmath the allowed region corresponds to @xmath , once the
direct (Xenon1T) and indirect (Planck) detection constraints together
with updated @xmath mixing constraints are taken into account. In this
model the @xmath coupling to muons is suppressed by a mixing angle
between the SM 2nd generation lepton doublet and the 4th generation
vector-like lepton doublet, and thus we expect @xmath . Conversely,
@xmath is unnatural and would require a large hierarchy between the
corresponding @xmath charges, @xmath . On the other hand, for @xmath TeV
we find some allowed parameter space where @xmath is a factor of few
larger than @xmath , which is plausible. Further increasing @xmath
requires a sizable @xmath coupling to muons in order to address the
B-meson anomalies, @xmath . Then we are forced back into the unnatural
@xmath region, simply due to perturbativity constraints on @xmath rather
than some experimental bounds. To summarize, assuming this model is
indeed the correct explanation of the observed @xmath anomalies and Dark
Matter relic abundance, this analysis hints at a particular corner of
the parameter space where @xmath TeV, @xmath TeV, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Incidentally, that parameter space can be probed by several
distinct methods. First of all, the allowed window can be further
squeezed by better precision measurements of the trident @xmath process,
and by improving the theoretical precision of the SM prediction for the
@xmath meson mass difference. The above statement is in fact valid for
all models where the B-anomalies are addressed by a tree-level @xmath
exchange. What is more specific to models where the @xmath interactions
with the SM fermions originates from mixing of the latter with
vector-like fermions is a non-vanishing @xmath coupling not only to
muons but also to b-quarks. This results in a non-negligible rate of the
partonic process @xmath which can be probed by dimuon resonance searches
at the LHC. In fact, the preferred @xmath range is where the LHC
sensitivity is optimal. Targeted searches for b-quark-collision
initiated process (rather than recast of generic dimuon searches) could
lead to a discovery signal in the near future, or to better constraints
that are more stringent than the @xmath mixing one.

Finally, the preferred range of Dark Matter masses and couplings can be
probed by direct detection experiments, such that the improvements of
one or two orders of magnitude in sensitivity in the next years, which
is expected to be achieved by the LZ [ Akerib:2018lyp ] , DARWIN [
Aalbers:2016jon ] and DarkSide-20k [ Aalseth:2017fik ] experiments. As
illustrated in Fig. 7.11 , these future improvements should exclude the
remaining most natural parameter space of the model.

## Part III Alternative Dark Matter production beyond the WIMP paradigm

### Chapter 8 Vector Strongly Interacting Massive Particles \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

#### 8.1 Introduction

The WIMP mechanism is potentially one of the most natural and simplest
way to explain the Dark Matter abundance in our universe. However, the
absence of experimental signals in direct [ Arcadi:2017kky ,
Aprile:2016swn , Akerib:2016vxi , Tan:2016zwf ] and indirect [
Ackermann:2015tah , Abdallah:2016ygi ] detection has strongly
constrained the simplest WIMP models and the naturalness of the
parameters invoked to achieve the correct relic density has become
questionable. The possibility to solve some discrepancies between
astrophysical observations and simulations based on @xmath CDM ¹ ¹ 1
known as the small scale controversies, discussed in Sec. 3.5.1 . by
considering a Dark Matter candidate with a sizable self-interaction has
led researchers to focus attention in recent years on alternative
thermal scenarios embedding such a DM candidate. For these reasons,
alternative production mechanisms such as Strongly Interacting Massive
Particles (SIMP) [ Hochberg:2014dra ] and ELastic DEcoupling Relic
(ELDER) [ Kuflik:2015isi , Kuflik:2017iqs ] , with a slightly different
thermal history than WIMPs, has been developed recently and typically
sub-GeV Dark Matter candidates are considered in both frameworks.
Thermal production of such light Dark Matter is possible if, for
instance, standard @xmath annihilations proceed with small couplings [
Feng:2008ya ] or if new annihilation mechanisms are present, such as
@xmath annihilations [ Carlson:1992fn , Hochberg:2014dra ,
Hochberg:2014kqa ] or forbidden @xmath channels [ Griest1991c ,
DAgnolo:2015ujb ] .

The thermal production of SIMPs is based on freezeout of @xmath
self-annihilation of Dark Matter, with coupling between SIMPs and light
Standard Model (SM) particles, which maintain kinetic equilibrium
between the two sectors until freeze-out occurs. Various realizations of
SIMP Dark Matter have been proposed in the literature, which often
contain (pseudo)scalar Dark Matter particles with dark abelian or
non-abelian gauge symmetries [ Hochberg:2014dra , Lee:2015gsa ,
Choi:2015bya , Hochberg:2015vrg , Choi:2016hid , Choi:2016tkj ,
Choi:2017mkk ] . Massive dark vector bosons can also be SIMP candidates
when stemming from non-abelian dark gauge bosons [ Hambye:2009fg ,
Hambye:2008bq , Karam:2015jta , Karam:2016rsz , Bernal:2015ova ,
Heikinheimo:2017ofk ] , as can be dark fermions or scalars when
accompanied with a light dark photon or another scalar [ Cline:2017tka ,
Dey:2016qgf ] . Vector SIMP models are particularly predictive since the
cubic and quartic self-interactions of Dark Matter are determined by a
single gauge coupling. If the non-abelian dark gauge symmetry is
spontaneously broken by the Higgs mechanism, the resulting massive dark
Higgs can equilibrate the vector SIMPs and the SM via a Higgs portal
coupling [ Hambye:2009fg , Hambye:2008bq , Karam:2015jta ,
Bernal:2015ova , Kamada:2016ois ] . The spin information of the Dark
Matter could be then be inferred from the invisible Higgs decay, as is
the case for the WIMP [ Lebedev:2011iq ] .

In this work, we consider vector SIMP Dark Matter in an @xmath dark
gauge theory, where the three massive (degenerate) @xmath gauge bosons
play the role of vector SIMPs. Equilibration between the dark and
visible sectors can be achieved by elastic scattering between the Dark
Matter and the @xmath dark Higgs, provided that the latter is light
enough to be thermalized with the SM via the Higgs portal until
freeze-out occurs. As we will see, the dark Higgs can successfully
thermalize the two sectors only when it is close in mass to the Dark
Matter, in which case additional forbidden @xmath annihilations are
important as well. Alternatively, the dark @xmath photon can thermalize
the dark and visible sectors via its kinetic mixing with the SM
hypercharge alongside its coupling to the DM, which proceed through
generalized Chern-Simons (CS) terms [ Anastasopoulos:2006cz ,
Antoniadis:2009ze , Mambrini:2009ad , Dudas:2009uq , Kim:2015vba ,
Arcadi:2017jqd ] . In both cases of the Higgs and vector portals, we
find parameter space consistent with all existing constraints. Our
results indicate that the framework can be probed via Higgs/ @xmath
-boson invisible decays as well as dark Higgs/dark photon searches in
current and future collider and beam dump experiments.

This chapter is organized as follows. First, we start by presenting the
SIMP and ELDERs mechanisms which possess common features. Then, we
present the model considered in this chapter based on a @xmath dark
gauge theory in Sec. 8.3 , including the relevant Higgs and gauge-mixing
vector portals to the SM. Section 8.4 discusses the @xmath annihilation
processes setting the DM abundance, the self-scattering cross sections,
and the effects of forbidden channels on the relic density. Methods for
achieving kinetic equilibrium between the dark and visible sectors via
Higgs mixing and/or gauge mixing are addressed in Sec. 8.5 . We conclude
in Sec. 8.6 .

#### 8.2 The SIMP and ELDER mechanisms

In the WIMP paradigm, one of the key assumption to generate the correct
relic density via the freeze-out mechanism is the primordial thermal
equilibrium between the dark sector and the Standard Model particle
content. This equilibrium can be ensured through rapid scatterings
between a DM candidate @xmath and some SM particle: @xmath and in the
simplest WIMP cases, the DM particles annihilate while becoming
non-relativistic @xmath . However the story would be different if
interactions among the dark sector were also present in the theory, such
as self-annihilations which might affect the DM density. In the former
case, the fate of the DM density evolution would depend on the relative
importance of the rates of these processes:

-   Scattering rate @xmath of processes such as @xmath

-   Annihilation rate @xmath of the process @xmath

-   Self-annihilation rate @xmath among the dark sector : @xmath .

Assuming that @xmath is large enough to ensure a primordial thermal
equilibrium between the dark sector and the SM particles, three distinct
regimes are possible:

###### Wimp:

In the WIMP case, @xmath is large enough to ensure kinetic equilibrium
until the freeze-out time and the DM density undergo a depletion through
annihilations into SM particles: @xmath . Part II of this thesis is
completely devoted to the study of specific realizations of this
mechanism.

###### Strongly Interacting Massive Particles (SIMP) [Hochberg:2014dra]:

The SIMP case correponds to the regime where scattering are still
efficient enough to ensure a kinetic equilibrium between the dark sector
and the SM bath until the freeze-out temperature. However in this case
the freeze-out occurs through annihilations in the dark sector, implying
@xmath . In order for the kinetic equilibrium state to be achieved until
the freeze-out time, the typical kinetic energy injected by self
annihilation processes per unit of time @xmath must be smaller than the
typical energy transferred per unit of time @xmath in elastic
scatterings between the dark sector and the SM bath. The freeze-out
temperature @xmath can be defined as the temperature for which these two
processes become comparable:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming that the reaction @xmath is the dominant self-annihilation
process, as shown in Sec. A.3 , the Boltzmann equation for the Dark
Matter density @xmath typically takes the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the expected DM thermal equilibrium distribution and the
quantity @xmath is the analogous of the velocity averaged annihilation
cross section for the @xmath process. As detailed in Sec. A.3 , the
relic density can be expressed as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the freeze-out temperature. @xmath can be
estimated as the temperature for which the RHS of the Boltzmann equation
becomes comparable to the Hubble expansion dependent term on the LHS. In
this regime, typically the correct relic density can be achieved for DM
masses @xmath , assuming sizable couplings in the dark sector of @xmath
for a gauge interaction for instance. Thus, in such a construction, the
self-interaction cross section is typically much larger than in the WIMP
context.

###### Elastic Decoupling Relic (ELDER) [Kuflik:2015isi]:

In this case the following hierachy is present among the rates @xmath
therefore the dark sector and the SM bath would decouple before
freeze-out, while maintaining a thermal equilibrium in their own
seperate baths. The thermal decoupling typically occurs while the Dark
Matter become non-relativistic and by entropy conservation in both
sectors:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the temperatures of the dark sector and the
SM respectively. The previous relation implies the following approximate
behavior of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the decoupling temperature. As discussed in Sec. A.3 the
DM temperature evolution, assuming the dark sector in thermal
equilibrium, is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term on the RHS of this equation drives the DM temperature to
evolve grossly as @xmath while the second term tends to moderate the
temperature difference between the two sectors with an efficiency
proportional to the momentum relaxation rate @xmath defined in Sec. A.3
. The decoupling temperature can be estimated as the temperature for
which the second term becomes of the order of one:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

When the temperature drops below @xmath , the dark sector and SM bath
decouple. Thermal equilibrium is maintained in the dark sector because
of a large @xmath rate, imposing the DM chemical potential to vanish.
Dark Matter particles then undergo a canibalization period where the
process @xmath , kinematically favoured, is highly dominant over the
reverse process. Therefore the freeze-out will occur when the @xmath
process is not frequent enough to ensure a chemical equilibrium in the
dark sector. Thus, we can define the freeze-out temperature @xmath via
the condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relic density can be expressed as a function of the freeze-out and
decoupling temperatures as [ Kuflik:2017iqs ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the number of degrees of freedom of the DM
states and @xmath is the effective number of relastivistic degrees of
freedom of the SM bath at the decoupling temperature. In order to
effectively realize the ELDER mechanism, one typically needs to consider
larger couplings than in the SIMP case, pushing them towards the
perturbativity limit as represented in Fig. 8.1 .

#### 8.3 The model

Here we present the framework for vector SIMPs: We start with the dark
gauge theory, and then describe the Higgs interactions as well as
kinetic gauge mixing and couplings between the dark photon and the Dark
Matter.

##### 8.3.1 The dark sector

We consider as a model for non-abelian SIMP Dark Matter an @xmath gauge
theory in the dark sector, broken completely due to the VEVs of a dark
Higgs doublet @xmath . The massive gauge bosons of @xmath , denoted by
@xmath @xmath , are degenerate and stable due to a dark custodial
isospin symmetry, and are a Dark Matter candidate [ Hambye:2009fg ,
Hambye:2008bq , Bernal:2015ova ] . The accidental custodial symmetry
persists in the presence of the Higgs portal and @xmath portal with the
generalized Chern-Simons term which we discuss later, maintaining the
stability of the Dark Matter.

The Lagrangian for the dark sector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the field strength tensors are @xmath . The scalar potential is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the covariant derivatives for the dark Higgs doublet is @xmath .

After expanding the dark Higgs fields around the VEV as @xmath in
unitary gauge, one obtains gauge boson mass of @xmath . The
self-interactions of the vector Dark Matter and its interactions with
the dark Higgs @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The non-abelian interactions among the vector bosons @xmath allow for
@xmath annihilations as SIMPs. This idea is actually much more general
than we discussed above. This symmetry breaking can also be considered
as dynamical, as a result of chiral symmetry breaking @xmath in an
@xmath gauge theory. This corresponds to the limit where @xmath at low
energies, while resonances can play an important role at higher
energies. In this case, the coupling @xmath is still considered
perturbative.

Alternatively, we can consider the theory with a Higgs doublet in the
strongly coupled regime @xmath . As pointed out by ’t Hooft [
tHooft:1979yoe ] , an @xmath gauge theory with a doublet scalar does not
have an order parameter to distinguish the broken and confining phases,
and hence the two phases are continuously connected, akin to liquid and
gas phases of water at high pressures. In the strong coupling case, the
vector SIMP is described by the interpolating field @xmath , while the
dark Higgs by @xmath . Given enough parameters in the model @xmath , one
can most likely have the dark Higgs heavier than the vector SIMP as
required (see below); such a discussion requires numerical simulations
and is beyond the scope of this work.

##### 8.3.2 Higgs portal

The dark Higgs provides a portal between the dark sector and the visible
sector, since the dark and SM scalars may interact at the renormalizable
level,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, a complex scalar field @xmath is introduced for giving mass to
@xmath gauge boson by Higgs mechanism in the later discussion on @xmath
portal in Sec. 8.3.3 . Since @xmath is assumed to be heavier than Dark
Matter in our model, we assumed that the radial mode of @xmath has no
significant mixing with the dark Higgs @xmath and the SM Higgs.

The SM and dark Higgs bosons are then mixed by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are mass eigenstates of mass

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the mixing angle is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we assume that the additional Higgs field @xmath for @xmath is
heavy enough so that its mixing effects with the above Higgs fields is
negligible. The Higgs mixing yields interactions between the vector DM
and the SM particles,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

enabling communication between the two sectors.

In the presence of such Higgs-portal couplings, the SM Higgs can decay
invisibly into a pair of dark gauge bosons or dark higgses, with decay
rates

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The visible decays of the SM Higgs are scaled down universally by @xmath
due to the Higgs mixing. As we will see in Sec. 8.5.2 , the bound on
invisible Higgs decays places a strong constraint on the allowed mixing,
and hence on the possibility that the Higgs portal maintains kinetic
equilibrium between the two sectors.

##### 8.3.3 Vector portal

In addition to the Higgs portal, we can gauge a @xmath symmetry acting
on the complex scalar @xmath , with the covariant derivative @xmath .
The @xmath massive gauge boson @xmath can connect the dark and visible
sectors, in the presence of gauge kinetic mixing with the SM hypercharge
as well as DM- @xmath interactions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath generates a 3-pt interaction between @xmath ; it may be
generated by a non-abelian Chern-Simons (CS) term, as will be discussed
below.

The kinetic and mass terms for the @xmath and @xmath gauge bosons [
Choi:2015bya ] is diagonalized

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are hypercharge, neutral-weak and dark gauge fields, @xmath
are mass eigenstates, and @xmath , etc. Here, @xmath is @xmath
-boson-like and @xmath is @xmath -boson-like, with masses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the mixing angle is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The electromagnetic and neutral-current interactions are then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
electromagnetic, neutral and dark currents, respectively. For @xmath ,
one has @xmath , so the neutral current interaction of the dark photon
is negligible due to @xmath .

There are no direct couplings between the SM and the non-abelian vector
Dark Matter at the renormalizable level, because of the non-abelian
gauge symmetry. Likewise, there are no direct renormalizable
interactions between the @xmath and the @xmath -boson, since the dark
Higgs are not charged under both symmetries (in other words, the dark
Weinberg angle vanishes).

If heavy fermions charged under both @xmath and @xmath are present in
the theory, they may generate low-energy effective @xmath interactions
via triangle diagrams. From the effective theory point of view these may
manifest as generalized non-abelian Chern-Simons terms [ Dudas:2009uq ,
Kim:2015vba ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the coefficient @xmath is dimensionless, these are
non-renormalizable operators and arise from gauge dimension-8 operators,
known as D’Hoker-Farhi terms [ DHoker:1984izu ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Likewise, an effective 3-pt interaction can be generated by the gauge
invariant dimension-8 operator of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this work we will consider the phenomenology of the effective
operator Eq. ( 8.24 ). Sec. B.2 contains a concrete example of
generating the effective Chern-Simons term.

We remark on the invisible decays of @xmath and @xmath bosons in our
setup. The @xmath boson can decay invisibly into a pair of vector Dark
Matter particles through the generalized CS terms in the presence of a
gauge kinetic mixing between @xmath and @xmath bosons. But, if @xmath
heavy fermions @xmath running in triangle diagrams are relatively light
for a sizable CS term (but heavy enough not to affect our discussion on
vector SIMPs in the later sections) as discussed in Sec. B.2 , the
@xmath -boson preferentially decays directly into a pair of heavy
fermions at tree level. Then, the corresponding @xmath -boson invisible
decay width is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . On the other hand, if the heavy fermions are heavier than
@xmath , the @xmath boson decays into a pair of vector Dark Matter
particles via the CS term, with the width

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 8.4 Vector SIMP Dark Matter

Having established the interactions of the framework, we now address the
cross section for the Dark Matter relic abundance and self-scatterings.
We first determine the relic density of Dark Matter from @xmath
processes in Sec. 8.4.1 , and discuss the role of additional forbidden
annihilation channels in Sec. 8.4.2 .

##### 8.4.1 SIMP channels

Here we compute the relic density assuming the @xmath annihilation
processes are the dominant number-changing processes. In the presence of
an isospin symmetry for the vector Dark Matter, all components of Dark
Matter have the same mass, and can be treated as identical particles.
Assuming the Dark Matter remains in kinetic equilibrium with the SM
until the time of freeze-out, the Boltzmann equation for the vector Dark
Matter is given by [ Hochberg:2014dra ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, the thermally averaged @xmath annihilation cross-section (away
from a resonance) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (8.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless quantities given in Eqs. (
A.64 ) and ( A.66 ), respectively. We note that the first term in @xmath
stems from @xmath channels and @xmath due to @xmath channels contributes
only for @xmath , becoming dominant near the resonance at @xmath . where
@xmath and @xmath are dimensionless quantities given in Eqs. ( A.64 )
and ( A.66 ), respectively. We note that the first two lines stem from
@xmath channels and the last line due to @xmath channels contributes
only for @xmath , becoming dominant near the resonance at @xmath . On
the other hand, @xmath channels are @xmath -wave suppressed so they are
not included here. Additional terms that give an approximate resonance
when @xmath are present, but as they are @xmath -wave suppressed they
are always subdominant and hence can be neglected. Further details of
the @xmath cross section and discussion of the Boltzmann equation can be
found in Appendix A.3.4 .

In the instantaneous freeze-out approximation, the relic abundance for
@xmath annihilation is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ratio of the entropy density today to the critical
density, @xmath is the entropy density at @xmath , and @xmath is the
Hubble rate at @xmath . Here @xmath indicates the freezeout temperature,
which is typically @xmath for @xmath freezeout. For @xmath , the Higgs
contributions to the cross-section effectively decouples, and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 8.2 we depict the parameter space in which the measured Dark
Matter relic density is obtained within @xmath (red region) for @xmath (
@xmath ) and @xmath in the upper (lower) panel. For illustration, the
top panel shows the results for dark Higgs mass of @xmath where no
resonance enhancement is present, while in the bottom panel we fix
@xmath and vary @xmath and @xmath .

In addition to @xmath annihilations, the vector SIMP Dark Matter
undergoes self-scattering processes, which are constrained by the bullet
cluster [ Clowe:2003tk , Markevitch:2003at , Randall:2007ph ] and by
elliptical halo shapes [ Rocha:2012jg , Peter:2012jh ] . Away from a
resonance, the self interacting cross-section is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

A simple approximation can be derived in the limit @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contours of the self-scattering cross section obeying @xmath are shown
in Fig. 8.2 in dotted, dashed and dot-dashed lines, respectively.

We learn that away from a resonance region, vector SIMP @xmath Dark
Matter consistent with self-scattering constraints points to Dark Matter
masses of @xmath and strong couplings of @xmath . Indeed, strong
coupling is a frequent common feature in SIMP Dark Matter models [
Hochberg:2014dra , Lee:2015gsa , Choi:2015bya , Hochberg:2015vrg ,
Choi:2016tkj , Hambye:2009fg , Hambye:2008bq , Bernal:2015ova ,
Cline:2017tka ] , though exceptions can arise ( e.g. on resonance [
Choi:2016hid , Choi:2017mkk ] ). Close to the resonance region, the
relic density is sensitive to the dark Higgs mass, and the viable
parameter space is broadened further to include larger DM masses at
fixed dark gauge coupling, or smaller dark gauge couplings for fixed DM
masses.

We comment that the strong gauge coupling leads to a question on the
potential breakdown of perturbativity in relic density calculation. In
our case, however, the @xmath gauge symmetry is completely broken by the
VEV of the dark Higgs, and there are no light particles below the
confinement or symmetry breaking scale ( i.e. , vector SIMP mass).
Therefore, given that there is no phase transition separating the Higgs
phase and confining phase, namely, the complementarity between the Higgs
and confining phases [ Fradkin:1978dv , Banks:1979fi , tHooft:1979yoe ,
Susskind:1979up , Raby:1979my , Georgi:2016qbt ] , the Higgsed theory
can be pushed into regions where perturbativity is questionable. Closer
inspection of the issue of complementarity may be worthwhile, though is
beyond the scope of this work.

As the dark Higgs mass approaches the DM mass, when @xmath , forbidden
@xmath annihilation channels contribute significantly to the relic
density and must be included as well; we study this in the next
subsection. (The regions in which @xmath processes dominate the relic
density are shown in shaded gray in Fig. 8.2 .) As we will see, the
self-scattering rate is reduced in this case, allowing smaller Dark
Matter masses consistent with observational constraints.

##### 8.4.2 Forbidden channels

When the dark Higgs is slightly heavier than the Dark Matter, forbidden
@xmath channels such as @xmath and @xmath —although kinematically
inaccessible at zero temperature—can be important in determining the
relic density at the time of freeze-out [ Griest1991c , DAgnolo:2015ujb
] . For @xmath , new @xmath channels such as @xmath open up as well so
they have been already included in Fig. 8.2 . Here we discuss the
effects of the forbidden channels on the relic abundance and identify
the parameter space of vector SIMP Dark Matter that is consistent with
the observed relic density when including these effects. (This will be
particularly relevant when kinetic equilibrium between the SIMP and SM
sectors is obtained via the Higgs portal, as will become evident in Sec.
8.5.2 .)

Assuming that the forbidden channels are dominant, the approximate
Boltzmann equation is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.36)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have assumed that @xmath maintains chemical and thermal
equilibrium with the SM bath throughout freezeout. Detailed balance
conditions at high temperature determine the annihilation cross sections
for the forbidden channels in terms of the unforbidden channels,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The cross section formulas for the allowed @xmath channels
in the RHS above are given in Sec. A.2.2 .

Denoting the allowed @xmath cross sections in the RHS above by @xmath
and @xmath , the DM abundance is found to be [ DAgnolo:2015ujb ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (8.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

resulting in the relic density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, however, one must account simultaneously for both the @xmath
processes and the @xmath forbidden channels in determining the Dark
Matter relic abundance.

In Fig. 8.3 , we show the Dark Matter relic density as a function of
@xmath , first when including only forbidden channels ( left panel ) and
then when taking both forbidden and SIMP channels into account ( right
panel ). We have varied @xmath and @xmath between @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. We learn that forbidden channels play an important role
for @xmath , where the observed relic density can be achieved over a
broad range of couplings @xmath and masses @xmath . As the mass
difference increases, @xmath SIMP annihilations begin dominating the
relic abundance as a saturated value for mass differences @xmath . We
note that the importance of the forbidden semi-annihilation channels for
@xmath , in contrast to the naive expectation from the Boltzmann
suppression factors of @xmath , is due to a large numerical factor in
the SIMP @xmath annihilation cross section.

#### 8.5 Kinetic equilibrium

In order for the SIMP mechanism to be viable, we require that the SIMP
sector efficiently dumps entropy into the SM bath. In the proposed
framework, this can be achieved either by a Higgs or @xmath portal
between the vector SIMPs and SM particles. After a general discussion of
the relevant Boltzmann equation in terms of the dark sector temperature
and the requirement of equilibration in Sec. 8.5.1 , we study the Higgs
portal in Sec. 8.5.2 and the @xmath portal in Sec. 8.5.3 .

##### 8.5.1 Equilibration conditions

Following Ref. [ Kuflik:2015isi ] , we find the decoupling temperature
by comparing the rate of change in kinetic energy injected by the @xmath
annihilations compared to the kinetic energy lost due to elastic
scattering. When the @xmath occurs, the mass of one dark particle is
converted to the kinetic energy of the 2 outgoing particles. These
particles quickly scatter off the Dark Matter particles, and distribute
the energy to the dark bath. Thus, the @xmath annihilations maintain
chemical equilibrium in the DM gas, while releasing kinetic energy per
particle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Elastic scattering processes transfer this excess kinetic energy to the
SM gas at a rate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the sum is taken over the species @xmath in the relativistic
plasma with initial(final) momentum @xmath , @xmath is the Dark Matter
initial(final) momentum. The decoupling occurs when the DM-to-SM energy
transfer can no longer keep up with the kinetic energy production. The
quantity @xmath can be related to the momentum relaxation rate @xmath
defined in Sec. A.3 as @xmath . Equating Eq. ( 8.42 ) with Eq. ( A.56 )
leads to the following conditions satisfied at the kinetic decoupling
temperature @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath the effective relativistic number of species
for @xmath and @xmath GeV the Planck mass. In what follows we use Eq. (
8.44 ), evaluated at @xmath , to place a lower bound on the interactions
between the vector SIMPs and the SM particles, needed to achieve the
correct DM abundance. The ELDER DM curve [ Kuflik:2015isi ,
Kuflik:2017iqs ] , corresponds to @xmath , where the relic abundance is
determined by the elastic scattering rate.

The Dark Matter can also thermalize with the SM, if the Dark Matter
maintains equilibrium with the dark Higgs, while the dark Higgs
maintains equilibrium with the SM bath via decay and inverse decays into
SM fermions. The dark Higgs should be heavier than the dark @xmath
-bosons, or else the Dark Matter will efficiently annihilate into dark
Higgs, effectively becoming a WIMP-like scenario. However, if the dark
Higgs is much heavier than the Dark Matter, then the dark Higgs
abundance will have been sufficiently depleted and it will not be able
to maintain equilibrium between the two sectors. This pushes the
spectrum to a forbidden regime, @xmath , where the Dark Matter can
annihilate into dark Higgses, but with a large Boltzmann suppression. At
the time right before freezeout, both the semi-annihilation @xmath and
self-annihilation @xmath processes will be active for large gauge
coupling. The dark sector will be in thermal equilibrium with vanishing
chemical potential. Thus in order for freezeout to occur one just needs
to check that the dark Higgs can deplete the density in the dark sector
fast enough up until freezeout,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the above condition on the dark Higgs decay rate in the case that
vector SIMPs are in kinetic equilibrium through the scattering with the
dark Higgs.

##### 8.5.2 Higgs portal

The coupling @xmath present in Eq. ( 8.11 ) leads to mixing between the
SM and dark Higgs, which enables a Higgs portal between the dark and
visible sectors.

In the presence of Higgs-portal induced mixing between the SM and dark
Higgs, the SM Higgs can decay invisibly into a pair of Dark Matter
particles, with decay rate given by Eq. ( 8.3.2 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The combined VBF, @xmath and gluon fusion production of Higgs bosons at
CMS leads to @xmath at @xmath CL [ Khachatryan:2016whc ] , while the
ATLAS bounds from the VBF [ Aad:2015txa ] and @xmath [ Aad:2014iia ]
modes give @xmath and @xmath , respectively. These decays provide a
strong constraint on the mixing: @xmath for @xmath .

The mixing also induces direct couplings of the darks Higgs to the SM
electron and muons, which in turn induces tree-level scattering of the
SM of the leptons. However, the smallness of the electron Yukawa
coupling and the Boltzmann-suppression of the muons at the time of
freezeout combined with constraints on the Higgs invisible decay result
in the elastic scattering being inefficient for thermalization.

Alternatively, if the dark Higgs is fairly light, scattering between the
vector Dark Matter and the dark Higgs can equilibrate the dark sector,
with decays and inverse decays of the dark Higgs into SM particles
completing the equilibration requirement between the SIMP and SM
sectors. The momentum relaxation rate from the elastic scattering of
Dark Matter off of dark Higgs, @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We note that the above result is valid for @xmath .
Plugging this into the kinetic equilibrium condition Eq. ( 8.44 ), we
find that equilibrium between the dark Higgs and the DM is effective in
most of parameter space satisfying the Dark Matter relic abundance.

Simultaneously, kinetic equilibrium between the dark Higgs and the SM is
maintained by decays and the inverse decays of the Higgs into a pair of
SM fermions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 8.4 , we illustrate this second requirement of equilibration
between the dark Higgs and the SM, as a function of @xmath and @xmath (
left ) or @xmath ( right ) for fixed @xmath and @xmath ( left ) or fixed
ratio @xmath ( right ). The upper bound on the mixing angle from
invisible Higgs decays is indicated by the dashed black curves in both
panels. Here the active thermalization process comes primarily from
decays into muons when kinematically accessible, and from electrons for
smaller masses.

We learn that the Higgs portal is a viable mediator between vector SIMPs
and the SM when the dark Higgs is close in mass to the DM. In this
regime, @xmath forbidden (semi)-annihilations channels of DM and the
dark Higgs, @xmath , can be active and are then important contributors
in determining the Dark Matter relic density, as discussed in Sec. 8.4.2
. In this case, the semi-annihilations are also active thermalization
processes within the dark sector.

We note that current limits on Higgs mixing from rare kaon- and @xmath
-meson decays are weaker than the bound we impose from the Higgs
invisible decay. However future beam dump or fixed target experiments,
such as SHiP at CERN SPS, have the potential to probe the Higgs mixing
angle further down [ Alekhin:2015byh ] . The allowed parameter space for
the Higgs portal to vector SIMPs could then be further probed as the
invisible Higgs decay constraint improves.

Before ending this subsection, we remark that a Higgs portal coupling
could allow in principle for the elastic scattering of relic vector SIMP
Dark Matter with electrons in direct-detection experiments [
Essig:2011nj , Graham:2012su , Lee:2015qva , Essig:2015cda ,
Hochberg:2015pha , Hochberg:2015fth , Hochberg:2016ntt , Essig:2016crl ,
Derenzo:2016fse , Tiffenberg:2017aac , Essig:2017kqs ] . For @xmath ,
the DM-electron direct detection scattering cross section via the Higgs
portal is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The small electron Yukawa coupling suppresses the cross section
substantially, yielding a currently unconstrained spin-independent
direct detection cross section.

##### 8.5.3 @xmath portal

Next, we explore the kinetically mixed @xmath portal for mediation
between the SIMP and visible sectors. We use the CS terms of Eq. ( 8.24
) to couple the vector DM to the @xmath , together with kinetic mixing
between the @xmath and the SM hypercharge. The momentum relaxation rate
for vector DM scattering with electrons via the @xmath portal is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one imposes Eq. ( 8.44 ) for kinetic equilibrium.

The resulting allowed parameter space is depicted in Fig. 8.5 as a
function of kinetic mixing @xmath , for fixed DM and @xmath masses. The
gray region is excluded by the unitarity bound on the CS term, and the
kinetic equilibrium condition fails in the purple region. The LEP bound
on the invisible decay width of the @xmath -boson, @xmath [ ALEPH:2005ab
] is shown in green, where we have assumed the dominant mode is into
dark fermions that generate the CS coupling [as would be the case in
generic UV completions with @xmath in Eq. ( 8.27 )] in both plots. The
BaBar constraint from invisible decays [ Lees:2017lec ] is shown in blue
(with a similar-sized constraint from the beam dump experiment NA64 at
CERN SPS [ Banerjee2017 ] ).

In Fig. 8.6 we further show the allowed parameter space in @xmath and
@xmath (top panels) or @xmath (lower panels), for fixed values of the CS
coefficient and of @xmath or @xmath , respectively. Here, kinetic
equilibrium is not maintained in the purple region; @xmath processes are
dominant over @xmath processes in the red region; invisible @xmath
-decay limits [ ALEPH:2005ab ] are imposed in green [where we have
assumed the dominant mode is into dark fermions with @xmath in Eq. (
8.27 )]; and constraints from BaBar invisible [ Lees:2017lec ] and
visible [ Lees:2014xha ] searches are shown in blue. The projected reach
of Belle-II into the parameter space is shown in the dashed blue curve [
Essig:2013vha ] . As is evident, vector SIMPs through the @xmath portal
can be achieved in an experimentally viable parameter space.

Concerning direct-detection, we note that the @xmath portal coupling of
vector SIMPs via the CS term gives rise to a @xmath -wave
velocity-suppressed elastic cross section off electrons. As a result,
the spin-independent cross section between vector SIMPs and electrons
via the @xmath portal is highly suppressed, in contrast to the case of
scalar SIMPs [ Choi:2015bya ] . For @xmath , the DM-electron scattering
cross section with @xmath portal is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For illustration, contours of DM-electron scattering with @xmath are
depicted in the lower left (right) panel of Fig. 8.6 .

We learn that a kinetically mixed @xmath with CS couplings can
successfully mediate interactions between the SIMP and SM sectors,
consistent with all experimental constraints. We expect that future
experiments such as Belle-II [ Essig:2013vha ] and potentially
measurements at LHCb [ Ilten:2016tkc ] can further probe the allowed
parameter space for vector SIMPs with a vector portal.

#### 8.6 Conclusion

We have considered a spontaneously broken @xmath gauge theory in the
hidden sector as an economical realization of vector SIMP Dark Matter.
Kinetic equilibrium between the dark and visible sectors can be obtained
via a Higgs portal in a minimal model or through a @xmath -portal in an
extended model with an additional @xmath and its non-abelian
Chern-Simons term. We have identified the parameter space for the @xmath
gauge coupling and Dark Matter mass by taking into account the observed
relic density as well as the self-scattering cross section. The kinetic
equilibrium condition in combination with a variety of experimental
constraints restrain the Higgs mixing or gauge kinetic mixing to a
region that could be probed in current and planned experiments at the
intensity frontiers.

### Chapter 9 Spin-2 portal Dark Matter \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

#### 9.1 Introduction

In this previous part we discussed the impact of recent results of
direct detection experiments such as LUX [ Akerib:2016vxi ] , PANDAX-II
[ Cui:2017nnn ] or XENON1T [ Aprile:2017iyp ] that constrain a large
part of the WIMP parameter space, and are close to excluding the
simplest extensions of the Standard Model (SM) such as the Higgs-portal
model [ Silveira:1985rk , McDonald:1993ex , Burgess:2000yq ,
Davoudiasl:2004be , Djouadi:2011aa , Han:2015hda , Mambrini:2016dca ] ,
the @xmath -portal [ Arcadi:2014lta , Escudero:2016gzx ] or even the
@xmath -portal [ Arcadi:2017jqd ] (see [ Arcadi:2017kky ] for a recent
review on the subject). In the WIMP paradigm, the key element for this
mechanism to work, is to introduce a sizable coupling between the dark
sector and the standard model particle content. This is obviously a
strong assumption motivated by the elegant simplicity of the WIMP
miracle. However, facing the strong constraints from a plethora of
experiments, the question of the effective viability of this mechanism
has arose over the last years. Consider the alternative case where the
coupling between the SM and the dark sector is extremely small, in such
a case the thermal equilibrium state cannot be reached in the early
universe. There is the possibility to still generate non-thermally the
correct Dark Matter density by producing it through decays or
annihilations of SM particles, via the so-called freeze-in mechanism [
Hall:2009bx ] ¹ ¹ 1 See [ fimp ] for a review. , while assuming a
vanishing DM density at the reheating temperature. In order to
illustrate the main idea of this mechanism, consider the following
situations:

-   The Dark Matter @xmath is weakly coupled to a heavy mediator @xmath
    that thermalized with the SM particles in the early universe. If
    @xmath is unstable, it will slowly decay, eventually to SM
    particles, but also to a Dark Matter pair @xmath if kinematically
    allowed. As shown in Sec. A.4 , in this case the Boltzmann equation
    for the DM number density reads:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath . The numerical solution of the Boltzmann equation for
    the DM yield @xmath is shown in Fig. 9.1 on the right pannel. In
    this case most of the Dark Matter would be produced when the @xmath
    becomes non-relativistic around @xmath and the corresponding relic
    density is given by:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Another possibility is to produce a DM pair from relativistic SM
    particles annihilations @xmath . In this case the Boltzmann equation
    can be written as ² ² 2 See Sec. A.4 for a detailed derivation. :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the production cross section and @xmath is the
    thermal density of the initial SM states which typically behaves as
    @xmath as they are assumed to be relativistic. We can define the
    production rate @xmath as:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Considering the following parametrization of the cross section:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    in this case the rate is simply given by a power law of the
    temperature and as shown in Sec. A.4 , the Boltzmann equation can be
    solved analytically in this case:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the reduced Planck mass and @xmath is the usual
    variable @xmath . Assuming the reheating to occur at high
    temperatures @xmath , we can distinguish two interesting regimes:

    -   The light mediator regime ( @xmath ): where the only relevant
        scale in @xmath is the temperature. The behavior of the yield in
        this case in shown in red on the left pannel of Fig. 9.1 and the
        relic density behaves as:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (9.7)
          -- -------- -- -------

        In this case the DM is mostly produced in the infrared regime
        when @xmath and typically one would invoke very small couplings
        @xmath to compensate the Planck mass dependence.

    -   The heavy mediator regime ( @xmath ): In this case most of the
        Dark Matter is produced around the reheating temperature as the
        cross section is not suppressed but enhanced by powers of the
        temperature, as shown on the left pannel of Fig. 9.1 . The relic
        density is given by:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (9.8)
          -- -------- -- -------

        which shows the importance of the ultra-violet regime in this
        case via the reheating temperature dependence.

Therefore, in order to achieve the correct relic density in the simplest
realization of the freeze-in mechanism, one has to invoke either tiny
couplings or very large mass scales. It turns out there are many
possible constructions where the Dark Matter is secluded from SM
particle content by intermediate mass scale messengers. Indeed,
intermediate scales are naturally present in many well-motivated
extensions of the SM, including Grand Unified Theories, models with a
see-saw mechanism, string constructions, inflation and reheating or
leptogenesis. In all of these frameworks, the presence of an
intermediate mass scale generates a heavy particle spectrum which can in
principle mediate interactions between a possible dark sector and the
SM. Some specific examples of these frameworks are Grand Unified SO(10)
models [ so10 ] or high-scale supersymmetry [ Benakli:2017whb ,
gravitino ] , where Dark Matter candidates respecting the Planck/WMAP
constraints [ Hinshaw:2012aka , Ade:2015xua ] are present. The effective
superweak coupling generated by the exchange of an intermediate mass or
even a superheavy mediator much heavier than the reheating temperature
after inflation, @xmath , allows for the production of Dark Matter
directly from the thermal bath in the same way that gravitinos are
produced during reheating by Planck suppressed operators [
Nanopoulos:1983up , Ellis:1983ew , Khlopov:1984pf ] . Often it is
sufficient to approximate the details of particle production during
reheating with the instantaneous reheating approximation. Namely, that
all particle production occurs at the end of the reheating process
characterized by the reheating temperature @xmath . However, depending
on the specific production process, the instantaneous approximation may
or may not be a good approximation. For example, considering the
parameterization of the production cross section of Eq. ( 9.5 ), this
approximation has been shown to be reasonable for @xmath [ Chung:1998rq
, Giudice:2000ex , Kolb:2003ke , Garcia:2017tuj ] . However, for @xmath
, the production rate is sensitive to the maximum temperature during the
reheating process [ Ellis:2015jpg , Garcia:2017tuj ] as we describe in
more detail below. Thus the detailed mechanism for Dark Matter
production during reheating will in general be sensitive to the form of
the coupling of the dark sector to the SM.

In the case of the gravitino, as noted above, from the strict
observational point of view, Dark Matter only requires gravitational
coupling. That is, communication between the two sectors (dark and SM)
is mediated only through gravity, which couples to the energy–momentum
tensor of the Standard Model and Dark Matter. Because this coupling is
fixed by the equivalence principle, the only free parameter in this
model is the mass of the Dark Matter. It has been shown in [
Garny:2015sjg , Tang:2017hvq , Garny:2017kha ] that independent of the
nature of Dark Matter, there exists a possibility to populate the relic
abundance through a freeze-in mechanism via the exchange of a massless
spin-2 graviton.

In this work we generalize this to the case in which the exchanged
spin-2 particle is massive. We borrow concepts from the theory of
massive gravity. The Lorentz invariant linear theory of a massive
graviton was formulated by Fierz and Pauli in [ Fierz:1939ix ] , where
it was shown that only one specific choice for the mass term is free
from singularities. At the linear level, the massive graviton has 5
possible polarization states, as expected for a massive spin-2 particle.
It was then shown that a generic nonlinear completion introduces a sixth
state, that is a ghost [ Boulware:1973my ] . Ref. [ deRham:2010kj ]
provided a nonlinear construction that is ghost free. ³ ³ 3 In fact,
such a model was already formulated in [ GrootNibbelink:2004hg ,
Nibbelink:2006sz ] , using the vielbein formalism. It was noted in these
works that the ghost does not appear in the scalar sector of the theory.
A conclusive proof that the ghost is absent in the full theory was later
obtained in [ Hassan:2011hr ] , also using the vielbein formulation. We
are not interested here in the nonlinear self-interactions of the
massive spin-2 field, so we will simply employ the Fierz and Pauli
linear term, implicitly assuming a ghost-free nonlinear completion.

The coupling of the spin-2 mediator is expected to be universal, but it
might couple more strongly to the SM (and the dark sector) than a Planck
suppressed gravitational coupling. Thus we consider here, a massive
spin-2 mediator coupling via the energy momentum tensor but with an
intermediate mass scale, thus enhancing its couplings relative to
gravity. We generalize spin-2 couplings to Dark Matter and study the
production mechanism of Dark Matter through a massive spin-2 portal.

This chapter is organized as follows. In the next section, we lay out
the model which includes a massive spin-2 mediator which is coupled to
both the Dark Matter sector and the SM. In Sec. 9.3 , we discuss our
computation of the relic Dark Matter abundance and our results are given
in Sec. 9.4 where we consider separately the cases of heavy and light
mediators and discuss the impact of dropping the instantaneous reheating
approximation and our conclusions are given in Sec. 9.5 .

#### 9.2 The model

The model we consider is a relatively minimal extension of the SM which
includes (in addition to the massless graviton @xmath ) a Dark Matter
candidate @xmath , and a massive spin-2 mediator @xmath and is described
by the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath ( @xmath ) the Standard Model (Dark Matter) Lagrangian.
@xmath is the Einstein-Hilbert sector ⁴ ⁴ 4 See Eq. ( 1.5 ). which
contains the kinetic terms of the massless graviton obtained after
expanding the metric around flat space, @xmath . @xmath is the
ghost-free Fierz-Pauli Lagrangian which contains the kinetic and mass
terms for the massive spin-2 field. A general mass term for a spin-2
field can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . However, as briefly discussed in the introduction, one
would expect at first sight that a massive spin-2 would carry ten
degrees of freedom, which is reduced to six by considering a minimal
coupling to matter with @xmath . It was realized, when trying to
quantize such a field, that one mode possesses kinetic terms with a
wrong sign and therefore describing a ghost. The trick of Fierz and
Pauli to avoid such a situation is to set @xmath . In this case the
propagator describes five degrees of freedom corresponding to the five
polarization states of the massive spin-2. Using this condition, the
complete Fierz-Pauli Lagrangian is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The massive spin-2 propagator @xmath and polarization sum rule can be
built from the quantity @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the polarization tensor of a spin-2 propagating with a
momentum @xmath and a polarization state @xmath . The polarization
tensors satisfy the following relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The propagator of the massless graviton can be written in the Lorentz
gauge as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final two terms present in the Lagrangian, @xmath are the
interaction terms with the massless graviton @xmath ( @xmath ) and the
massive spin-2 mediator @xmath ( @xmath ) that can be written, from the
equivalence principle:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the reduced Planck mass @xmath GeV, and @xmath is an
intermediate scale and governs the strength of the new spin-2
interaction. The couplings, @xmath ( @xmath ) of the messenger to the
Standard Model (Dark Matter) allow us to distinguish interactions
between the two sectors. Of course only 2 of the three parameters (
@xmath ) are independent. The form of the stress-energy tensor of a
field, @xmath depends on its spin @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 We assume real scalars
and Dirac fermions throughout our work. In general, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The amplitudes relevant for the computation of the processes @xmath can
be parametrized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote respectively the spin of the SM and DM
particles involved in the process @xmath . @xmath denotes the
propagators of the graviton ( @xmath ) and massive spin-2 ( @xmath )
given respectively in Eq. ( 9.15 ) and Eq. ( 9.12 ). The partial
amplitudes, @xmath , can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.20)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with similar expressions in terms of the Dark Matter momenta, @xmath .
The total amplitude squared implied in the processes SM SM @xmath DM DM
will be a sum of the three contributions, weighted by the Standard Model
content in fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further details regarding these amplitudes are found in Sec. C .

#### 9.3 The relic abundance

As noted in the introduction, reheating after inflation is often assumed
to occur instantaneously, on a timescale given by the inflaton decay
rate @xmath . This results in a thermal bath of initial temperature (see
[ Ellis:2015jpg , Garcia:2017tuj ] for a detailed discussion)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of effective degrees of freedom in the
thermal bath of temperature @xmath , and where @xmath is an order one
parameter that depends on when precisely reheating is assumed to take
place (setting @xmath equal to the reheating time, @xmath , leads to
@xmath ; setting it instead equal to the Hubble rate, @xmath , leads to
@xmath ). Numerical solutions to particle yields during reheating agree
with the instantaneous approximation if @xmath [ Pradler:2006hh ,
Rychkov:2007uq , Ellis:2015jpg ] .

In reality reheating is a finite-duration process. The inflaton decay
products thermalize on a much shorter timescale than @xmath , so it is
appropriate to assume the co-existence of a decaying inflaton, and of a
thermal bath arising from the decay. In this context, the reheating
temperature is conventionally defined as the temperature of the thermal
bath when it starts to dominate over the inflaton. However, the thermal
bath reaches its maximum temperature while still subdominant to the
inflaton. One finds (see for instance Ref. [ Ellis:2015jpg ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inflaton mass. Perturbativity requires @xmath , and
it is typical to have @xmath . Therefore the maximum temperature of the
thermal bath can be many orders of magnitude greater than @xmath .

Particle production at temperatures @xmath can be significant. There are
two reasons, in fact, why assuming an instantaneous reheating can lead
to a significant underestimation of the Dark Matter abundance. The first
case, which has extensively been pointed out in the literature, occurs
when the (thermally averaged) Dark Matter production cross section times
velocity given in Eq. ( 9.5 ) has a strong temperature dependence. Such
a relation applies for instance when the Dark Matter is produced from
quanta in the thermal bath by the exchange of a heavy mediator of mass
@xmath . If @xmath in this relation, the Dark Matter abundance is mostly
produced at the end of reheating, when @xmath . In contrast, the quanta
produced at @xmath dominate the final abundance if @xmath . For @xmath ,
particles produced at any temperature equally contribute to the final
abundance. This results in a logarithmic @xmath enhancement of the
abundance with respect to the naive estimate based on instantaneous
reheating. As shown in [ Garcia:2017tuj ] , @xmath is obtained in the
case of gravitino Dark Matter in high scale supersymmetry models. As we
show in the present work, this also applies to the cases in which the
mediator is a heavy spin-2 particle. While we do not consider it here,
the same strong temperature dependence is found if the mediator is a
pseudo-scalar particle, and both the Dark Matter and the quanta in the
thermal bath are spin-1 particles.

A second reason why the instantaneous reheating case can lead to a
significant underestimation of the Dark Matter abundance, and which we
explore in the present work, is if the mass @xmath of the mediator is
between @xmath and @xmath . In this case, it is possible that the final
Dark Matter abundance is due to the quanta produced on resonance, taking
place at @xmath . The resonance is missed if one simply assumes that the
thermal bath is instantaneously formed with @xmath .

The numerical analysis in this work takes into account the total set of
Boltzmann equations for the time evolution of a system whose energy
density is in the form of unstable massive particles @xmath (the
inflaton for instance), stable massive DM particles @xmath , and
radiation @xmath (ie SM particles). For the exact computation, we
assumed that @xmath decays into radiation with a rate @xmath , and that
the DM particles are created and annihilate into radiation with a
thermal-averaged cross section times velocity @xmath . The corresponding
energy and number densities satisfy the differential equations [
Chung:1998rq , Giudice:2000ex ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We assumed that each @xmath has energy @xmath and the factor @xmath is
the average energy released per @xmath pair annihilation. The Hubble
expansion parameter @xmath is given by @xmath . Thermalization of the SM
radiation produced by inflaton decays is rapid [ Davidson:2000er ,
Harigaya:2013vwa , Mukaida:2015ria , Ellis:2015jpg ] . However, as shown
in [ Garcia:2018wtq ] , a sizable amount of DM could be produced before
the SM particles thermalize, we do not take into account this effect
here. As such, we can define a radiation temperature,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath corresponds to the maximum temperature attained during the
reheating process. When the Dark Matter number density is far below its
equilibrium abundance (and when inflaton decays do not directly produce
@xmath ) the Dark Matter density @xmath is given by the approximate
Boltzmann equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hubble rate and @xmath is the number density that
the dark-matter would have in thermal equilibrium. This relation assumes
that the Dark Matter is produced through @xmath processes from quanta in
the thermal bath, and that the Dark Matter abundance is well below its
thermal equilibrium value, which is the case in the models considered
here. This relation can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Dark Matter yield, @xmath is the entropy density in
the thermal bath with @xmath effective number of degrees of freedom. The
production rate, @xmath for the 1 + 2 @xmath 3 + 4 process is obtained
from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the distribution functions of the initial
(SM) particles.

The two processes we consider contributing to the relic abundance are
the exchange of the (massless) graviton @xmath , with Planck mass
suppressed couplings, and the exchange of the massive spin-2 mediator
@xmath . Different results are obtained in the heavy mediator ( @xmath )
and light mediator ( @xmath ) cases which are discussed separately
below.

#### 9.4 Results

As noted above, all of the results in this work are obtained via a
numerical calculation using the complete set of the Boltzmann equations
( 9.24 ), and are not based on the instantaneous reheating
approximation. However, it is useful to give approximate solutions in
order to perform simple analytical estimates, as the difference between
the instantaneous and the non-instantaneous reheating is often an
overall multiplicative factor [ Garcia:2017tuj ] . In Sec. A.4.2 , we
derive in detail the computation of the relic abundance. We obtained the
following expression for the relic density in the instantaneous
approximation:

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.29)
  -- -- -- --------

where we fixed @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the Heaviside step
function. The first term in this expression is due to ordinary graviton
exchange in the processes producing Dark Matter. We see that this
contribution is completely negligible unless the Dark Matter is very
heavy. The following terms are due to the exchange of a massive spin-2
state in three different mass regimes, namely mass greater, smaller but
comparable, and much smaller than the reheating temperature. The
numerical factors @xmath and @xmath are normalized by their values for
the case of a scalar Dark Matter candidate and would change by a factor
of one order of magnitude if the Dark Matter is a fermion or a vector.
The superscript of the coupling coefficients denotes the spin of the
Dark Matter candidate and values of these coefficients are tabulated in
a table given in Sec. C . Note that the parametric dependence in the
above expressions for @xmath can be seen directly from the rates with
@xmath . Overall, we can distinguish 4 regimes corresponding to 4
different process leading to the production of a sufficient abundance of
Dark Matter.

-    Super-heavy mediator regime , or decoupling regime ( @xmath ): When
    @xmath , the dominant production mode is through the exchange of a
    massless graviton. For very large masses, the rate mediated by the
    spin-2 propagator is suppressed even relative to the Planck
    suppressed rate mediated by gravity. In this regime, the first term
    of Eq. ( 9.29 ) dominates. The production rate in such regime is
    very sensitive to the temperature of the thermal bath and is
    proportional to @xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 The exact expression of the rates can
    be found the Sec. C for the separate cases of scalar, fermionic, and
    vector Dark Matter. .

-    Heavy mediator regime ( @xmath ): When the condition for the
    super-heavy mediator regime above is not satisfied, yet the mediator
    mass still exceeds the reheating temperature, the dominant mode is
    massive spin-2 mediator with rate given by the final term
    (proportional to @xmath ) in Eq. ( 9.29 ). Despite the massive
    mediator, the coupling and hence the rate are enhanced over the
    gravitational rate by the fact that @xmath . The rate is in this
    case @xmath dependent on the temperature and is proportional to
    @xmath .

-    Narrow Width Approximation (NWA) ( @xmath ): this regime dominates
    when the temperature of the thermal bath approaches the mediator
    mass @xmath . @xmath is then produced on-shell in resonance, and if
    the width @xmath is sufficiently small, this process will dominate.
    The expression of the width can be found in the Sec. C and scales as
    @xmath . The rate is mildly dependent on the temperature and is
    proportional to @xmath ⁷ ⁷ 7 See the Sec. C for details. . For
    @xmath we obtain the term proportional to @xmath in Eq. ( 9.29 ).

-    Light mediator regime ( @xmath ): this regime is very similar to
    the well studied case of a light gravitino. Indeed, the behavior and
    couplings are exactly the same except the coupling, proportional to
    @xmath and not @xmath , is much larger. This regime is the one for
    which the particle production is greatest and the rate is
    proportional to @xmath .

The exact dependence on the temperature of each rate is detailed in Sec.
C , and is fundamental in order to understand the behavior of the relic
abundance as function of the reheating temperature. For an illustration,
we show in Fig. 9.2 the production rate @xmath as function of the
dimensionless parameter @xmath for @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV.

We can clearly distinguish 3 main regimes (in addition, the superheavy
mediator regime is seen as a slight bend in the curve at large @xmath )
in this figure. To guide the eye, we have plotted with dashed lines all
four regimes as if they were valid at all values of @xmath . The line
labeled as graviton corresponds to the superheavy mediator with rate
proportional to @xmath . The solid black line corresponds to the full
calculation valid for all values of @xmath . When @xmath , the rate is
dominated by the light mediator limit, @xmath decreasing with the
temperature at a rate proportional to @xmath . Then, when the
temperature approaches the mass of the mediator, the NWA regime
dominates, giving a rate very mildly dependent on the temperature (
@xmath ). It is only when @xmath drops below @xmath that the exponential
behavior of the Bessel function dominates. At larger @xmath , the rate
then drops abruptly to enter in the heavy mediator regime, with a strong
dependence on the temperature @xmath . At still lower temperatures,
eventually graviton exchange dominates and the rate again falls as
@xmath .

In the following subsections, we compute the relic abundance of the Dark
Matter, integrating the production rate in each of these regimes. The
integration was made numerically, using the set of equations ( 9.24 ),
taking into account the effect of non-instantaneous reheating on the
relic abundance. However, as it was shown in [ Garcia:2017tuj ] , the
difference induced by the exact non-instantaneous reheating treatment is
a multiplicative factor, independent of the model, except when the
resonance is important. The analytical expressions in Eq. ( 9.29 ) are
based on the instantaneous reheating approximation and are used only as
an aid to describe the results below.

##### 9.4.1 Heavy mediator regime

In the heavy mediator scenario, for scalar Dark Matter ⁸ ⁸ 8 Sec. C also
includes the exact formulae for fermionic and vectorial Dark Matter.
However, these differ only by a factor of order one to ten. one can
extract from Eq. ( 9.29 ) the expression for @xmath in the term
proportional to @xmath . This result (based on instantaneous reheating)
should be multiplied by a “boost” factor, @xmath , to account for
non-instant reheating. It was calculated in [ Garcia:2017tuj ] to be
@xmath for @xmath and numerically @xmath . We plot in Fig. 9.3 the
values of @xmath and @xmath required to obtain a relic density of @xmath
for two choices of Dark Matter masses (1 GeV and @xmath GeV) and ⁹ ⁹ 9
When not specified, we will fix @xmath . @xmath GeV. It is important to
underline that, to produce this figure, we took into account the
enhancement of the production rate due to non-instantaneous reheating.
Indeed, as it was shown in [ Garcia:2017tuj ] , such a high power-law
dependence on the reheating temperature implied that the majority of
Dark Matter is produced at the beginning of the reheating process and
the approximation of instant reheating is not valid anymore. However,
this enhancement does not depend on the production process of Dark
Matter but only on the ratio @xmath .

In the heavy mediator regime, we can verify the fact that the relic
abundance is compatible with WMAP/Planck data when @xmath GeV and @xmath
GeV, from the analytical expression ( 9.29 ). Agreement between the
curve and our analytical expression requires the boost factor of about
20. Thus for @xmath GeV, we find @xmath GeV. Note that for this value of
@xmath , the solid curve cuts off at @xmath GeV as we must require
@xmath so that the production of the Dark Matter is kinematically
allowed. At lower value of @xmath the analytical expression ( 9.29 )
would require a significantly larger boost factor as the effect of the
pole can not be neglected and this effect is not accurately taken into
account in the analytical expression. In fact, under close examination
of the solid line in Fig. 9.3 , we see a change in slope at @xmath GeV.
At higher masses, the effect of the pole is safely neglected and the
term propotional to @xmath in Eq. ( 9.29 ) describes the numerical
result reasonably well.

At still higher @xmath , the curve flattens out, when the term
proportional to @xmath in Eq. ( 9.29 ) dominates, corresponding to
graviton exchange. Indeed, Eq. ( 9.29 ) shows that when @xmath (for the
parameters shown in the figure), graviton exchange dominates and the
necessary reheat temperature is independent of @xmath and is @xmath GeV
as seen in Fig. 9.3 . This is easily understood once one notices that,
even if massless, graviton exchange is highly suppressed by Planck mass
couplings to the standard-model and dark sector. Note that in the case
of graviton exchange there is effectively no boost factor as the rate
depends on @xmath rather than @xmath . A large reheating temperature is
needed to compensate the weakness of the coupling. Then for all masses
@xmath GeV, graviton exchange dominates.

For @xmath GeV (as seen by the dashed line), the heavy mediator is only
important at extremely high values of @xmath as seen by the slight bend
in the curve at the upper right of the figure. This bend corresponds to
the point where the effect of the pole ceases to dominate as we
previously saw for @xmath GeV and discussed above.

##### 9.4.2 Light mediator regime

As we discussed above, if @xmath is lighter than the reheating
temperature @xmath , there is the possibility of resonant production of
the mediator @xmath [ blennow_freeze-through_2014 ] . One can easily
understand that once the temperature of the thermal bath @xmath dropped
to the value @xmath , Dark Matter production will be enhanced by the
rapid s-channel cross section on resonance. The important parameter in
this case is the width of @xmath . Within the narrow width
approximation, one can compute the rate and relic density (see the Sec.
C for details) which is given in Eq. ( 9.29 ) by the term proportional
to @xmath . This expression is obviously independent of @xmath because
it corresponds to rapid Dark Matter production around @xmath . This
pole-phenomena is clearly visible in Fig. 9.3 , represented by the
vertical line (for @xmath GeV) corresponding to the value @xmath in good
agreement with our analytical computation Eq. ( 9.29 ).

For lower values of @xmath , the pole process occurs at lower
temperatures and the Dark Matter production rate is not sufficient to
obtain the correct relic density. The dominant production mode becomes
the exchange of the spin-2 mediator offshell. Its contribution is given
in Eq. ( 9.29 ) by the term proportional to @xmath . In this case, the
rate does not scale with the mediator mass and we expect a specific
value of @xmath necessary to obtain the correct relic density for a
given Dark Matter mass. We obtain the right amount Dark Matter with
mass, @xmath GeV for @xmath GeV, which corresponds to the plateau
observed on the left hand side of Fig. 9.3 .

##### 9.4.3 Non-instantaneous reheating

The effects of non-instantaneous reheating on the relic abundance is
shown in Fig. 9.4 , where we plot the ratio of the relic abundance
computed with the the exact numerical solution compared to
instant-reheating approximation, @xmath .

There are several effects of non-instantaneous reheating, depending on
the mass of the mediator @xmath relative to @xmath and @xmath :

-   If @xmath , the Dark Matter production process is dominated by the
    exchange of the (light) spin-2 mediator, @xmath . Since the cross
    section is proportional to @xmath ( @xmath ), the boost factor
    @xmath is marginal (of the order of 1.5 in accordance with what was
    found in [ Garcia:2017tuj ] ). This is seen by the horizontal part
    of the solid line at the smallest values of @xmath shown.

-   At slightly higher @xmath , we notice that the boost factor is
    unity. This is a consequence of the weak influence of the
    temperature on the production rate. Indeed, at these values of
    @xmath , the rate @xmath is dominated by the pole-production and
    @xmath . If we ignore the pole, then the abundance is characterized
    by a rate which is proportional to @xmath (as it is for very large
    @xmath ) and we obtain a boost factor of @xmath as seen by the
    dotted line.

-   If @xmath , there is a huge enhancement of the cross section
    depicted in Fig. 9.4 due to the presence of the pole between @xmath
    and @xmath . This boost factor @xmath can even reach a few @xmath
    for this value of @xmath . For lower @xmath , the boost factor can
    be much higher as it scales as @xmath for a fixed ratio of @xmath .

-   Although @xmath , there is a large boost factor associated with the
    pole, an effect we already saw in the discussion of Fig. 9.3 . At
    higher @xmath , the boost factor drops from its peak due to the
    pole, to the shoulder at around @xmath GeV, where the rate is
    proportional to @xmath (corresponding to @xmath in the cross section
    due to the exchange of the off-shell spin-2 mediator). Here, the
    boost factor is approximately 20 as discussed above. The dotted line
    ignores the effect of the pole and shows the smooth transition
    between rates which vary as @xmath to @xmath to @xmath .

-   Finally, at the largest values of @xmath shown in the figure, the
    production rate is dominated by graviton exchange, and the rate
    again varies as @xmath . The pole can be safely ignored, and the
    boost factor is approximately 1.5 as was found for very low @xmath .

#### 9.5 Conclusion

We have shown that Dark Matter can naturally be produced through a
spin-2 portal. We generalized our study to any massive spin-2 state with
stress-energy tensor couplings to the Standard Model and the dark
sector. In a large part of the parameter space, the massive spin-2
portal dominates over the (Planck-suppressed) graviton exchange. We have
performed an exhaustive analysis, considering cases where the spin-2
field is both heavier and lighter than the reheating temperature. In
both cases, the freeze-in process dominates the production, while
enhanced during the reheating phase (heavy mediator case) or through its
resonant production (light mediator case). We have also shown that our
results are greatly influenced by taking into account the effects of
non-instantaneous reheating. Not only do we recover boost factors in the
production due to the large dependence on the temperature of the rate
@xmath , but we have also shown that the presence of a mediator between
@xmath and @xmath strongly enhances the relic abundance due to rapid
s-channel production when @xmath .

### Conclusion

In this PhD thesis we reviewed some theoretical elements required to
understand how the combination of cosmological observations including
(between others) studies of the cosmic microwave background, distant
supernovae, large samples of galaxy clusters, baryon acoustic
oscillation measurements and gravitational lensing has firmly
established a standard cosmological model where the Dark Matter, a new
yet-to-be discovered form of matter, accounts for about 85 @xmath of the
matter content of the Universe, and about @xmath of the global energy
budget.

We reviewed the theoretical foundations of the WIMP paradigm as an
attractive solution to this invisible mass issue since the Dark Matter
abundance is set to the observed value by a new physics scale that is
well motivated and only require one major assumption, i.e. the
primordial thermal contact between the dark sector and the Standard
Model bath. As a result, concrete realizations of WIMP models had been
developed in different Beyond-the-Standard-Model (BSM) frameworks,
accessible to several search strategies such as direct, indirect and
collider searches whose current status and prospects have been
discussed.

In particular, we have studied the simplest WIMP constructions, i.e.,
the Higgs portal and the @xmath portal, and we concluded that these
models will be substantially ruled out, ad exception of the case of
fermionic DM with only axial couplings with the @xmath boson (e.g.,
Majorana DM), in absence of signals in next generation of Direct
Detection experiments. The tension with direct detection constraints can
be relaxed in somehow next-to minimal scenarios for instance by
introducting of a BSM scalar s-channel mediator. However, the
introduction of such extra degree of freedom seems quite contrived and
would require some theoretical arguments.

The BSM framework of extended gauge symmetries is well suited to the
WIMP paradigm as both the Dark Matter stability and the origin of the
mediator can naturally arise in such constructions. We studied specific
models in which the connection between a vectorial Dark Matter candidate
and the massive gauge field of a broken new BSM symmetry group @xmath is
mediated by a Chern-Simons (CS) interaction, whose origin is motivated
by anomaly cancellation mechanisms. In particular, we explored the
possibility of connecting the @xmath with the Standard Model via a
kinetic mixing term with the hypercharge field @xmath as well as the
possibility of having a second CS-like term involving the @xmath and the
hypercharge field strength tensor. We performed a complete
phenomenological analysis of such models and proposed a framework for
the generation of Chern-Simons coupling from a UV complete model as well
as a radiative origin of the kinetic mixing. The existing and near
future experimental setups would favor a value of the CS coupling hard
to explain with a radiative origin unless more families of the BSM
fermions are included or in the case where strong couplings are
considered. The radiative origin of the kinetic mixing between the
vectorial DM and the mediator could be avoided, to ensure the Dark
Matter stability, by suitedly choosing the charge assignment of the
heavy fermions, but would be quite contrived. The phenomenological
analysis of these models showed the possibility to account for the Dark
Matter abundance in our universe. However, a more detailed theoretical
analysis based on UV completion of this framework showed that the viable
parameter space compatible with the previous statement would require
some tuning of the parameters of the theory.

In a different chapter, we scrutinized a flavourful model, where a
fourth vector-like family is introduced and charged under an extra
@xmath symmetry, as a possible solution to the @xmath flavour anomalies.
The massive @xmath associated to this broken gauge symmetry plays the
role of mediator between the Standard Model and the Dark Matter, i.e.
the fourth-family singlet Dirac neutrino. In the absence of mixing, the
@xmath is fermiophobic, having no couplings to the three chiral
families, but does couple to a fourth vector-like family. The presence
of Yukawa couplings between some new singlet scalars charged under the
extra @xmath and the four families of fermions induces mixing between
generations. Such mixing effects induces @xmath couplings to second
family left-handed lepton doublets and third family left-handed quark
doublets. This model can simultaneously account for the measured @xmath
-decay ratios @xmath for the observed relic abundance of Dark Matter.
Facing a plethora of constraints from flavour physics, collider and Dark
Matter searches, this analysis hints at a particular viable corner of
the parameter space where the mediator has a mass of the order of 500
GeV. The allowed window can be further squeezed by better precision
measurements of the trident @xmath process, and by improving the
theoretical precision of the SM prediction for the @xmath meson mass
difference. The preferred range of Dark Matter masses and couplings
could be probed by the future generation of direct detection
experiments.

Alternative thermal Dark Matter production mechanisms have been
discussed in the third part of this thesis, such as the Strongly
Interactive Massive Particles (SIMP) and ELastic Decoupling Relic
(ELDER) mechanisms. In these frameworks, the role of interactions inside
the dark sector as well as the effect of an early decoupling between the
Dark Matter and the SM bath imply a different phenomenology. In
particular, such frameworks provide the possibility of having a sizable
Dark Matter self-interaction cross section that could alleviate tensions
between observations and N-body simulations based on @xmath CDM. In this
thesis we considered an explicit realization of the SIMP mechanism in
the form of vector SIMPs arising from an @xmath hidden non-abelian gauge
theory, where the accidental custodial symmetry protects the stability
of the Dark Matter. We propose several ways of equilibrating the dark
and visible sectors in this setup. In particular, we showed that a light
dark Higgs portal can maintain thermal equilibrium between the two
sectors, as can a massive dark vector portal kinetically mixing the
hyperchage, with its generalized Chern-Simons couplings to the vector
SIMPs, all while remaining consistent with experimental constraints.

In the last chapter we discussed the possibility of producing the Dark
Matter non-thermally from annihilation or decay of particles in thermal
contact with the Standard Model bath. In particular, we studied the case
where a heavy spin-2 messenger can efficiently play the role of a portal
between the dark and Standard Model sectors. In a large part of the
parameter space compatible by the requirement of generating the correct
relic density, production through the exchange of a massive spin-2
mediator dominates over processes involving a graviton with Planck
suppressed couplings. We studied the impact of the reheating stage of
the universe on the Dark Matter production, and we showed that our
results are greatly influenced by taking into account the effects of
non-instantaneous reheating. Not only do we recover boost factors in the
production due to the large dependence on the temperature of the
production rate, but we have also shown that the presence of a mediator
with a mass of the order of the reheating temperature might
significantly enhance the production due to resonance effects of the
massive spin-2 state.

The work presented in this thesis aimed at tackling one of the open
questions of modern physics regarding our understanding of the
fundamental laws of nature. The precise nature of the Dark Matter still
remains unknown to this day, but it is clear that most of the WIMP
models will be scrutinized in the next decades. This thesis highlighted
the paramount role of the next generation of experiments and its
complementarity with theoretical considerations as a way to solve the
disturbing puzzle of the presence of Dark Matter in our universe.

### Appendix A The Boltzmann equation \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

In this chapter we provide some details regarding the derivation of the
Boltzmann equation expressing the time evolution of the Dark Matter
density and its resolution in the specific cases considered in this
thesis.

#### a.1 Derivation of the Boltzmann equation : the WIMP case

In this section we derive the Boltzmann equation, relating the time
evolution of the number density of some species in the universe to its
interaction processes. The Liouville operator @xmath represents the time
evolution of the phase space distribution function @xmath . In the
context of general relativity, the Liouville operator can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the specific case of the FLRW metric, according to the homogeneity
and isotropy hypotheses, the distribution function does not depend on
space-time coordinates and depends only on the momentum modulus @xmath .
Thus the Liouville operator then takes the form simplified form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The number @xmath density can be defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of degrees of freedom of the species
considered. Integrating of the momentum gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a non-interacting universe, the momentum integral of the Liouville
operator would vanish

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

expressing the conservation of the number of particles per comoving
volume. In the case of number changing microscopic processes such as
scattering or annihilations, the evolution of the phase space
distribution is ruled by the Boltzmann equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the collision operator. Consider the microscopic
process:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For this specific process, the collision operator can be defined as:

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.8)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath respectively apply to bosons and fermions. The amplitude
squarred @xmath is averaged over initial and final spin states and
divided by symmetry factors accounting for identical initial or final
states. We introduced the Lorentz invariant quantity @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating over the momentum of @xmath gives:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.10)
  -- -- -- --------

In order to consider all the possible collision terms that are affecting
the phase space distribution @xmath , one has to sum on the right-hand
side, over all the possible processes involving the particle @xmath ,
including processed involving a larger number of particles. In the
following, we will focus on how to rewrite the collision operator in a
more convenient way, for few specific cases.

##### a.1.1 The Liouville operator in the radiation era

In the radiation era entropy is conserved and the expansion rate is
dominated by radiation components, therefore entropy density and @xmath
can be expressed as a function of the temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath is the reduced Planck mass.

We define the yield @xmath as a quantity proportional to the number of
particle when entropy is conserved, allowing to write the left-hand side
of the Boltzmann equation as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the term on the RHS corresponding to the temperature variation
of the effective numbers of relativistic species can sometimes be
neglected. In this case the Boltzmann equation has the simple form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.1.2 Kinetic equilibrium and Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics

Considering of the process @xmath , one can write the right-hand side of
the Boltzmann equation as a function of a physical quantity that can
experimentally be measured and theoretically be computed assuming a
specific microscopic model. In order to remain general we write every
introduced quantity in a Lorentz invariant way, hence define the Lorentz
invariant cross section @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 As @xmath includes symmetry and
spin averaging factors for both initial and final states, this
definition would have to be rescaled accordingly to match the usual
definition of a cross section in particle physics. This defintion
differs to the particle physics standard definition where Lorentz
invariance is satisfied but only when a Lorentz boost is considered
along the beam axis. as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and we introduced the Lorentz invariant relative velocity :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

assuming thermal distributions and neglecting the Pauli blocking and
stimulation factors ² ² 2 equivalent to consider Maxwell-Boltzmann
distributions @xmath , we can write the right-hand side of the Boltzmann
equation in a more convenient way:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

we used the velocity averaged cross section defined as follow:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively, it is common to find definition of @xmath involving the
Møller velocity @xmath , more adapted to the non-relativistic regime
that can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we will assume, unless stated explicitely, CP
invariance such that @xmath . Assuming that species @xmath are in
kinetic equilibrium allows to write @xmath . In this case, using energy
conservation during the @xmath process we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rewriting the product @xmath we derive a compact formulation of the
Boltzmann equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to remind the few assumptions implied in the derivation
of this expression :

-   We assumed CP invariance: using the previous derivation in CP
    violating processes would not be valid and one would have to start
    from the definition of the collision operator when considering such
    cases, relevant in the context of Baryogenesis for instance.

-   @xmath and @xmath are always in kinetic equilibrium throughout the
    freeze-out process: This condition can be estimated using simple
    estimate or more exact treatment as described further on.

-   Maxwell-Boltzmann distributions: we assumed that Pauli blocking or
    enhancement factor can be neglected, this is generally a reasonable
    assumption in the non-relativistic regime but these factors can play
    a role when relativistic decoupling is considered for instance.

-   Chemical potentials can be neglected: this condition is not always
    satisfied, one has to verify that the rate of number changing
    processes is sufficiently high to ensure chemical equilibrium.

-   Reference frame: we neglected the fact that temperature is defined
    in a cosmic comoving frame while usually computation of cross
    sections are performed in the centre-of-mass frame, one would need
    to define a boost factor from one frame to another to express the
    apparent ”redshift” of the temperature in the centre-of-mass frame.
    In this case factorization of the several terms in the collision
    operator is not trivial and would require a specific treatment.
    However, in the non-relativistic treatment, as a first
    approximation, it is a reasonable approximation to neglect this
    effect.

##### a.1.3 Computation of @xmath

###### Non-relativistic expansion

In the WIMP case, an important point is that the DM is still in kinetic
equilibrium while the decoupling occurs, allowing to trade the
distribution @xmath by @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have an analytical approximation of this quantity, one can
perform an expansion, in the non-relativistic limit of @xmath , as a
power series of the DM velocity squared:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence @xmath can be written in the non relativistic limit by considering
a Maxwellian velocity distribution as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the DM particles. Injecting the expansion
of @xmath in the previous expression gives :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Even though this result relies on several approximations, as long as the
DM is in the non-relativistic regime (i.e. @xmath ) the first term
should give a rather reliable analytical approximation. Notice that this
expansion is not valid around pole regions or near thresholds, in this
cases one has to compute numerically the quantity @xmath .

###### Near a resonance

In the case where the DM can annihilate into SM particles through
s-channel exchange of some heavy field, and if this field is unstable,
the cross section expressed as a function of the center-of-mass energy
follows a Breit-Wigner distribution and presents a resonance when the
heavy mediator is produced on shell. In this case the usual velocity
expansion of @xmath is not longer valid and must be treated differently
[ Griest1991c , Gondolo:1990dk ] . In particular, it can be computed
analytically in the Narrow Width Approximation (NWA), assuming that
@xmath can be expressed as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the width of the resonance
normalized by its mass. @xmath can then be expressed in the following
way:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the NWA limit @xmath the relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be injected in the previous integral, giving:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression depends mostly on the parameter @xmath why quantify the
mass difference between the DM and the mediator, where thermal effects
can have sizable effect on @xmath .

###### General case

In the relativitic case, near threshold and around poles, the velocity
expansion of @xmath is not valid and one has to evaluate the full
numerical integration which can be expressed, by the change of variable
@xmath as a function of a single integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This expression can be simplified in the case of the
identical initial states [ Gondolo:1990dk ] by defining a dimensionless
variable @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.2 Forbidden channels

##### a.2.1 General treatment

When computing the Boltzmann equation for the DM density, one has to
take into account all the DM number changing physical processes. In the
case where a DM candidate @xmath is slightly lighter than some other
particle, at zero temperature the DM annihilation in this channel would
be kinematically forbidden but if the difference between their masses is
small enough, the DM particles with velocities corresponding to the most
energetic part of the distribution could have sufficient kinetic energy
to produce this other particle on-shell [ Griest1991c ] . This can be
the case for instance in the context of SSB where the higgs @xmath
generating the DM mass can be just slightly more massive. If the higgs
is thermalized with the SM for instance, the forbidden channel sector of
the Boltzmann equation for the DM density would read :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the right-hand side of this equation vanishes, the DM evolves only
according to the Hubble expansion rate and the DM would be in thermal
equilibrium with the SM bath, giving the following balance relation:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

in the case of non-relativistic collisions and assuming the same number
of degrees of freedom for the Higgs and the DM, where we introduced the
variable @xmath . This relation can be injected in the Boltzmann
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Higgs density should be suppressed by a exponential Boltzmann factor
and then can be neglected. Assuming a s-wave contribution of @xmath for
simplicity and integrating over @xmath gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where we defined @xmath . The relic density at the present time becomes:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.35)
  -- -- -- --------

Where @xmath is the Euler function. Notice that this expression is
extremely sensitive to the mass splitting parameter @xmath because of
the exponential Boltzmann factor and thus can significantly enhance the
DM annihilation and, as a result, the relic density.

##### a.2.2 Contributions in the VSIMP case

Based on the discussion in Sec. 8.4.2 , the @xmath forbidden
(semi-)annihilation cross sections (with notations, @xmath meaning that
@xmath and @xmath meaning that @xmath ) are also given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.36)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath in the latter case.

#### a.3 Strongly Interacting Massive Particle

##### a.3.1 General treatment

Assuming that the DM density evolution is triggered by a @xmath process,
we can write the Boltzmann equation as follow:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . By defining @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

then we can write the Boltzmann equation as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantity @xmath can be understood as the generalization of the
notion of cross section for a collision process involving three
particles in the initial state. In the case where all the particles have
the same mass @xmath , in the non-relativistic regime , @xmath can be
related to the amplitude squared as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the non-relativistic limit, energy conservation gives @xmath with
@xmath the external momentum of an outgoing particle. The quantity
@xmath can be simplified if the matrix element @xmath does not depend on
the direction of the outgoing particles as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore in the specific regime mentioned above, the following relation
holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.3.2 Solution of the Boltzmann equation

Assuming a @xmath process involving identical particles, one can write
the relevant Boltzmann equation as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

A non-relatisitic freeze-out, similar to the WIMP case, occurs as the
second term on the RHS becomes exponentially suppressed after the
freeze-out time @xmath , where @xmath . One can derive an analytical
approximation of the relic density by integrating the Boltzmann
equation, which can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This equation can be integrated straightforwardly, giving
a relic density:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the freeze-out time @xmath can be estimated by comparing the
interaction rate and the Hubble expansion rate, which gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

for which @xmath is a solution, as in the WIMP case. Plugging this value
is Eq. A.47 provides an estimation of the relic abundance generated by
the SIMP mechanism.

##### a.3.3 Kinetic equilibrium condition

In order to check if kinetic equilibrium is maintained between the dark
sector and SM thermal baths, we need to understand how energy is
transferred between the two baths. In order to do so, consider the
Boltzmann equation A.6 associated to the evolution of a DM candidate
@xmath with a phase space distribution @xmath . Integrating over all
possible momenta after plugging A.1 gives:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the second term has been obtained after integrating by parts.
Using the expressions of the energy density and pressure as defined in
Sec. 1.2.2 , the LHS of the Boltzmann equation reads:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.50)
  -- -- -- --------

The RHS of the Boltzmann equation corresponds to the integral of the
collision operator. In order to evaluate this term, one would have to
sum over all possible processes that can affect the DM phase space
distribution. Assuming a scenario where the DM could scatter with SM
particles @xmath through processes such as @xmath , the RHS of the
Boltzmann equation would read:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The integral of the collision operator can be understood as the typical
energy transfer between @xmath and @xmath per unit of time. Therefore we
define the quantity @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the Boltzmann equation takes the simple from:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this equation we see that in absence of interaction (i.e. @xmath ),
if the DM particles are non-relativistic, the pressure can be neglected
and this implies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows to recover the DM energy density evolution with the scale
factor: @xmath . The quantity @xmath can be related to the momentum
relaxation rate @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the temperatures of the SM and dark sector
respectively. In the limit where a non-relativistic DM particle scatters
with a relativistic SM particle of momentum @xmath , the momentum
relaxation rate can be expressed as a sum over all possible SM particles
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the squared momentum transfer between DM and the
relativistic species. The differential elastic scattering cross section
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Going back to Eq. A.53 and considering that the DM density evolves
according to its thermal equilibrium function gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term on the RHS of this equation drives the DM temperature to
evolve grossly as @xmath while the second term tends to moderate the
temperature difference between the two sectors with an efficiency
proportional to the momentum relaxation rate. The decoupling temperature
@xmath can be estimated as the temperature for which the second term
becomes of the order of one, yielding:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.3.4 The VSIMP case

Based on the discussion in Sec. 8.4.1 , the @xmath annihilation cross
sections including only @xmath gauge interactions (with notations,
@xmath meaning @xmath , etc) are, in the non-relativistic limit,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we have included the @xmath -wave terms in @xmath as they have a
resonance at @xmath . We note that @xmath are the speeds of two Dark
Matter particles in the initial states and @xmath is the angle between
the two in the center of mass frame.

On the other hand, the @xmath annihilation cross sections including the
dark Higgs (with notations, @xmath meaning @xmath , etc) are, in the
non-relativistic limit,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.64)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that the factor @xmath in the above results is the squared
product of the dark Higgs propagator in @xmath -channel and the Dark
Matter propagator in @xmath -channel, which are regularized at @xmath by
the finite width of the dark Higgs and a nonzero Dark Matter velocity,
respectively. The @xmath annihilation cross sections including two dark
Higgs bosons such as @xmath are @xmath -wave suppressed and
sub-dominant.

#### a.4 Non-thermal production : the freeze-in case

##### a.4.1 Dark Matter production in the radiation domination era

In the case where the coupling strength between the SM particles and the
dark sector is not sufficient to reach a primordial thermal equilibrium
state, the DM could be produced non-thermally assuming that at the end
of reheating, Dark Matter is not already produced in our universe.

###### Production through decay of a heavy field

One possibility could be that the Dark Matter is produced from
annihilations of SM particles through the exchange of some heavy @xmath
mediator for instance or produced directly by the decay of this
mediator. The full Boltzmann equation relevant in the former case
involves the amplitude @xmath of the @xmath process where @xmath denotes
a DM candidate:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.67)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the freeze-in approximation, the initial Dark Matter number density
vanishes, we can neglect the term proportional to @xmath . We can use
the definition of the decay width

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

to write the Boltzmann equation as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we considered Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics for the @xmath .
Computing the integral over all possible momenta and using the variable
@xmath gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The yield @xmath can be expressed as a function of the following
integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The yield at the present time @xmath can be estimated analytically as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case most of the DM is produced at a late time @xmath . As a
result the relic density is given by the following analytical formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

.

###### Production through annihilation of SM particles

Another possibility is to produce Dark Matter particles via processes
such as @xmath . In that case the Boltzmann equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we neglected the backreaction term by using the freeze-in
approximation. Assuming two initial identical SM particles with internal
degrees of freedom equals to the ones of the DM for simplicity and
Maxwell-Boltzmann distributions, one can rewrite the Boltzmann equation
as a function of the velocity averaged annihilation cross section @xmath
³ ³ 3 as defined in Eq. ( A.30 ). as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We can define the production rate @xmath as being the RHS
of the Boltzmann equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Boltzmann equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the usual variables @xmath and @xmath . Parametrizing the cross
section as a power law:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some mass scale and @xmath the Heaviside step function,
gives the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the number of internal degrees of freedom of the
initial states, leading to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating this equation ⁴ ⁴ 4 Assuming @xmath , otherwise a
logarithmic behavior is expected. from the reheating temperature @xmath
to some temperature @xmath gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

assuming @xmath and @xmath constant. Since we considered that the
production rate vanishes for temperatures larger than the DM mass, the
yield at the present time will be given by taking @xmath . Therefore,
the relic density can be derived in a straightforward way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.4.2 The preheating contribution

As it was discussed in Sec. 1.2.2 , the reheating is not expected to be
a instantaneous process and the physics occuring at temperatures above
the reheating temperature @xmath plays a role in the production of Dark
Matter. In the following we call the period of time occuring before the
reheating temperature as preheating . Assuming that the inflaton @xmath
mostly decays into SM particles, the evolution of energy densities of
radiation @xmath , Dark Matter @xmath and @xmath are given by the
following set of Boltzmann equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the inflaton decay width and @xmath the DM velocity
averaged annihilation cross section. The Hubble parameter can be
written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can write the set of Boltzmann equations using dimensionless
variables for convenience:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined as follow

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the effective number of degrees of freedom of the
SM thermal bath at the reheating temperature. This set of equation can
be solved assuming that the inflaton is the only species present at the
initial time @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the condition @xmath is arbitrary and will not impact the results.
Following [ Giudice:2000ex ] we can infer the following analytical
formula assuming a constant @xmath during the reheating process:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

The maximum temperature achieved in the universe can be expressed as a
function of the Hubble parameter at the initial time and the reheating
temperature:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the relation between the normalized scale factor and the temperature
is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we considered the effective number of relativistic species as
constant @xmath . An important result is the temperature evolution of
the Hubble parameter which is very specific to this preheating stage of
the universe:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Boltzmann equation relevant for DM production in the context of
freeze-in can be simplified by neglecting the backreaction term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the production rate. Considering the relation @xmath and
@xmath we can express the time derivative as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the Boltzmann equation for the DM number density is give by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose LHS can be written as a total derivative:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula shows that the quantity @xmath is conserved in absence of
interactions and is not limited to the DM case, it remains valid for any
species that does not interact sufficiently enough with the SM to
thermalize. This equation can be integrated in order to deduce the DM
density at a temperature @xmath with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term on the LHS of the initial condition for the DM density
vanishes from the initial condition used to derive the results in the
previous section, coming from the freeze-in hypothesis. Assuming that
the rate can be written as a power law and vanishes when the temperature
is lower than the DM mass ⁵ ⁵ 5 In a more realistic description, the
rate would not vanish for @xmath but would be exponentially suppressed
due to the high-energy tail of the thermal distribution of the initial
states.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

allows for an analytical estimation of the density in the preheating
phase. First, if we assume that the DM is lighter than the reheating
temperature:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

giving:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

assuming @xmath . Now if we assume that @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since below @xmath the rate vanishes the quantity @xmath is conserved
during the preheating phase and we can express the density at the
reheating temperature as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This formula shows how strongly the DM density is redshifted during the
preheating phase, much stronger than in a radiation-dominated universe.
After the reheating, the universe is dominated by radiation and we can
use the usual conservation of the yield @xmath which lead to:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As a result, analytical formulas can be derived in the case where @xmath
as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath the relic density can be written:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### Appendix B Chern-Simons couplings \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

In this section of the appendices we provide some detailed elements
related to the computation of the Chern-Simons couplings considered in
this thesis.

#### b.1 Computation of the abelian Chern-Simons coupling

In this section of the appendix we show how to derive the effective
Lagrangian considered in Chapter 6 from a UV complete model framework.
To achieve this goal, we review computations performed in Ref. [
Anastasopoulos:2006cz ] of potential anomalous diagrams of the theory
which involve three external gauge bosons or axions, interacting through
a triangular loop of massive fermions. We can classify the possible
diagrams in three categories: (1) diagrams without any mass insertions.
Such diagrams are linearly divergent and proportional to the usual
anomaly trace [ Adler:1969gk , Bell:1969ts ] (see Ref. [ Bilal:2008qx ]
also for an overview). (2) Diagrams involving three gauge bosons with
two mass insertions which give a finite result. They are connected to
the so-called ”CS” interaction (see, for example Ref. [
Anastasopoulos:2006cz ] ) and, (3) diagrams involving axions and two
gauge bosons with one mass insertion. Just like the former class of
diagrams, these diagrams are also finite. We will consider examples
where the incoming state for the triangle loop diagrams with heavy
fermions is either a gauge boson @xmath or an axion @xmath while two
outgoing states are two gauge fields, denoted as @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. After evaluating these loop diagrams, we also compute the
gauge transformations of the effective Lagrangian to ensure an anomaly
free setup.

##### b.1.1 Diagrams with two mass insertions : ”Chern-Simons”
contribution

We initiate our analysis for diagrams having gauge fields in the three
external legs and two mass insertions, which is equivalent to have two
chirality flips for each diagram. Thus, we can chose one dominant
chirality over the remaining two others in the fermionic loop and have
three possibilities to place the mass insertions for each dominant
chirality. Further, considering the fact that we can contract the
external legs of the outgoing gauge fields in two different ways, we end
up with twelve diagrams as shown in Fig. B.1 .

For a systematic analysis we start with the following Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the BSM heavy fermions running in the triangle loops
with @xmath as the relevant gauge charges associated with @xmath field
for the left- and right-chiral BSM fermions, respectively. We can write
contributions of the twelve diagrams without contractions on any
external legs as an integral over the momentum @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , after integrating out heavy fermionic degrees of freedom,
can be expanded in the powers of external momentums to achieve the
low-energy effective Lagrangian. The expansion goes as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now from Fig. B.1 it is apparent that @xmath can be decomposed as a
product of the two terms, i.e., @xmath where @xmath includes possible
couplings and traces over gamma matrices while @xmath is defined in the
following way:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The trace in the leading term @xmath (see Eq. ( B.1.1 )) appears to be
proportional to odd powers of @xmath for the numerator, which vanishes
after @xmath integration. The linear and quadratic terms in @xmath can
be computed straightforwardly from Eq. ( B.1.1 ) as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The contributions from denominators @xmath are shown in Eq. ( B.1.1 )
while trace contributions @xmath from the twelve diagrams are:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where mass insertions are properly taken into account. One can use Eq. (
B.1.1 ) to extract contributions from the twelve diagrams shown in Fig.
B.1 . For example, the contribution proportional to @xmath involving
diagrams @xmath and @xmath , in the linear terms of Eq. ( B.1.1 ),
gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we used the known expressions for different momentum integrals
over @xmath (see Ref. [ Peskin:1995ev ] for example) and @xmath . In a
similar way the contributions from all the twelve diagrams of Fig. B.1
can be grouped as shown in Table B.1 .

From Table B.1 , one can factorize the sum of all contributions
proportional to the external momentum @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The same factorization can be done for @xmath and @xmath to produce the
following effective Lagrangian :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where summation over all the possible combinations of the gauge fields
is implied.

##### b.1.2 Diagrams with axions

The diagrams involving an axion field @xmath include only one mass
insertion since vertices with two fermionic legs and an axion field
flips the chirality, as evidenced from the following Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the associated Yukawa coupling. For the chosen
Lagrangian we have three possible ways to place a mass insertion on the
fermionic propagators and two different ways to connect the external
lines with the vertices, giving a total of six diagrams as shown in Fig.
B.2 .

Once again, like the CS case (see Eq. ( B.2 )), we can write the sum
over the six diagrams without contractions on the external legs as an
integral over the momentum @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is decomposed as @xmath with @xmath as already defined in
Eq. ( B.1.1 ) and the trace factors @xmath written as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with proper mass insertion. Now if we consider expansion of @xmath in
powers of the external momentums @xmath , just like the already studied
CS scenario, the zeroth and linear order terms of the expansion vanish.
This happens as the former is proportional to @xmath while the latter
yields contributions @xmath and thus, disappears after performing @xmath
over an odd function. The leading contribution thus, comes from the
second order. Considering a CP invariant UV complete theory, we keep
only the CP-odd contribution in @xmath since axions are CP-odd fields.
With this approach one can compute the detail expressions for all the
six diagrams of Fig. B.2 , for example, for the diagram @xmath one gets:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the last step we have used the known momentum integral as of
Ref. [ Peskin:1995ev ] as well as @xmath with @xmath being the VEV of
the scalar field giving masses to the BSM fermions @xmath and the gauge
field @xmath . In a similar way the contributions from all the six
diagrams of Fig. B.2 can be evaluated as tabulated in Table B.2 .

Summing all the six contributions from Table B.2 yields :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which finally produce the following effective Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, once again summation over all the possible combinations of the
gauge fields is implied.

##### b.1.3 Anomaly cancellation

In the last two subsections we discussed about the three different
anomalous contributions, namely, (1) diagrams without any chirality flip
which are linearly divergent and giving contributions proportional to
the anomaly traces. (2) Diagrams with one chirality flip involving an
axion field that are finite and, (3) the so-called ”CS” contributions
which are finite and invoke two chirality flips. In this subsection we
show that gauge transformation of the effective CS and axion Lagrangians
(see Eq. ( B.9 ) and Eq. ( B.14 )) is proportional to the “usual”
anomaly trace. Hence, a vanishing anomaly trace, with appropriate
distribution of the charges of BSM fermions, assures an anomaly free
theory construction. Given the following gauge transformations of an
axion field @xmath and a gauge field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the parameter of gauge transformation, the variation of
the effective CS Lagrangian (see Eq. ( B.9 )) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the advantages of integrating by parts as well as
Bianchi identity and included all possible combinations of the @xmath
indices. The change in effective axion Lagrangian (see Eq. ( B.14 )) is
given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining Eq. ( B.16 ) and Eq. ( B.17 ) the resultant variation, given
the transformations of Eq. ( B.15 ), is written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now apparent from Eq. ( B.18 ) that gauge transformation of the
total Lagrangian, i.e., axion and CS Lagrangians is proportional to the
“usual” anomaly trace @xmath . Hence, with proper choice of the charges
for the heavy fermions one can ensure an anomaly free theory setup where
the anomaly trace @xmath vanishes for all @xmath . Further, when this
anomaly trace disappears with proper choice of @xmath and @xmath , the
combination of the axion and CS effective Lagrangians (i.e., Eq. ( B.9 )
+ Eq. ( B.14 )) can be embedded into a dimension-six operator as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are co-variant derivatives for axion fields @xmath ,
respectively. One can always consider the case of unitary gauge when the
axion Lagrangian (see Eq. ( B.14 )) vanishes and the total Lagrangian is
simply the CS one, as given by Eq. ( B.9 ). This is the scenario which
we studied in this work. Recasting Eq. ( B.9 ) for the specific case of
@xmath , as considered in this work, one can generate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where terms @xmath is effaced with suitable choice of associated charges
and the parameter @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we have already used to derive Eq. ( 6.64 ) for the charges given
in Table 6.1 .

#### b.2 Generation of non-abelian Chern-Simons couplings

In this section, we discuss the origin of the generalized CS terms in a
concrete VSIMP model, considered in Sec. 8.5.3 , with dark fermions for
a UV completion. Furthermore, we show that the effective CS terms and
the general @xmath interactions can be derived from manifestly gauge
invariant operators at low energy. Suppose that there is a set of light
fermions charged under @xmath such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

along with a heavy dark fermions with opposite @xmath charges ( @xmath )
that cancel the anomalies. With dark Higgs fields of charges @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath vector-like and chiral masses from terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , are generated after @xmath spontaneous symmetry breaking
¹ ¹ 1 The @xmath gauge bosons masses are degenerate at tree level and
receive small loop corrections due to the mass splitting between the
members of each doublet fermion, that is proportional to chiral fermion
mass. If the mass splitting between @xmath gauge bosons is smaller than
@xmath of DM mass, all the SIMP processes are still active and dominant
and the vector dark matter remains stable for heavy fermions. One can
check explicitly in the example with vector-like dark fermions that
there is no @xmath mixing generated at loop level, so there is no issue
of Dark Matter instability. .

When integrating out the light fermions, the non-decoupling portion of
the one-loop triangle diagrams gives an effective CS term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath being the number and mass of light fermion generations of
mass, @xmath .

For instance, for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , we find the
coefficient of the operator of Eq. ( 8.24 ), @xmath . Therefore, for
@xmath , we can avoid additional @xmath annihilations of vector Dark
Matter into light dark fermions, such as @xmath , and a sizable CS term
required for kinetic equilibrium can be consistently realized.

Notice here that the values of @xmath required for achieving the correct
relic density in this setup imply a large multiplicity of the dark
fermions or sizable gauge couplings which might drive the theory toward
its non perturbative regime or the unstability of the dark higgs
potential vacuum for energies of the order of the GeV scale. One could
invoke more elaborate mechanisms in order to solve this potential issues
but those are beyond the phenomenological considerations of this work.

If one considers only the light fermions @xmath and their heavy partners
for anomaly cancellation, then are only chiral fermion masses due to the
@xmath breaking. In this case, the needed CS terms are not generated.
Instead, a nonzero dimension-6 interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

appears, which can also be sufficient for equilibrating the two sectors

Similarly, the effective dimension-6 operator in Eq. ( B.25 ) can be
derived from another gauge invariant dimension-8 operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, in both cases with dimension-6 and dimension-8 operators, after
the @xmath is broken by the VEV of the scalar doublet @xmath , the
needed @xmath interactions are generated.

The effective approach considered in this work would be valid only for
processes involving energies below the lightest dark fermion mass. Our
approach is then justified for the DM freeze-out process which occurs
when the DM becomes non-relativistic (i.e. for processes occuring at
energies @xmath ) and the dark fermions have already decoupled for the
thermal bath. However, considering the invisible decay of the @xmath
boson leads the effective approach to fail and one has to consider the
complete dark fermions degrees of freedom in the computation.

### Appendix C Spin-2 portal: amplitudes and rates \pdfbookmark

[0]Contentstoc \minitoc

In this part of the appendices, we provide analytical expressions of the
amplitude squared, partial decay widths as well as rates relevant for
the spin-2 portal model.

#### c.1 Decay rate of the massive spin-2

The decay modes of the spin-2 state are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The total decay width of the massive spin-2 to SM state
is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### c.2 Amplitudes and production rates

##### c.2.1 Scalar Dark Matter

The amplitudes involving a scalar Dark Matter and massless spin-2
mediator (graviton) are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding amplitudes assuming a massive spin-2 propagator are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

From these amplitudes, the rate in the graviton domination regime is
given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case where the massive spin-2 state is exchanged, we can
distinguish three regimes, depending on the relative value of @xmath
with respect to typical exchanged momentum @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.12)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the last line of Eq. ( C.13 ), we expressed the width @xmath using
Eq. ( C.4 ). The values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are collected in
Table C.1 which also includes the corresponding coefficients for
fermionic and vectorial Dark Matter.

##### c.2.2 Fermionic Dark Matter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding rates are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### c.2.3 Vectorial Dark Matter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding rates are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -- --------