## 2.1 Introduction

Galaxy clusters are the most visible tracers of large-scale structure.
They occupy very massive dark matter halos and are observationally
accessible by a wide range of means. Their locations are found to
corresponding to large numbers of tightly clustered galaxies, pools of
hot X-ray emitting gas, and relatively strong features in the
gravitational lensing shear field. Precise observations of large numbers
of clusters provide an important tool for testing our understanding of
cosmology and structure formation. Clusters are also interesting
laboratories for the study of galaxy evolution under the influence of
extreme environments (Koester et al., 2007 ) .

The baryonic matter of the clusters is found in two forms: first,
individual galaxies within the cluster, which are most effectively
studied through optical and NIR photometric and spectroscopic surveys;
and second, a hot, ionized intra-cluster medium (ICM), which can be
studied by means of its X-ray emission and the Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ)
effect (Sunyaev & Zeldovich, 1972 , 1980 ) . The detection of clusters
using SZ effect is a fairly new and highly promising technique for which
tremendous progress has been made in finding high redshift clusters and
measuring the total cluster mass (e.g. Planck Collaboration et al., 2011
; Vanderlinde et al., 2010 ; Marriage et al., 2011 ) .

The X-ray selection of clusters has several advantages for cosmological
surveys: the observable X-ray luminosity and temperature of a cluster is
tightly correlated with its total mass, which is indeed its most
fundamental parameter (Reiprich & Böhringer, 2002 ) . These relations
provide the ability to measure both the mass function (Böhringer et al.,
2002 ) and power spectrum (Schuecker et al., 2003 ) , which directly
probe the cosmological models. Since the cluster X-ray emission is
strongly peaked on the dense cluster core, X-ray selection is less
affected by projection effects than optical surveys and clusters can be
identified efficiently over a wide redshift range.

Many clusters have been found in X-ray observations with Uhuru, HEAO-1,
Ariel-V, Einstein, and EXOSAT, which have allowed a more accurate
characterization of their physical proprieties (for a review, see Rosati
et al. ( 2002 ) ). The ROSAT All Sky Survey (RASS, Voges et al., 1999 )
and the deep pointed observations have led to the discovery of hundreds
of clusters. In ROSAT observations, 1743 clusters have been identified,
which are compiled in a meta-catalogue called MCXC by Piffaretti et al.
( 2011 ) . The MCXC catalogue is based on published RASS-based (NORAS,
REFLEEX, BCS, SGP, NEP, MACS, and CIZA) and serendipitous (160D, 400D,
SHARC, WARPS, and EMSS) cluster catalogues.

The current generation of X-ray satellites XMM-Newton, Chandra, and
Suzaku have provided follow-up observations of statistical samples of
ROSAT clusters for cosmological studies (Vikhlinin et al., 2009a ) and
detailed information on the structural proprieties of the cluster
population (e.g. Vikhlinin et al., 2006 ; Pratt et al., 2010 ; Arnaud
et al., 2010 ) . Several projects are ongoing to detect new clusters of
galaxies from XMM-Newton and Chandra observations (e.g. the XSC (Romer
et al., 2001 ) , XDCP (Fassbender et al., 2007 ) , XMM-LSS (Pierre
et al., 2006 ) , COSMOS (Finoguenov et al., 2007 ) , SXDS (Finoguenov
et al., 2010 ) , and ChaMP (Barkhouse et al., 2006 ) ).

In this paper, we present the 2XMMi/SDSS galaxy cluster survey, a search
for galaxy clusters based on extended sources in the 2XMMi catalogue
(Watson et al., 2009 ) in the field of view the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS). The main aim of the survey is to build a large catalogue of new
X-ray clusters in the sky coverage of SDSS. The catalogue will allow us
to investigate the correlation between the X-ray and optical properties
of the clusters. One of the long term goals of the project is to improve
the X-ray scaling relations, and to prepare for the eROSITA cluster
surveys, a mid term goal is the selection of the cluster candidates
beyond the SDSS-limit for studies of the distant universe. Here we
present a first cluster sample of the survey which comprises 175
clusters found by cross-matching the 2XMMi sample with published SDSS
based optical cluster catalogues.

The paper is organized as follows: in Sect. 2 we describe the procedure
of selecting the X-ray cluster candidates as well as their possible
counterparts in SDSS data. In Sect. 3 we describe the X-ray data the
reduction and analysis of the optically confirmed clusters. The
discussion of the results is described in Sect. 4. Section 5 concludes
the paper. The cosmological parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath km s
@xmath Mpc @xmath were used throughout this paper.

### 2.2 Sample construction

We describe our basic strategy for identifying clusters among the
extended X-ray sources in the 2XMMi catalogue. We then proceed by
cross-matching the initial catalogue with those of optically selected
galaxy clusters from the SDSS thus deriving a catalogue of X-ray
selected and optically confirmed clusters with measured redshifts, whose
X-ray properties are analysed in Sect. 3.

#### 2.2.1 X-ray cluster candidate list

X-ray observations provide a robust method for the initial
identification of galaxy clusters as extended X-ray sources. A strategy
to create a clean galaxy cluster sample is to construct a catalogue of
X-ray cluster candidates followed by optical observations. XMM-Newton
archival observations provide the basis for creating catalogues of
serendipitously identified point-like and extended X-ray sources. The
largest X-ray source catalogue ever produced is the second XMM-Newton
source catalogue (Watson et al., 2009 ) . The latest edition of this
catalogue is 2XMMi-DR3, which was released on 2010 April 28. The
2XMMi-DR3 covers 504 deg @xmath and contains @xmath times as many
discrete sources as either the ROSAT survey or pointed catalogues. The
catalogue contains 353191 X-ray source detections corresponding to
262902 unique X-ray sources detected in 4953 XMM-Newton EPIC (European
Photon Imaging Camera) observations made between 2000 February 3 and
2009 October 8.

The 2XMMi-DR3 contains 30470 extended source detections, which form the
primary database for our study. This initial sample contains a very
significant number of spurious detections caused by the clustering of
unresolved point sources, edge effects, the shape of the PSF (point
spread function) of the X-ray mirrors, large extended sources consisting
of several minor sources, and other effects such as X-ray ghosts and
similar.

We applied several selection steps to obtain a number of X-ray extended
sources that were then visually inspected individually. In our study, we
considered only sources at high Galactic latitudes, @xmath , and
discarded those that were flagged as spurious in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue
by the screeners of the XMM-Newton SSC (Survey Science Centre). The
source detection pipeline used for the creation of the 2XMMi catalogues
allows for a maximum core radius of extended sources of 80 arcsec.
Sources with extent parameters equalling that boundary were discarded,
screening of a few examples shows that those sources are spurious or
large extended sources (the targets of the observations) that were
discarded anyhow. This initial selection reduced the number to 4027
detections.

Since our main aim is the generation of a serendipitous cluster sample,
we removed sources that were the targets of the XMM-Newton observation.
We also discarded fields containing large extended sources and selected
only those fields within the footprint of SDSS, which left 1818
detections. After removing multiple detections of the same extended
sources (phenomena caused by either problematic source geometries in a
single XMM-Newton observation or duplicate detections in a re-observed
field), the catalogue was reduced to 1520 extended sources that were
regarded as unique.

This list still contains spurious detections for a number of reasons:
(a) point-source confusion, (b) resolution of one asymmetric extended
source into several symmetric extended sources, (c) the ill-known shape
of the PSF leads to an excess of sources near bright point-sources, for
both point-like and extended sources, and (d) edge effects/low exposure
times. To remove the obvious spurious cases, we visually inspected the
X-ray images of the initial 1520 detections using the FLIX upper limit
server ^(†) ^(†) † http://www.ledas.ac.uk/flix/flix.html . As a result,
we were left with 1240 confirmed extended X-ray sources.

We then made use of the SDSS to remove additional non-cluster sources.
We downloaded the XMM-Newton EPIC X-ray images from the XMM-Newton
Science Archive (XSA: Arviset et al., 2002 ) and created summed EPIC
(PN+MOS1+MOS2) images in the energy band @xmath keV. Using these, we
created smoothed X-ray contours, which were overlaid onto co-added
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath band SDSS images. Visual inspection of
those optical multi-colour images with X-ray contours overlaid, allowed
us to remove extended sources corresponding to nearby field galaxies, as
well as those objects that are likely spurious detections. The resulting
list which passes these selection criteria contains 1180 cluster
candidates, about 75 percent of which are newly discovered.

Figure 2.1 shows the X-ray-optical overlay of a new X-ray cluster, which
has a counterpart in SDSS at photometric redshift = 0.4975 and a stellar
mass centre indicated by the cross-hair as given by Szabo et al. ( 2011
) (see Section 2.2). We use this cluster to illustrate the main steps of
our analysis in the following sections. In Appendix A, Figures A.1 to
A.4 show the X-ray-optical overlays and the extracted X-ray spectra for
four clusters illustrating results for various redshifts covered by our
sample and different X-ray fluxes.

About one quarter of the X-ray selected cluster candidates have no
plausible optical counterpart. These are regarded as high-redshift
candidates beyond the SDSS limit at @xmath , and suitable targets for
dedicated optical/near-infrared follow-up observations (see e.g.  Lamer
et al., 2008 ) .

#### 2.2.2 The cross-matching with optical cluster catalogues

The SDSS offers the opportunity to produce large galaxy-cluster
catalogues. Several techniques were applied to identify likely clusters
from multiband imaging and SDSS spectroscopy. We use those published
catalogues to cross-identify common sources in our X-ray selected and
those optical samples. All these optical catalogues give redshift
information per cluster, which we use in the following to study the
X-ray properties of our sources ( @xmath indicates a photometric, @xmath
a spectroscopic redshift).

Table 2.1 lists the main properties of the optical cluster catalogues
that we used to confirm our X-ray selection. Below we provide a very
brief description of each of these together with the acronym used by us:

-    GMBCG The Gaussian Mixture Brightest Cluster Galaxy catalogue (Hao
    et al., 2010 ) consists of more than 55,000 rich clusters across the
    redshift range @xmath identified in SDSS-DR7. The galaxy clusters
    were detected by identifying the cluster red-sequence plus a
    brightest cluster galaxy (BCG). The cross-identification of X-ray
    cluster candidates with the GMBCG within a radius of 1 arcmin yields
    136 confirmed clusters.

-    WHL The catalogue of Wen, Han & Liu (Wen et al., 2009 ) consists of
    39,668 clusters of galaxies drawn from SDSS-DR6 and covers the
    redshift range @xmath . A cluster was identified if more than eight
    member galaxies of @xmath were found within a radius of 0.5 Mpc and
    within a photometric redshift interval @xmath . We confirm 150 X-ray
    clusters by cross-matching within 1 arcmin.

-    MaxBCG The max Brightest Cluster Galaxy catalogue (Koester et al.,
    2007 ) lists 13,823 clusters in the redshift range @xmath from
    SDSS-DR5. The clusters were identified using maxBCG red-sequence
    technique, which uses the clustering of galaxies on the sky, in both
    magnitude and colour, to identify groups and clusters of bright E/S0
    red-sequence galaxies. The cross-match with our X-ray cluster
    candidate list reveals 54 clusters in common within a radius of one
    arcmin.

-    AMF The Adaptive Matched Filter catalogue of Szabo et al. ( 2011 )
    lists 69,173 likely galaxy clusters in the redshift range @xmath
    extracted from SDSS-DR6 using an adaptive matched filter (AMF)
    cluster finder. The cross-match yields 127 confirmed X-ray galaxy
    clusters.

In the AMF-catalogue, the cluster centre is given as the anticipated
centre of the stellar mass of the cluster, while in the other three
catalogues the cluster centre is the position of the brightest galaxy
cluster (BCG).

Many of our X-ray selected clusters have counterparts in several optical
cluster catalogues within our chosen search radius of one arcmin. In
these cases, we use the redshift of the optical counterpart, which has
minimum spatial offset from the X-ray position. Table 2.1 lists in the
second to last column the number of matching X-ray sources per optical
catalog individually and in the last column the final number after
removal of duplicate identifications.

The unique optically confirmed X-ray cluster sample obtained by
cross-matching with the four catalogues consists of 275 objects having
at least photometric redshifts. After cross-identification, we found 120
clusters of the optically confirmed cluster sample with a spectroscopic
redshift for the brightest galaxy cluster (BCG) from the published
optical catalogues. Since the latest data release, SDSS DR8, provides
more spectroscopic redshifts, we searched for additional spectra of BCGs
and other member galaxies. We ran SDSS queries searching for galaxies
with spectroscopic redshifts @xmath within 1 Mpc from the X-ray centre.
We considered a galaxy as a member of a cluster if @xmath .

The spectroscopic redshift of the cluster was calculated as the average
redshift for the cluster galaxies with spectroscopic redshifts. The
confirmed cluster sample with spectroscopic redshifts for at least one
galaxy includes 182 objects. Therefore, the unique optically confirmed
X-ray cluster sample has the photometric redshifts for all of them, 120
spectroscopic redshifts for 120 BCGs from the optical cluster
catalogues, and 182 clusters with one or more members with spectroscopic
redshifts from the SDSS database. Figure 2.2 shows the distribution of
the cluster photometric redshift @xmath , the distribution of
spectroscopic redshifts @xmath of the BCGs as given in the various
optical cluster catalogues, and the average spectroscopic redshift of
the cluster members (which we refer to as the cluster spectroscopic
redshift) for the confirmed cluster sample. Figure 2.3 shows the
distribution of the number of cluster galaxies that have a spectroscopic
redshift in the SDSS database. The relation between the photometric and
spectroscopic redshifts of the cluster sample is shown in Figure 2.4 .
Since this relation was found to be tight (where the Gaussian
distribution of ( @xmath - @xmath ) has @xmath = 0.02), we were able to
rely on the photometric redshifts for the cluster with no spectroscopic
information.

We used an angular separation of one arcmin to cross-match the X-ray
cluster candidates with the optical cluster catalogues. The
corresponding linear separation was calculated using the spectroscopic
redshift, if available, or the photometric redshift. Figure 2.5 shows
the distribution of the linear separation between the X-ray centre and
the BCG position. For AMF clusters (60 objects), we identified the BCGs
of 40 systems within one arcmin and computed their offsets, which are
included in this aforementioned distribution. The BCGs were selected as
the brightest galaxies with @xmath among the three BCG candidates given
for each AMF cluster published by Szabo et al. ( 2011 ) . The other 20
AMF clusters are not included in Figure 2.5 , because their BCG is
outside one arcmin. It is not always the case that the BCG lies exactly
on the X-ray peak. Rykoff et al. ( 2008 ) model the optical/X-ray offset
distribution by matching a sample of maxBCG clusters to known X-ray
sources from the ROSAT survey. They found a large excess of X-ray
clusters associated with the optical cluster centre. There is a tight
core in which the BCG is within @xmath 150 h @xmath kpc of any X-ray
source, as well as a long tail extending to @xmath 1500 h @xmath kpc. It
is shown in Figure 2.5 that the majority of the confirmed sample have
the BCG within a radius ( @xmath 150 kpc), as well as a tail extending
to 352 kpc that is consistent with the optical/X-ray offset distribution
of Rykoff et al. ( 2008 ) .

We searched the Astronomical Database SIMBAD and the NASA/IPAC
Extragalactic Database (NED) to check whether they had been identified
and catalogued previously. We used a search radius of one arcmin. About
85 percent of the confirmed sample are new X-ray clusters, while the
remainder had been previously studied using ROSAT, Chandra, or
XMM-Newton data.

### 2.3 X-ray data analysis

The optically confirmed clusters have a wide range of source counts
(EPIC counts in the broad band energy 0.2-12 keV from the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue) from 80 to 28000 counts as shown in Figure 2.6 . To analyse
the X-ray data, we have to determine the optical redshifts, except for
some candidates with more than 1000 net photons for which it is possible
to estimate the X-ray redshift (e.g. Lamer et al., 2008 ; Yu et al.,
2011 ) . In this paper, we use the cluster spectroscopic redshifts where
available or the photometric redshifts that we obtained from the
cross-matching as described in the previous section.

The data reduction and analysis of the optically confirmed sample was
carried out using the XMM-Newton Science Analysis Software (SAS) version
10.0.0.

#### 2.3.1 Standard pipelines

The raw XMM-Newton data were downloaded using the Archive
InterOperability System (AIO), which provides access to the XMM-Newton
Science Archive (XSA). The raw data were provided in the form of a
bundle of files known as observation data files (ODF), which contain
uncalibrated event files, satellite attitude files, and calibration
information. The main steps in the data reduction were: (i) the
generation of calibrated event lists for the EPIC (MOS1, MOS2, and PN)
cameras using the latest calibration data. This was done using the SAS
packages cifbuild , odfingest , epchain , and emchain . (ii) The
creation of background light curves to identify time intervals with poor
quality data. (iii) The filtering of the EPIC event lists to exclude
periods of high background flaring and bad events. (iv) To create a sky
image of the filtered data set. The last three steps were performed
using SAS packages evselect , tabgtigen , and xmmselect .

#### 2.3.2 Analysis of the sample

We now describe the procedure to determine the source and background
regions for each cluster, extract the source and background spectra, fit
the X-ray spectra, and finally measure the X-ray parameters
(e.g. temperature, flux, and luminosity). As input to the task
generating the X-ray spectra, we used the filtered event lists as
described in the previous section.

##### 2.3.2.1 Optimum source extraction radius

The most critical step in generating the cluster X-ray spectra is to
determine the source extraction radius. We developed a method to
optimize the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the spectrum for each
cluster. To calculate the extraction radius with the highest integrated
SNR we created radial profiles of each cluster in the energy band @xmath
keV. Background sources, taken from the EPIC PPS source lists, were
excluded and the profiles were exposure corrected using the EPIC
exposure maps. Since we did not perform a new source detection run, the
SNR was calculated as a function of radius taking into account the
background levels as given in the 2XMMi catalogue.

The radial profiles of the X-ray surface brightness of the
representative cluster in MOS1, MOS2 and PN data are shown in Figure 2.7
. The background values of the cluster in the EPIC images are indicated
by the horizontal line with the same colours as the profiles. Figure 2.8
shows the SNR profiles of the representative cluster in MOS1, MOS2, PN
and EPIC (MOS1+MOS2+PN) data as a function of the radius from the
cluster centre. The optimum extraction radius ( @xmath ) is determined
from the maximum value in the EPIC SNR plot, which is indicated by a
point in Figure 2.8 .

##### 2.3.2.2 Spectral extraction

The EPIC filtered event lists were used to extract the X-ray spectra of
the cross-correlated X-ray and optical cluster sample. The spectra of
each cluster candidate were extracted from a region with an optimum
extraction radius as described in the previous section. The background
spectra were extracted from a circular annulus around the cluster with
inner and outer radii equalling two and three times the optimum radius,
respectively. Other unrelated nearby sources were masked and excluded
from the source and background regions that were finally used to extract
the X-ray spectra. Figure 2.9 shows the cluster and background regions,
as well as the excluded regions of field sources for the representative
cluster. The SAS task especget was used to generate the cluster and
background spectra and to create the response matrix files
(redistribution matrix file (RMF) and ancillary response file (ARF))
required to perform the X-ray spectral fitting with XSPEC.

##### 2.3.2.3 Spectral fitting

The photon counts of each cluster spectrum were grouped into bins with
at least one count per bin before a fit of a spectral model was applied
to the data using the Ftools task grppha . The spectral fitting was
carried out using XSPEC software version 12.5.1 (Arnaud, 1996 ) . Before
executing the algorithm to fit the spectra, the Galactic HI column (nH)
was derived from the HI map from the Leiden/Argentine/Bonn (LAB) survey
(Kalberla et al., 2005 ) . This parameter was fixed while fitting the
X-ray spectrum. The redshift of the spectral model was fixed to the
optical cluster redshift either the spectroscopic redshift for 182
clusters or the photometric redshift for the remainder cluster sample.

For each cluster, the available EPIC spectra were fitted simultaneously.
The employed fitting model was a multiplication of a @xmath absorption
model (Wilms et al., 2000 ) and a single-temperature optically thin
thermal plasma component (the @xmath code in XSPEC terminology, Mewe
et al., 1986 ) to model the X-ray plasma emission from the ICM. The
metallicity was fixed at 0.4 @xmath . This value is the mean of the
metallicities of 95 galaxy clusters in the redshift range from 0.1 to
0.6 (the same redshift range of the confirmed sample) observed by
Chandra (Maughan et al., 2008 ) . The free parameters are the X-ray
temperature and the spectral normalization. The fitting was done using
the Cash statistic with one count per bin following the recommendation
of Krumpe et al. ( 2008 ) for small count statistics.

To avoid the fitting algorithm converging to a local minimum of the
fitting statistics, we ran series of fits stepping from 0.1 to 15 keV
with a step size = 0.05 using the @xmath command within XSPEC. The
cluster temperature, its flux in the [0.5-2] keV band, its X-ray
luminosity in the [0.5-2] keV band, the bolometric luminosity, and the
corresponding errors were derived from the best-fitting model. We
assumed that the fractional error in the bolometric luminosity was the
same as the fractional error in the aperture luminosity [0.5-2] keV
(within an aperture defined by the optimum extraction radius). Figure
2.10 shows the fits to the EPIC (MOS1, MOS2, and PN) spectra and the
models for the representative cluster. Figures A.1 to A.4 in the
Appendix A show the fitted spectra of four clusters with different X-ray
surface brightnesses and data qualities at different redshifts covering
the whole redshift range of the confirmed clusters.

### 2.4 Analysis of a cluster sample with reliable X-ray parameters

We analysed the X-ray data of the optically and X-ray confirmed clusters
to measure the global temperature of the hot ICM. We developed an
optimal extraction method for the X-ray spectra maximising the SNR. The
cluster spectra were fitted with absorbed thin thermal plasma emission
models with pre-determined redshift and interstellar column density to
determine the aperture X-ray temperature ( @xmath ), flux ( @xmath )
[0.5-2] keV, luminosity ( @xmath ) [0.5-2] keV, and their errors. We
accepted the measurements of @xmath and @xmath if the fractional errors
were smaller than 0.5. About 80 percent of the confirmed clusters passed
this fractional error filter. For these clusters, another visual
screening of the spectral fits (Figure 2.10 ) and the X-ray images
(Figure 2.9 ) was done. When the spectral extraction of a given cluster
was strongly affected by the exclusion of field sources within the
extraction radius or a poor determination of the background spectrum, it
was also excluded from the final sample, which comprises 175 clusters.
For a fraction of 80 percent, this is the first X-ray detection and the
first temperature measurement.

Our subsequent presentation of our analysis and discussion refers to
those 175 objects with reliable X-ray parameters. The distribution of
the @xmath and @xmath [0.5-2] keV fractional errors for the first
cluster sample is shown in Figure 2.11 . It is clearly evident that the
cluster luminosity is more tightly constrained than the temperature. For
about 86 percent of the sample, the fractional errors are smaller than
0.25. Therefore, we estimated several physical parameters for each
cluster based on the bolometric luminosity @xmath within the optimal
aperture. The median correction factor between aperture bolometric
luminosities and aperture luminosities in the energy band [0.5-2] keV (
@xmath / @xmath ) was found to be 1.7. We assumed that the fractional
error in @xmath was identical to that of @xmath [0.5-2] keV. The
estimated parameters are @xmath the radius at which the mean mass
density is 500 times the critical density of the Universe (see Eq. 2) at
the cluster redshift, @xmath the bolometric luminosity within @xmath ,
and @xmath the cluster mass within @xmath . We used an iterative
procedure to estimate the physical parameters using published @xmath and
@xmath relations (Pratt et al., 2009 , their orthogonal fit for @xmath
with Malmquist bias correction) . Our procedure is similar to that used
by Piffaretti et al. ( 2011 ) and Šuhada et al. ( 2010 ) , which
consists of the following steps:

-   We estimate @xmath using the @xmath relation

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the Hubble constant normalised to its present-day
    value, @xmath . We approximate @xmath as the aperture bolometric
    luminosity @xmath , which we correct in an iterative way.

-   We compute @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the critical density is @xmath .

-   We compute the cluster temperature within @xmath using the @xmath
    relation

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   We calculate the core radius @xmath and @xmath using scaling
    relations from Finoguenov et al. ( 2007 )

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   We calculate the enclosed flux within @xmath and the optimum
    aperture by extrapolating the @xmath -model. The ratio of the two
    fluxes is calculated, i.e. @xmath .

-   We finally compute a corrected value of @xmath .

We then considered @xmath as input for another iteration and all
computed parameters were updated. We repeated this iterative procedure
until converging to a final solution. At this stage, the @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath were determined. The median correction factor between
extrapolated luminosities and aperture bolometric luminosities ( @xmath
/ @xmath ) was 1.5. To calculate the errors in Eqs. 1 and 3, we included
the measurement errors in the aperture bolometric luminosity @xmath ,
the intrinsic scatter in the @xmath and @xmath relations, and the
propagated errors caused by the uncertainty in their slopes and
intercepts. For Eq. 4 and Eq. 5, we included only the propagated errors
of their independent parameters since their intrinsic scatter had not
been published. Finally, all the measured errors were taken into account
when computing the errors in @xmath and @xmath in the last iteration.
The errors in @xmath and @xmath were still underestimated because of the
possible scatter in the relations in Eq. 4 and Eq. 5.

We investigated the @xmath relation in the first cluster sample using
@xmath and @xmath . Figure 3.23 shows the relation between @xmath
(corrected for the redshift evolution) and @xmath (uncorrected for
cooling flows). Here we assumed that @xmath did not differ significantly
from @xmath and its error was derived from the spectral fits. The
best-fit linear relation (solid line) derived from an orthogonal
distance regression fit (ODR) (Boggs & Rogers, 1990 , which takes into
account measurement errors in both variables) between their logarithm,
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The best-fit power law relation derived from a BCES orthogonal fit to
the @xmath - @xmath relation published by Pratt et al. ( 2009 ) for the
REXCESS sample is plotted as the dashed line in Figure 3.23 . The ODR
slope (present work), @xmath , is consistent with the BCES orthogonal
slope (Pratt et al., 2009 ) of the REXCESS sample, @xmath . In addition,
the present slope is consistent with the BCES orthogonal slope (3.63
@xmath 0.27) of the @xmath relation derived from a sample of 114
clusters (without excluding the core regions) observed with Chandra
across a wide range of temperature (2 @xmath kT @xmath 16 keV) and
redshift (0.1 @xmath z @xmath 1.3) by Maughan et al. ( 2011 ) .

We tested the corresponding uncertainty in the error budget of @xmath
caused by the above-mentioned unknown scatter in Eq. 4 and 5: for
example, a @xmath scatter in the @xmath value results in a fractional
error in @xmath of 17 @xmath . If we take into account the newly
estimated errors in @xmath when fitting the @xmath relation, the revised
slope of 3.32 is within the error in the original slope as in Eq. 6 and
still consistent with the published ones.

Our sample represents cluster temperatures ranging from 0.45 to 5.92 keV
and values of bolometric luminosity in the @xmath range @xmath erg s
@xmath in a wide redshift range 0.1 - 0.6. Most of the published @xmath
relations were derived from local cluster samples with temperatures
higher than 2 keV. The current relation is derived for our sample, which
includes clusters and groups with low temperatures and luminosities in a
wide redshift range up to @xmath . The distribution of luminosity as a
function of redshift is shown in Figure 2.13 .

Table 2.2 , available at the CDS, represents the first cluster sample
containing as many as 175 X-ray clusters. In addition, the first cluster
sample with the X-ray-optical overlay and fitted spectra for each
cluster is publicly available from
http://www.aip.de/groups/xray/XMM_SDSS_CLUSTERS/17498.html . In the
catalogue, we provide the cluster identification number (detection Id,
detid) and its name (IAUNAME) in (cols. [1] and [2]), the right
ascension and declination of X-ray emission in equinox J2000.0 (cols.
[3] and [4]), the XMM-Newton observation Id (obsid) (col. [5]), the
optical redshift (col. [6]), the scale at the cluster redshift in kpc/
@xmath (col. [7]), the aperture and @xmath radii in kpc (col.[8] and
[9]), the cluster aperture X-ray temperature @xmath and its positive and
negative errors in keV (cols. [10], [11] and [12], respectively), the
aperture X-ray flux @xmath [0.5-2] keV and its positive and negative
errors in units of @xmath erg cm @xmath s @xmath (cols. [13], [14] and
[15], respectively), the aperture X-ray luminosity @xmath [0.5-2] keV
and its positive and negative errors in units of @xmath erg s @xmath
(cols. [16], [17] and [18], respectively), the cluster bolometric
luminosity @xmath and its error in units of @xmath erg s @xmath (cols.
[19] and [20]), the cluster mass @xmath and its error in units of @xmath
M @xmath (cols. [21] and [22]), the Galactic HI column in units @xmath
cm @xmath (col.[23]), the identification number of the cluster in
optical catalogue (col.[24]), the BCG right ascension and declination in
equinox J2000.0 (cols. [25] and [26]) although for AMF catalogue they
represent the cluster stellar mass centre, the cluster photometric
redshift (col.[27]), the average spectroscopic redshift of the cluster
galaxies with available spectroscopic redshifts and their number
(cols.[28] and [29]), the linear offset between the cluster X-ray
position and the cluster optical position (col.[30]), the optical
cluster catalogue names that identify the cluster (col.[31]) (Note: the
optical parameters are extracted from the first one), and the
alternative name of the X-ray clusters previously identified using
ROSAT, Chandra, or XMM-Newton data and its reference in NED and SIMBAD
databases (col.[32] and [33]).

### 2.5 Summary and outlook

We have presented the first sample of X-ray galaxy clusters from the
2XMMi-Newton/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The survey comprises 1180
cluster candidates selected as X-ray serendipitous sources from the
second XMM-Newton serendipitous source catalogue (2XMMi-DR3) that had
been observed by the SDSS. A quarter of the candidates are identified as
distant cluster candidates beyond z = 0.6, because there is no apparent
overdensity of galaxies in the corresponding SDSS images. Another
quarter of the candidates had been previously identified in optical
cluster catalogues extracted from SDSS data. Our cross-correlation of
the X-ray cluster candidates with four optical cluster catalogues within
a matching radius of one arcmin confirmed 275 clusters and provided us
with the photometric redshifts for all of them and the spectroscopic
redshifts for 120 BCGs. We extracted all available spectroscopic
redshifts for the cluster members from recent SDSS data. Among the
confirmed cluster sample, 182 clusters have spectroscopic redshifts for
at least one galaxy member. More than 80 percent of the confirmed sample
are newly identified X-ray clusters and the others had been previously
identified using ROSAT, Chandra, or XMM-Newton data. We reduced and
analysed the X-ray data of the confirmed sample in an automated way. The
X-ray temperature, flux and luminosity of the confirmed sample and their
errors were derived from spectral fitting. The analysed sample in the
present work contains 175 X-ray galaxy clusters with acceptable
measurements of X-ray parameters (ie. with fractional errors smaller
than 0.5) from reasonable quality fitting (139 objects being newly
discovered in X-rays). In addition, we derived the physical properties (
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) of the study sample from an iterative
procedure using the published scaling relations. The relation between
the X-ray bolometric luminosity @xmath and aperture temperature of the
sample is investigated. The slope of the relation agrees with the slope
of the same relation in the REXCESS sample (Pratt et al., 2009 ) . The
present relation is derived from a large sample with low luminosities
and temperatures across a wide redshift range 0.09 - 0.61.

As one extension to this project, we intend to obtain SDSS photometric
redshifts of all 2XMMi-DR3 X-ray cluster candidates that have been
detected in SDSS imaging. This will significantly increase the sample
size and the identified fraction of the 2XMMi cluster sample. Further
improvements in the accuracy of the X-ray parameters for about 10
percent of the confirmed sample will be made by analysing repeated
observations of those clusters.

## Chapter 3 II. The optically confirmed cluster sample and the @xmath
relation***This chapter is published in the Astronomy & Astrophysics
Journal, 2013a&a…558a..75t

### Abstract

Aims. We compile a sample of X-ray selected galaxy groups and clusters
from the XMM-Newton serendipitous source catalogue (2XMMi-DR3) with
optical confirmation and redshift measurement from the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS). We present an analysis of the X-ray properties of this
new sample with particular emphasis on the X-ray luminosity-temperature
( @xmath ) relation.

Methods. The X-ray cluster candidates were selected from the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue in the footprint of the SDSS-DR7. We developed a finding
algorithm to search for overdensities of galaxies at the positions of
the X-ray cluster candidates in the photometric redshift space and to
measure the redshifts of the clusters from the SDSS data. For optically
confirmed clusters with good quality X-ray data we derive the X-ray
flux, luminosity and temperature from proper spectral fits, while the
X-ray flux for clusters with low quality X-ray data is obtained from the
2XMMi-DR3 catalogue.

Results. The developed detection algorithm provides the photometric
redshift of 530 galaxy clusters. Among them, 310 clusters have a
spectroscopic redshift for at least one member galaxy. About 75 percent
of the optically confirmed cluster sample are newly discovered X-ray
clusters. Also, 301 systems are known as optically selected clusters in
the literature while the remainder are new discoveries in X-ray and
optical bands. The optically confirmed cluster sample spans a wide
redshift range 0.03-0.70 (median @xmath =0.32). In this paper, we
present the catalogue of X-ray selected galaxy groups and clusters from
the 2XMMi/SDSS galaxy cluster survey. The catalogue has two subsamples:
(i) a cluster sample comprising 345 objects with their X-ray
spectroscopic temperature and flux from the spectral fitting; (ii) a
cluster sample consisting 185 systems with their X-ray flux from the
2XMMi-DR3 catalogue since their X-ray data is not sufficient to do
spectral fitting. For each cluster, the catalogue also provides the
X-ray bolometric luminosity and the cluster mass at @xmath based on
scaling relations and the position of the likely brightest cluster
galaxy (BCG). The updated @xmath relation of the current sample with
X-ray spectroscopic parameters is presented. We find the slope of the
@xmath relation is consistent with published ones. We see no evidence
for evolution in the slope and intrinsic scatter of the @xmath relation
with redshift when excluding the low luminous groups.

### 3.1 Introduction

Galaxy clusters are the largest known gravitationally bound objects,
their study is important for both an intrinsic understanding of their
systems and an investigation of the large scale structure of the
universe. The multi-component nature of galaxy clusters offers multiple
observable signals across the electromagnetic spectrum (e.g. Sarazin,
1988 ; Rosati et al., 2002 ) . The hot, ionized intra-cluster medium
(ICM) is investigated at X-ray wavelengths and the Sunyaev-Zeldovich
(SZ) effect (Sunyaev & Zeldovich, 1972 , 1980 ) . The cluster galaxies
are most effectively studied through optical and NIR photometric and
spectroscopic surveys. The statistical studies of clusters of galaxies
provide complementary and powerful constraints on the cosmological
parameters (e.g. Voit, 2005 ; Allen et al., 2011 ) .

X-ray observations offer the most powerful technique for constructing
cluster catalogues. The main advantages of the X-ray cluster surveys are
their excellent purity and completeness and the X-ray observables are
tightly correlated with mass (e.g. Reiprich & Böhringer, 2002 ; Allen
et al., 2011 ) . Reliable measurements of cluster masses allow us to
measure both the mass function (Böhringer et al., 2002 ) and power
spectrum (Schuecker et al., 2003 ) , which directly probe the
cosmological models.

At X-ray wavelengths, galaxy clusters are simply identified as X-ray
luminous, continuous, spatially extended, extragalactic sources (Allen
et al., 2011 ) . Several X-ray cluster samples have been constructed
from previous X-ray missions and used for a variety of astrophysical
studies (e.g. Romer et al., 1994 ; Forman et al., 1978 ; Scharf et al.,
1997 ; Vikhlinin et al., 1998 ; Böhringer et al., 2000 ; Borgani et al.,
2001 ; Böhringer et al., 2004 ; Burenin et al., 2007 ) . The current
generation of X-ray satellites XMM-Newton, Chandra, and Suzaku provided
follow-up observations of individual clusters allowing a precise
determination of their spatially resolved spectra (e.g. Vikhlinin
et al., 2009a ; Pratt et al., 2010 ; Arnaud et al., 2010 ) . Several
other projects are being conducted to detect galaxy clusters from the
observations of the XMM-Newton, Chandra, and the X-ray Telescope on
board of the Swift satellite (e.g. Barkhouse et al., 2006 ; Kolokotronis
et al., 2006 ; Finoguenov et al., 2007 , 2010 ; Adami et al., 2011 ;
Fassbender et al., 2011 ; Takey et al., 2011 ; Mehrtens et al., 2012 ;
Clerc et al., 2012 ; Tundo et al., 2012 ) .

We have started a serendipitous search for galaxy clusters based on
extended sources in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue, the second XMM-Newton
source catalogue (Watson et al., 2009 ) , in the footprint of the
SDSS-DR7. The main aim of the survey is to construct a large catalogue
of newly discovered X-ray selected groups and clusters from XMM-Newton
archival observations. The catalogue will allow us to investigate the
evolution of X-ray scaling relations as well as the correlation between
the X-ray and optical properties of the clusters.

The survey comprises 1180 X-ray selected cluster candidates. A
cross-correlation of these with recently published optically selected
SDSS galaxy cluster catalogues yielded photometric redshifts for 275
objects. Of these, 175 clusters were published by (Takey et al., 2011 ,
Paper I hereafter) together with their X-ray luminosity, temperature and
mass. The first cluster sample from the survey covers a wide range of
redshifts from 0.09 to 0.61. We extended the relation between the X-ray
bolometric luminosity at @xmath (the radius at which the cluster mean
density is 500 times the critical density of the Universe at the cluster
redshift) and the X-ray temperature towards significantly lower
luminosities than reported in the literature and found that the slope of
the linear @xmath relation was consistent with that for more luminous
clusters.

In the present paper, we expand the optically confirmed sample from the
survey by searching for the optical counterparts of cluster candidates
that had been missed by previous cluster finding algorithms and their
members detected in the SDSS imaging (see Paper I for a sample of X-ray
and optically selected groups and clusters). We present the algorithm
used to identify the optical counterparts of the X-ray cluster
candidates and to estimate the cluster redshifts using SDSS data. As a
result, we present a catalogue of X-ray selected galaxy groups and
clusters (including the objects in Paper I) from the ongoing 2XMMi/SDSS
galaxy cluster survey. The catalogue provides the X-ray properties (e.g.
temperature, flux, luminosity, and mass) and the cluster photometric
redshift and, if available, the cluster spectroscopic redshift and the
position of the likely brightest cluster galaxy (BCG) of the optically
confirmed cluster sample.

The X-ray luminosity-temperature ( @xmath ) relation was investigated by
several authors (e.g. Markevitch, 1998 ; Pratt et al., 2009 ; Mittal
et al., 2011 ; Eckmiller et al., 2011 ; Reichert et al., 2011 ; Takey
et al., 2011 ; Maughan et al., 2012 ; Hilton et al., 2012 ) . These
studies showed that the observed @xmath relation is much steeper than
that predicted by self-similar evolution. This indicates that the ICM is
heated by an additional source of energy, which comes mainly from Active
Galactic Nuclei (AGNs) (Blanton et al., 2011 ) . The inclusion of
AGN-feedback in cosmological evolution models indeed gives better
agreement between simulated and observed @xmath under certain
circumstances (Hilton et al., 2012 ) . Here, we present an updated
@xmath relation based on the largest sample of X-ray selected groups and
clusters to date drawn from a single survey based on XMM-Newton
observations. The sample spans a wide redshift range from 0.03 to 0.67.

The format of this paper is as the follows. In Section 2, we describe
the construction of the X-ray cluster candidates list and the optically
confirmed cluster sample with their redshift estimations. In Section 3,
we present the X-ray data reduction and analysis of the constructed
sample. In Section 4, the results and discussion of the cluster sample
is presented. We summarise our results in Section 5. The cosmological
parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath km s @xmath Mpc @xmath were used
throughout this paper.

### 3.2 Sample construction

We started our search based on the XMM-Newton serendipitous sources
followed by searching of overdensities of galaxies in 3D space. In the
following subsections, we present the strategy to create the X-ray
cluster candidates list. To derive the X-ray properties of these
candidates, we need to determine their redshift either from the X-ray
data, which is only possible for the X-ray brightest clusters, or from
the optical data, which is used in the current work. We also present the
algorithm which is used to detect the clusters in the optical band and
to estimate their redshifts from the SDSS data. The comparison of the
measured redshifts with the published ones is presented.

#### 3.2.1 X-ray cluster candidates

The survey comprises X-ray cluster candidates selected as serendipitous
sources from the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue in the footprint of SDSS-DR7. The
number of XMM-Newton fields that were used in constructing the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue in the footprint of SDSS-DR7 at high galactic latitude @xmath
is 1200 fields after excluding the multiple observations of the same
field. We also excluded those fields that were flagged as bad (the whole
field) and not suitable for source detection according to the manual
flag given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. The total area of those fields
that were included in our survey is 210 deg @xmath taking into account
the overlap areas among the fields.

The cluster candidate selection was based on X-ray extended sources that
passed the quality assessment during the construction of the catalogue
by the XMM-Newton Survey Science Center (SSC). The extent parameter of
each extended source in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue is determined by the SAS
task emldetect by fitting a convolution of a @xmath model ( @xmath =2/3)
and the instrument PSF (point spread function) to each input source. The
source is classified as extended if the extent parameter varies between
6 to 80 arcsec and if the extent likelihood is larger than 4 (Watson
et al., 2009 ) .

The completeness of the 2XMMi-DR3 extended source catalogue is not easy
to assess since the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue was constructed from 4953
observations that have different exposure times. The wide range of
exposure times yields various flux limits. Mühlegger ( 2010 ) simulated
two fields (LBQS and SCSA with exposure time 52 ks and 8.8 ks,
respectively) in the XMM-Newton Distant Cluster project (XDCP) in order
to test the detection probability. They used a source detection
technique that is similar to the one used in detecting the 2XMMi-DR3
sources. According to their simulations, the higher detection
probability was for clusters with intermediate core radii in the range
of 15 to 25 arcsec. The probability goes down with the decrease of the
photon counts as well as the core radius ( @xmath arcsec) due to the
difficulty to discriminate extended sources from point sources. The
detection probability of sources with large core radii ( @xmath arcsec)
and low number of photon was low because these systems disappear in the
background due to their low surface brightness. The detection
probability decreases beyond the off-axis angle of 12 arcmin, caused by
vignetting. Based on these results clusters with low photon counts or
large core radii might be missed in the 2XMMi-catalogue or might be
listed with incorrect source parameters.

The selected extended sources were visually inspected by us in two steps
to exclude likely spurious detections. The first visual inspection was
done using the X-ray images through the FLIX upper limit server ^(†)
^(†) † http://www.ledas.ac.uk/flix/flix.html . The second one was done
using the X-ray-optical overlays, where the X-ray flux contours were
overlaid onto the co-added SDSS images in @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
bands. The former inspection allowed us the remove the obvious spurious
cases due to point source confusion, X-ray artifacts, and near very
bright sources. Extended sources were also rejected if they were found
within another extended source or at the very edge of the CCDs. The
latter inspection enabled us also to remove the X-ray extended sources
corresponding to low redshift galaxies. The resulting list which passed
these selection criteria includes 1180 X-ray cluster candidates with at
least 80 net photon counts. More than 75 percent are new X-ray
detections of galaxy groups and clusters.

Figure 3.1 shows the X-ray-optical overlay of a newly discovered galaxy
cluster in X-ray and optical observations at redshift = 0.1873. This
cluster has been serendipitously detected (at off-axis angle of about 11
arcmins) in XMM-Newton EPIC observations of the galaxy NGC 3221. We use
this cluster as an example for illustrating the main steps of estimating
the cluster redshift and the X-ray analyses in the following sections.

#### 3.2.2 Construction of the optically confirmed cluster sample

Various methods have been developed to define the cluster membership of
galaxies from the data provided by the SDSS. They are based on different
properties of the clusters and their galaxy members, e.g. using the
cluster red-sequence, or the E/S0 ridge-line (e.g. Koester et al., 2007
; Hao et al., 2010 ) , or an overdensity of galaxies in the photometric
redshift space (Wen et al., 2009 ) . Also, clusters of galaxies are
identified by convolving the optical galaxy survey with a set of filters
in position, magnitude, and redshift space based on a modeling of the
cluster and field galaxy distributions (Szabo et al., 2011 ) .

In Paper I, we have optically confirmed about a quarter of the X-ray
cluster candidates through cross-correlation with previously identified
clusters in four optical cluster catalogues (Hao et al., 2010 ; Wen
et al., 2009 ; Koester et al., 2007 ; Szabo et al., 2011 ) . The
remainder of the X-ray cluster candidates are either distant cluster
candidates beyond the SDSS detection limits i.e. z @xmath 0.6, which
need follow-up imaging and spectroscopic confirmation or there are
overdensities of galaxies at the X-ray cluster positions that were not
recognized by any previous optical cluster finders (see e.g. Figure 3.1
). Therefore, for those clusters with members detected in the SDSS
imaging, we developed our own algorithm to search for optical
counterparts and determine their redshifts from photometric redshifts in
the SDSS database.

##### 3.2.2.1 Estimation of the cluster redshifts

Since we have prior information about the cluster position, the position
of the X-ray emission peak, we can use this information to simplify the
cluster finding procedure. We searched for an overdensity of galaxies
around the X-ray position of the cluster candidates within a certain
redshift interval. We created a galaxy sample for each X-ray cluster
candidate by selecting all galaxies from the SDSS-DR8 in an area with 10
arcmins radius centred on the X-ray source position. This radius
corresponds to a physical radius of 500 kpc at redshift redshift 0.04,
which is about our low redshift limit.

The galaxies were selected from the galaxy view table in the SDSS-DR8,
which contains the photometric parameters measured for resolved primary
objects, classified as galaxies. Also, the photometric redshifts and, if
available, the spectroscopic redshifts of the galaxy sample were
selected from the Photoz and Specz tables, respectively, in the
SDSS-DR8. The extracted parameters of the galaxy sample include the
coordinates, the model magnitudes in @xmath band, the photometric
redshifts, and, if available, the spectroscopic redshifts. When
spectroscopic redshifts of galaxies are available, we use those instead
of the photometric redshifts.

To clean the galaxy sample from faint objects or from galaxies with poor
photometric measurements, we only use galaxies with @xmath mag and
@xmath mag. The resulting galaxy sample still includes galaxies with
large photometric redshift errors, which reach a 100 percent in many
cases. The photometric redshift errors of the galaxy sample with the
applied magnitude cut are plotted against the photometric redshifts in
Figure 3.2 . To exclude low redshift galaxies with significantly large
relative photometric redshift errors as well as to keep high redshift
galaxies with slightly large relative errors, but could be acceptable,
we decided to apply a relative photometric redshift error cut ( @xmath
percent) and not to use a fixed absolute error. The 50 percent relative
error line is plotted in Figure 3.2 .

The main idea of the finding algorithm is to identify the likely
brightest cluster galaxy (BCG) among those galaxies with similar
redshift within one arcmin from the X-ray centroid position and then
search for an overdensity of surrounding member candidates. To confirm
the X-ray cluster candidates optically and to measure their redshifts,
we do the following steps:

1.  plot the photometric redshift histogram of all galaxies within one
    arcmin from the X-ray position with @xmath mag, @xmath mag, and
    fractional error of the photometric redshift, @xmath as shown in
    Figure 3.3 .

2.  compute a tentative photometric redshift of the cluster as the
    centre of the redshift bin in the main peak, @xmath . To make sure
    that the distributions of the photometric redshifts of background
    galaxies can not produce such a peak in the histogram, we selected
    360 random positions in the SDSS sky coverage and count the galaxies
    with identical magnitude and photometric redshift criteria used in
    the previous step within one arcmin from the field positions. We
    have chosen that large number of fields in order to obtain the
    average redshift distribution of background galaxies. Figure 3.4
    shows the average distribution of the galaxy counts within those
    fields as a function of redshift. The distribution does not exceed
    0.91 per redshift bin. It is unlikely that the background galaxies
    have a significant influence on the redshift determination.
    Therefore, we can neglect subtraction of the background galaxies in
    the current step to compute a tentative cluster redshift.

3.  the BCG is identified as the brightest galaxy among those galaxies
    within one arcmin around the X-ray position with a photometric
    redshift in the interval @xmath . If the algorithm finds multiple
    peaks in the redshift histogram, we select the closest BCG candidate
    to the X-ray position. Wen et al. ( 2009 ) have shown that a
    redshift interval of @xmath comprises 80 percent of the clusters
    members. We assume that our tentative redshift gives a less reliable
    but still a robust estimate of cluster membership. The redshift of
    the likely BCG does not necessarily lie in the peak bin of the
    redshift histogram but may be within one of the adjacent bins.
    Therefore, we initially allow that the BCG candidate lies either in
    the central or in one of the adjacent redshift bins. We then chose
    as BCG the brightest galaxy in those bins nearest to the X-ray
    position.

4.  to detect an overdensity of galaxies in 3D space, all galaxies
    within a radius of 560 kpc from the X-ray emission peak within the
    redshift interval @xmath are considered as cluster member
    candidates, N( @xmath 560 kpc). The redshift range used here is the
    same as that used by (Wen et al., 2009 ) . Since the physical size
    of the cluster is not a priori known, we choose a radius of 560 kpc
    as the average of @xmath from Paper I. The radius used is similar to
    the radius used by (Wen et al., 2009 ) to detect an overdensity of
    galaxies. They showed that a radius of 500 kpc gives a high
    overdensity level and a low false detection rate using Monte Carlo
    simulation tests. Since we are not computing the cluster richness in
    the current work, we did not subtract the background galaxies. The
    identified cluster member candidates are only used to compute the
    cluster redshift.

5.  The cluster photometric redshift, @xmath , is finally determined as
    the weighted average of the photometric redshift of N( @xmath 560
    kpc) with weights given as @xmath . The redshift value for our
    example cluster is marked by the vertical red line in Figure 3.3 .
    If there are available spectroscopic redshifts of N( @xmath 560
    kpc), the cluster spectroscopic redshift, @xmath , is the weighted
    average of those available spectroscopic redshifts as indicated by a
    blue line in Figure 3.3 . For the example cluster, only the BCG has
    a spectroscopic redshift. Figure 3.5 shows the sky distribution of
    the cluster member candidates within 560 kpc from the X-ray centroid
    that are represented by red dots and the field galaxies that are
    represented by blue dots.

6.  A cluster is considered as detected if there are at least 8 cluster
    member galaxies within 560 kpc and 2 members within one arcmin. If
    N( @xmath 560 kpc) @xmath but the estimated redshift is consistent
    with either an available redshift from the literature or an
    spectroscopic redshift from the current algorithm, we also consider
    it as a detected cluster. The final decision to confirm the optical
    cluster detection is done through a visual inspection of the SDSS
    colour image of the cluster field, which led to the exclusion of
    misidentified optical counterparts in a few cases. Figure 3.6 shows
    the SDSS colour image of the example cluster with a field of view 4
    @xmath @xmath 4 @xmath centred at the X-ray position.

Our procedure yielded 530 optically confirmed galaxy clusters with
measured redshifts. We refer to this sample as the optically confirmed
cluster sample, which spans a wide redshift range from 0.03 to 0.70.
About 60 percent of this sample have spectroscopic confirmation. Figure
3.7 shows the distribution of the number of cluster galaxies per cluster
with spectroscopic redshifts. Figure 3.8 shows the distribution of the
estimated photometric redshifts and, if available, spectroscopic ones of
the optically confirmed cluster sample. The projected separation between
the X-ray centres and the optical centres (chosen to be the BCGs
positions) of the cluster sample is shown in Figure 3.9 . The
distribution has a median offset of 29 kpc, 86 percent of the BCGs are
found within 150 kpc. The maximum projected separation between the BCGs
and X-ray peaks is about 320 kpc. The reason for the small observed
offset lies in the way of sample construction, on the other hand the
offset distribution seems to be in agreement with the corresponding one
derived for the maxBCG survey and ROSAT clusters (Rykoff et al., 2008 )
.

##### 3.2.2.2 Redshift uncertainty and the comparison with published
redshifts

To assess the optical detection algorithm and the estimation of the
cluster redshift, we queried the NASA Extragalactic Data base (NED) to
search for published optical redshifts. The NED lists 301 objects
including those from our Paper I. Figure 3.10 shows the relation between
the present estimation of the redshifts, @xmath , and the published
ones, @xmath . The clusters with available spectroscopic redshifts are
represented by the green dots while those clusters with only photometric
redshifts are represented by the blue dots. In general, the newly
estimated redshifts are in a very good agreement with the published
ones.

For those clusters with redshift difference @xmath , about 5 percent of
the sample, we visually re-investigated their colour image (as in Figure
3.6 ) and the distribution on sky of the identified cluster members (as
in Figure 3.5 ). This leads in all cases to a revision of the published
redshifts and we thus regard the newly determined redshifts more
reliable than the published ones which were based only on optical search
methods. We note, that redshifts used in Paper I needed to be revised
also for about 5 percent of the objects for the same reason.

Among the optically confirmed cluster sample, 310 galaxy clusters are
spectroscopically confirmed with at least one member galaxy with
spectroscopic redshift from the existing SDSS data (SDSS-DR8). To assess
the accuracy of our weighted average photometric redshift, @xmath , we
compared it with the weighted average spectroscopic redshift, @xmath .
Figure 3.11 shows the distribution of the redshift differences, @xmath -
@xmath , of the sample. The standard deviation of these redshift
differences is 0.02, which roughly indicates the accuracy of the
estimated photometric redshifts. Therefore, we are confident about the
reliability of the photometric redshift measurements.

### 3.3 X-ray data analysis

We use a similar procedure as in Paper I to reduce and analyse the X-ray
data of the optically confirmed cluster sample. The raw XMM-Newton data
were downloaded using the Archive InterOperability System (AIO), which
provides access to the XMM-Newton Science Arcchive (XSA: Arviset et al.,
2002 ) . These data were reprocessed to generate the calibrated and
filtered event lists for EPIC (MOS1, MOS1, and PN) cameras with a recent
version of the XMM-Newton Science Analysis Software (SAS11.0.1). To
determine the source extraction radii with the maximum signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR), we created the radial profiles in the energy band [0.5-2.0]
keV of each camera as well as for EPIC. Then the SNR was calculated as a
function of radius taking into account the background values as given in
the 2XMMi catalogue.

The X-ray spectra of each cluster were generated from a region with the
determined optimal extraction radius, which was corresponding to the
highest EPIC SNR. The spectral extraction from the optimal aperture was
chosen in order to reduce the statistical uncertainty in the derived
temperatures and luminosities from the spectral fits. The background
spectra were extracted from a circular annulus around the cluster with
inner and outer radii equalling two and three times the optimum radius,
respectively. Other field sources embedded in the source and background
regions of the cluster were removed.

The extracted spectra were binned to one count per bin. Spectra for each
cluster were simultaneously fitted in XSPEC (Arnaud, 1996 , version
12.7.0) with a single-temperature optically thin thermal plasma model
modified by galactic absorption of neutral matter, @xmath in XSPEC
terminology (Mewe et al., 1986 ; Wilms et al., 2000 ) . The temperature
and the normalization of the plasma model were allowed to vary while the
abundance was fixed at 0.4 @xmath . The Hydrogen absorbing column
density, @xmath , was derived from the Leiden/Argentine/Bonn (LAB)
survey (Kalberla et al., 2005 ) and fixed to this value. The spectral
fit was performed using the Cash statistics with one count per bin, a
recommended strategy for sources with low photon counts (e.g. Krumpe
et al., 2008 ) .

To avoid a conversion of the fit to a local minimum of the fitting
statistics, we ran series of fits stepping the temperature from 0.1 to
15 keV with a step size = 0.05 using the @xmath command within XSPEC. We
note that when the model spectrum is interpolated from a pre-calculated
table, the cluster temperatures in some cases tend to converge exactly
at the temperature grid points of the model table. Therefore, we run the
@xmath code with the option of calculating the model spectrum for each
temperature during the fitting and stepping process.

The spectral fitting provided us with the X-ray temperatures, fluxes in
[0.5-2.0] keV and luminosities in the rest frame energy band [0.5-2.0]
keV and their errors. The errors of the X-ray temperatures, fluxes, and
luminosities represent the 68 percent confidence range. The bolometric
X-ray luminosity over the rest frame energy range (0.1 to 50.0) keV was
determined from the dummy response matrices based on the best fitting
model parameters. The fractional error in the bolometric luminosity was
assumed to be the same as the fractional error of the luminosity in the
given energy band. To make sure this assumption is valid, we varied the
temperatures by @xmath 1 @xmath in a few cases. We found the measured
band luminosities are within their errors.

We accepted the X-ray parameters (temperature, flux, luminosity) of a
cluster if the relative errors of both the temperature and luminosity
were smaller than 50 percent. A final check was made to ensure that
neither the source nor the background region were affected by detector
artefacts and/or astronomical objects. We also visually screened
spectral fits applied to the data and rejected poor spectral fits.

The finally derived bolometric luminosities were used to estimate the
cluster luminosities and masses at @xmath through an iterative method as
briefly described below and in more detail in Paper I.

### 3.4 Results and discussion

We could derive reliable X-ray parameters from spectral fits for 345
systems of the optically confirmed cluster sample. In the next
subsections, we compare our new results with the common clusters from
(a) the XMM Cluster Survey (Mehrtens et al., 2012 ) , (b) the MCXC
catalogue (Piffaretti et al., 2011 ) , and (c) the Paper I sample. We
then go ahead to derive an updated @xmath relation based on this new
sample. For the remaining 185 clusters of the optically confirmed sample
without proper spectral fit, we used the X-ray flux as given in the
2XMMi-DR3 catalogue to estimate the luminosity and the mass. We finally
present the X-ray luminosity-redshift distribution of the whole
optically confirmed cluster sample.

#### 3.4.1 The cluster sample with reliable X-ray parameters from the
spectral fits

Figure 3.12 shows the distribution of the net EPIC photon counts in the
energy interval [0.5-2.0] keV for those clusters that could be fitted
successfully. It shows that 87 percent of our clusters have more than
300 source photons. In some cases a successful spectral fit could be
achieved with just a few more than 100 photons due to the combination of
clean X-ray data and previous knowledge of the cluster redshift. Our new
sample has a wide range of temperatures from 0.5 to 7.5 keV, which is
shown in Figure 3.13 . The average relative errors of the temperatures
and luminosities are 0.20 and 0.06, respectively.

We follow an iterative method (see Paper I) to compute physical
parameters for each cluster. The estimated aperture X-ray bolometric
luminosity and its error, optimal extraction radius, and the redshift
were used as input to determine the radius @xmath , the X-ray bolometric
luminosity within @xmath , @xmath , and the cluster mass at @xmath ,
@xmath . The main idea of the iterative method is to extrapolate the
aperture bolometric flux to the bolometric flux at @xmath based on a
@xmath model of the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and core radius, r @xmath , depend on temperature (see
Eq. 4 and 5 in paper I). The correction factor of the flux is used to
extrapolate the aperture bolometric luminosity to the bolometric @xmath
. Finally, @xmath is computed based on the @xmath relation from (Pratt
et al., 2009 ) . The error budget of the estimated @xmath and @xmath
includes the errors of the input parameters, the intrinsic scatter in
the utilized @xmath and @xmath relations, and the propagated errors of
their slopes and the intercepts. The median correction factor between
the extrapolated bolometric luminosity to @xmath and the aperture
bolometric luminosity, @xmath , was 1.7.

Table 3.2 , available entirely at the CDS, represents the first 10
entries of the X-ray selected cluster sample with a total of 345 rows.
For each cluster the catalogue lists the cluster identification number
(detection Id, detid) and its name (IAUNAME) in (cols. [1] and [2]), the
right ascension and declination of X-ray emission in equinox J2000.0
(cols. [3] and [4]), the XMM-Newton observation Id (obsid) (col. [5]),
the optical redshift (col. [6]), the scale at the cluster redshift in
kpc/ @xmath (col. [7]), the aperture and @xmath radii in kpc (cols. [8]
and [9]), the cluster aperture X-ray temperature @xmath and its positive
and negative errors in keV (cols. [10], [11] and [12], respectively),
the aperture X-ray flux @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV and its positive and
negative errors in units of @xmath erg cm @xmath s @xmath (cols. [13],
[14] and [15], respectively), the aperture X-ray luminosity @xmath
[0.5-2.0] keV and its positive and negative errors in units of @xmath
erg s @xmath (cols. [16], [17] and [18], respectively), the cluster
bolometric luminosity @xmath and its error in units of @xmath erg s
@xmath (cols. [19] and [20]), the cluster mass @xmath and its error in
units of @xmath M @xmath (cols. [21] and [22]), the Galactic HI column
in units @xmath cm @xmath (col. [23]), the objid of the likely BCG in
the SDSS-DR8 (col. [24]), the BCG right ascension and declination in
equinox J2000.0 (cols. [25] and [26]), the estimated photometric and, if
available, spectroscopic redshift of the cluster (col. [27] and
col. [28]), the number of cluster members within 560 kpc with available
spectroscopic redshifts, which were used to compute the cluster
spectroscopic redshift, (col. [29]), the redshift type (col. [30]), the
linear offset between the cluster X-ray position and the BCG position
(col. [31]), and the NED name and its references (col. [32] and
col. [33]).

#### 3.4.2 The cluster sample with X-ray flux from the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue

For clusters with insufficient X-ray data to perform a proper spectral
fit, we estimated their X-ray parameters based on the EPIC flux and its
error in 0.5-2.0 keV as given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. The catalogue
provides aperture corrected fluxes, which are calculated by the SAS
tasks emldetect . For the individual cameras, individual-band fluxes are
calculated from the respective band count rate using the filter- and
camera-dependent energy conversion factors and corrected for the dead
time due to the read-out phase. The EPIC flux in each band is estimated
as the mean of the band-specific detections in all cameras weighted by
their errors (Watson et al., 2009 ) . Here we use the combined EPIC flux
in band 2 (0.5 - 1.0 keV) and band 3 (1.0 - 2.0 keV) and its propagated
error, @xmath in [0.5-2.0] keV.

Figure 3.14 shows the relation between the flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue and the aperture flux determined by us for the 345 clusters
with reliable X-ray parameters from the spectral fits. It shows a linear
relation between the two flux measurements apart from some outliers (of
order 5 percent) which we found to be contaminated by point sources in
the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. In general terms the catalogued flux is larger
than the aperture flux, since the former was computed for the integrated
@xmath -model.

Figure 3.15 shows the relation between the aperture bolometric
luminosities, @xmath , and @xmath of the cluster sample with X-ray
spectroscopic parameters, where @xmath is based on @xmath in [0.5-2.0]
keV. Generally, there is a linear relation between the two luminosities
except for 12 outliers with @xmath . Ignoring these outliers we
performed a linear regression between their logarithms to convert @xmath
to @xmath for the 185 clusters without proper spectral fit. The best-fit
linear relation derived using the BCES orthogonal regression method
(Akritas & Bershady, 1996 ) is represented by the dashed line in Figure
3.15 and is given by Eq. 2 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the iterative method as described above we computed bolometric
@xmath per cluster with the redshift, aperture radius @xmath and
aperture bolometric luminosity @xmath as input. The aperture radius used
here is still the radius that is corresponding to the maximum EPIC SNR,
see Section 3. We finally determined for each cluster @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath and the corresponding errors using the extrapolated values
for @xmath . From the comparison between the bolometric @xmath based on
the catalogue flux and the bolometric @xmath based on the spectroscopic
flux, there is no obvious systematic differences between the two
luminosities as shown in Figure 3.16 . Therefore, the conversion from
@xmath to @xmath and the iterative procedure are acceptable.

Table 3.3 , a full version of this table is provided at the CDS,
represents the first 10 entries of the X-ray selected cluster sample
comprising 185 clusters with X-ray parameters based on the flux given in
the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. For each cluster, the catalogue provides the
cluster identification number (detection Id, detid) and its name
(IAUNAME) in (cols. [1] and [2]), the right ascension and declination of
X-ray emission in equinox J2000.0 (cols. [3] and [4]), the XMM-Newton
observation Id (obsid) (col. [5]), the optical redshift (col. [6]), the
scale at the cluster redshift in kpc/ @xmath (col. [7]), the @xmath in
kpc (col. [8]), the 2XMMi-DR3 X-ray flux @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV and its
error in units of @xmath erg cm @xmath s @xmath (cols. [9], and [10]),
the estimated X-ray luminosity @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV and its error in
units of @xmath erg s @xmath (cols. [11], and [12]), the cluster
bolometric luminosity @xmath and its error in units of @xmath erg s
@xmath (cols. [13] and [14]), the cluster mass @xmath and its error in
units of @xmath M @xmath (cols. [15] and [16]), the @xmath and its error
in units of keV (cols. [17] and [18]), the objid of the likely BCG in
SDSS-DR8 (col. [19]), the BCG right ascension and declination in equinox
J2000.0 (cols. [20] and [21]), the estimated photometric and, if
available, spectroscopic redshift of the cluster (col. [22] and
col. [23]), the number of cluster members within 560 kpc with available
spectroscopic redshifts, which were used to compute the cluster
spectroscopic redshift, (col. [24]), the redshift type (col. [25]), the
linear offset between the cluster X-ray position and the BCG position
(col. [26]), and the NED name and its references (col. [27] and
col. [28]).

#### 3.4.3 Analysis of the cluster sample with reliable X-ray parameters

We present a comparison of the measured parameters (temperatures,
luminosities, and masses) of the cluster sample (345 systems) that have
reliable X-ray parameters from the spectral fits with the available
values in the literature.

##### 3.4.3.1 Comparison with the XCS sample

The so far largest published catalogue of X-ray clusters based on the
entire XMM-Newton archive was compiled by the XMM Cluster Survey team
(XCS, Romer et al., 2001 ; Lloyd-Davies et al., 2011 ; Mehrtens et al.,
2012 ) . The catalogue consists of 503 optically confirmed clusters. Of
these, 463 systems have redshifts in the range 0.05 to 1.46. The X-ray
temperatures are measured for 401 clusters. We cross-matched our cluster
sample and the XCS sample with available temperature measurements within
a matching radius of 30 arcsec which yielded 114 common clusters. About
half of the common sample was previously published by us in Paper I. The
standard deviation of the redshift difference @xmath is 0.027 and thus
of order of the photometric redshift accuracy. There is no systematic
deviation as e.g. a function of redshift present as shown in Figure 3.17
.

Regarding the temperature measurements, even though we extracted the
cluster spectra from a different aperture than the aperture used in the
XCS project and using a different spectral fitting procedure, in general
there is agreement between the two measurements. Figure 3.18 shows the
comparison of the measured temperatures from the two projects. We plot
the symmetric errors of each temperature as the average of the positive
and negative errors. Our procedure reveals a slightly smaller
temperature uncertainty than derived in the XCS with a median @xmath .
The differences between the two temperature measurements have a mean of
0.02 keV and a standard deviation of 0.93 keV that is comparable with
the standard deviation, 0.82 keV, of the error measurements in
temperatures of the XCS sample.

In the XCS project, the cluster luminosity @xmath was calculated by
using an analytical function of @xmath model fitted to the surface
brightness profile. The same profile was used to determine a scaling
factor between the aperture luminosity and @xmath (Lloyd-Davies et al.,
2011 ) . Our procedure of the extrapolation was described above and in
more detail in Paper I. We find a good agreement between both
determinations of @xmath as shown in Figure 3.19 . The ratio between the
current luminosity measurements to that of the XCS has a median of 0.93.

##### 3.4.3.2 Comparison with the MCXC sample

The MCXC catalogue, a meta-catalogue of X-ray detected clusters of
galaxies, is compiled from published ROSAT All Sky Survey-based and
serendipitous cluster catalogues (Piffaretti et al., 2011 ) . The
catalogue comprises 1743 clusters that span a wide redshift range up to
1.3. For each cluster the catalogue lists redshift, luminosity @xmath in
the 0.1-2.4 keV band, total mass @xmath , and radius @xmath . Within a
cross-matching radius of the cluster centres of 30 arcsec there are only
23 common clusters. The small overlap is mainly due to our small survey
area and our strategy to investigate serendipitous clusters only, not
cluster targets.

We compared the masses of the common sample in Figure 3.20 and found
consisting results. This comparison made sure that our mass measurements
are reliable and not affected by any systematic bias. We also found
consistency between the redshifts used in both catalogues.

##### 3.4.3.3 Comparison with the sample from Paper I

Since we have developed an algorithm to estimate the redshifts of the
X-ray cluster candidates, the redshifts of the first cluster sample from
the survey, Paper I, were revised, as discussed in Section 2. We also
revised the X-ray spectroscopic parameters for the first cluster sample.
The common sample between the current sample with reliable X-ray
parameters and the first cluster sample consists of 141 systems. The
remaining 34 clusters from Paper I did not pass the quality criterion
applied in the present work. Those missed clusters are nevertheless
included in the published cluster catalogue from this paper with less
reliable parameters (see above).

We found a systematic bias of the temperature measurements of the sample
in Paper I and the current sample as shown in Figure 3.21 . When
investigating possible reasons for the discrepancy we realized that the
X-ray data in Paper I were analysed in a non-appropriate manner. The
X-ray spectra were not grouped and binned before a spectral model was
applied. This led to a systematic shift of many of the derived
temperatures determined in Paper I towards too low values.

As a consequence the luminosities were biased towards smaller values
(Figure 3.22 ) by a factor of 20 percent. Revised redshifts and in some
cases revised spectral extraction regions led to a few outliers in that
figure.

We also presented in Paper I the @xmath of the first cluster sample,
which we now regard as affected by the underestimated X-ray
temperatures. We are confident through several sanity checks that our
updated temperatures and luminosities are reliable and we re-determine
the @xmath relation based on the much enlarged sample in the next
subsection.

#### 3.4.4 The @xmath relation of the cluster sample with reliable X-ray
parameters

Based on the cluster sample with X-ray spectroscopic parameters, we
investigate the @xmath relation as well as the evolution of its slope
and intrinsic scatter as presented in the following subsections.

##### 3.4.4.1 The @xmath relation of the full sample

The bolometric luminosities @xmath and the aperture temperatures @xmath
based on X-ray spectral fits were used to investigate the @xmath
relation for the cluster sample with reliable X-ray parameters. We note
that we could not make an attempt to excise the cores in most cases of
the cluster sample which is due to the rather low resolution of the
X-ray optics of the XMM-Newton telescopes, not too long exposure times
and the rather large distance of most of our clusters. This caveat needs
to be made when comparing our results with those in the literature which
are partly based on nearby clusters with Chandra follow-up.

Figure 3.23 shows the relation between the measured X-ray bolometric
luminosity, @xmath , modified with the evolution parameter for
self-similar evolution and the X-ray aperture temperature, @xmath . We
used the BCES orthogonal regression method (Akritas & Bershady, 1996 )
to derive the best-fit linear relation between the logarithms of @xmath
and @xmath taking into account their errors as well as the intrinsic
scatter. The best fit is shown in Figure 3.23 and is given by Eq. 3:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Hubble constant normalised to its present-day value,
@xmath , @xmath in erg s @xmath , and @xmath in keV. By an analysis of
common objects between our list and that of the XCS we have shown that
our @xmath and @xmath compare well with @xmath and @xmath of the XCS
sample. Not unexpectedly, the slopes and intercepts of the corresponding
@xmath relations in three redshift bins agree with each other within 1-2
@xmath (see subsection 4.4.2).

Relations between the luminosity and the temperature, @xmath , were
published for the REXCESS and HIFLUGCS sample (Pratt et al., 2009 ;
Mittal et al., 2011 ) . The REXCESS sample comprises 31 nearby ( @xmath
) galaxy clusters with temperature range from 2 to 9 keV which have been
observed with the XMM-Newton. The HIFLUGCS sample comprises the 64
brightest galaxy clusters in the sky with @xmath keV and @xmath , with
high quality Chandra data. In both samples the core emission could be
excised but @xmath were published for the non-excised data as well. The
REXCESS team used a fitting procedure similar to us, the HIFLUGCS sample
was fitted with a BCES-bisector routine.

The present slope of the relation in Eq. (3), 2.80 @xmath 0.12, is
slightly lower than that from the REXCESS sample, 3.35 @xmath 0.32, but
still within 1.8 @xmath . We also found the present slope in agreement
with the slope given by Mittal et al. ( 2011 ) , @xmath .

The current cluster sample includes groups with much lower luminosity
than REXCESS and HIFLUGCS, which might influence the slope of the @xmath
relation. If we exclude systems with luminosities @xmath erg s @xmath ,
the slope of the relation becomes @xmath , in much closer agreement with
the published ones for REXCESS, HIFLUGCS, and XCS samples. The
normalization of the relation, @xmath , is still much lower than the
one, @xmath , of the REXCESS sample. This is due to the much wider
temperature range covered by the current large sample. In addition to
establishing the current relation based on aperture temperatures that
are in general slightly higher than the temperatures at @xmath . We
found that the median scaling factor of @xmath and @xmath of the full
sample, @xmath , was 1.2, where @xmath is the the predicted temperature
based on the @xmath relation by Pratt et al. ( 2009 ) using our value
for @xmath .

Eckmiller et al. ( 2011 ) found the slope of @xmath relation of galaxy
groups (26 systems, @xmath erg s @xmath ) is slightly shallower than the
one derived for clusters (HIFLUGCS), but they are still consistent
within the errors. They also found no significant change of the slope
derived from a sample combining groups and clusters than clusters only,
which is consistent with the results by Osmond & Ponman ( 2004 ) . We
found the slope derived from the current sample (including groups and
clusters) is in good agreement with the slope obtained from clusters
only (HIFLUGCS sample) but it is lower than the slope of REXCESS sample.

The current slope of the @xmath relation is significantly lower than the
one published in Paper I, @xmath . The redshifts, temperatures, and
luminosities of the previous sample were revised. Using the updated
values we still find a rather steep slope of @xmath thus confirming the
initial result (the new fit is shown with a dashed line in Figure 3.23
). The much shallower slope found here based on the full sample is
clearly due to the inclusion of new objects that have a wider
temperature and luminosity range. As discussed above, when excluding the
low luminosity systems from the full sample the slope becomes steep,
@xmath , which is consistent within 1.4 @xmath with the updated slope,
@xmath , for the Paper I sample.

To estimate the intrinsic scatter in the @xmath relation, we followed
the method used by Pratt et al. ( 2009 ) . First we estimated the raw
scatter using the error-weighted orthogonal distances to the regression
line (Eqs. 3 and 4 in Pratt et al., 2009 ) . Then we computed the
intrinsic scatter as the mean value of the quadratic differences between
the raw scatters and the statistical errors. The error of the intrinsic
scatter was computed as the standard error of its value. The computed
intrinsic scatter value of the relation, @xmath , is slightly higher
than the value of REXCESS sample, @xmath .

The updated @xmath relation is derived for the first time from a sample
comprising 345 clusters drawn from a single survey and spans a wide
redshift range ( @xmath ). Of these, 210 clusters have spectroscopic
redshifts for at least one cluster member galaxy. The redshifts and the
X-ray parameters of the sample are measured in a consistent way. The
sample has X-ray spectroscopic temperature measurements from 0.5 to 7.5
keV and bolometric luminosity range @xmath erg s @xmath .

Based on the SDSS we could identify only about half of our X-ray cluster
candidates. The other 50 percent probably represents a more luminous
population. The omission of that subsample may have a yet to be
quantified influence on the @xmath relation. However including luminous
distant clusters does not have a significant effect on the slope of the
@xmath relation (Hilton et al., 2012 ) as described in the subsequent
section. Also the current sample does not include distant clusters
beyond @xmath , therefore we defer the measurement of the evolution of
the normalisation of the @xmath relation to a future study.

##### 3.4.4.2 Evolution of the slope and intrinsic scatter

Based on the first data release of the XCS, Hilton et al. ( 2012 )
investigated a possible evolution of the slope and intrinsic scatter of
the @xmath relation in three redshift bins. A sample of 211 clusters
with spectroscopic redshift up to 1.5 was used for this exercise. No
evidence for evolution in either the slope or intrinsic scatter as a
function of redshift was found.

Using our much larger sample of clusters with measured X-ray
spectroscopic parameters we further investigate a possible evolution of
the mentioned parameters of the @xmath relation. We divided our sample
into three subsamples with similar redshift bins as used by Hilton
et al. ( 2012 ) , @xmath , and @xmath . The numbers of clusters per
redshift bin are listed in Table 3.1 . Our two low redshift subsamples
are about twice as large as the XCS corresponding subsamples. The number
of clusters in the high redshift bin are comparable, however the XCS
comprises clusters up to redshift 1.5. In general, there are about 75
common clusters between our sample and the XCS-DR1 sample which were
used to derive the @xmath relation. Of these common clusters, 44 systems
were published from our survey in Paper I.

The @xmath relations of our subsamples are shown in Figure 3.24 . When
fitting these susamples using the BCES orthogonal regression method, we
find that the relation slope of the subsamples in the intermediate and
high redshift bins are consistent while the subsample in the lowest
redshift bin has a shallower slope. The reason is that the low redshift
subsample includes groups/clusters with low temperature and luminosity,
which produces a shallower slope. Also the present slope of the low
redshift subsample is lower than the published one of the corresponding
XCS-DR1 subsample and those of the REXCESS and HIFLUGCS samples. On the
other hand, the slopes of the intermediate and high redshift subsamples
are in agreement with the slopes of the corresponding XCS-DR1
subsamples. The intrinsic scatter of all subsamples agree with each
other. Table 3.1 also lists the fitted parameters (intercept and slope)
of the @xmath relations, their intrinsic scatter, together with
published values (slope, sample size, reference).

If we fit the @xmath for the low redshift subsample after excluding the
groups with low luminosity (i.e. @xmath erg s @xmath ), the slope of the
relation becomes @xmath , which is in agreement with the intermediate
and high redshift subsamples as well as the corresponding published
slopes given in Table 3.1 . We thus confirm the finding by Hilton et al.
( 2012 ) that the @xmath relation does not show a significant change of
its slope and its intrinsic scatter as a function of redshift.

#### 3.4.5 The distribution of the luminosity with redshift

Figure 3.25 shows the distribution of the bolometric luminosity @xmath
as a function of the redshift for all 530 clusters with redshifts that
were determined in the present work. Included are also the 1730 systems
from the MCXC catalogue below redshift 0.8. The X-ray luminosity @xmath
in @xmath keV of the MCXC sample was converted to the bolometric
luminosity @xmath by assuming the factor @xmath . This factor was
derived as a median of @xmath for the 23 common systems between the
cluster sample with reliable parameters from the spectral fitting and
MCXC cataloge.

It is clearly obvious that our X-ray selected samples extend to include
groups and clusters with low luminosity. The sensitivity of XMM-Newton
and deeper exposures for some fields allow us to detect less luminous
clusters over the redshift range as shown in Figure 3.25 .

### 3.5 Summary and outlook

We have presented the optically confirmed cluster sample of 530 galaxy
groups and clusters from the 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The
survey consists of 1180 X-ray cluster candidates with at least 80 net
photon counts selected from the second XMM-Newton serendipitous source
catalogue (2XMMi-DR3), which are in the footprint of the SDSS-DR7. The
survey area is 210 deg @xmath considering the XMM-Newton field of view
has a radius of 15 arcmin. We developed a finding algorithm to detect
the optical counterparts of the X-ray cluster candidates and to
constrain their redshifts using the photometric and, if available, the
spectroscopic redshifts of surrounding galaxies from the SDSS-DR8 data.
The cluster is recognized if there are at least 8 member galaxies within
a radius of 560 kpc from the X-ray emission peak with photometric
redshift in the redshift interval of the redshift of the likely
identified BCG, @xmath .

The cluster photometric and spectroscopic redshift is measured as the
weighted average of the photometric and the available spectroscopic
redshifts, respectively, of the cluster galaxies within 560 kpc from the
X-ray position. The measured redshifts are in a good agreement with
available redshifts in the literature, to date 301 clusters are known as
optically selected clusters with redshift measurements. Also, 310
clusters of the optically confirmed cluster sample have spectroscopic
redshifts for at least one cluster member. The measured photometric
redshifts are in a good agreement with the measured spectroscopic ones
from the survey. The cluster redshifts of the optically confirmed
cluster sample span a wide redshift range from 0.03 to 0.70. We reduced
and analysed the X-ray data of this sample in an automated way to
compute their X-ray properties.

We present a cluster catalogue from the survey comprising 345 X-ray
selected groups and clusters with their X-ray parameters derived from
the spectral fits including the published sample in Paper I. In addition
to the best fitting parameters, we estimated the physical properties (
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) of this sample from an iterative procedure
based on published scaling relations. We investigated the @xmath
relations for the first time based on a large cluster sample with X-ray
spectroscopic parameters drawn from a single survey. The current sample
includes groups and clusters with wide ranges of temperatures and
luminosities. The slope of the relation is consistent with the published
ones of clusters with high temperatures and luminosities. After
excluding the low luminosity groups, we find no significant change of
the slope and the intrinsic scatter of the relation with redshift when
dividing the sample into three redshift bins. When including the low
luminosity groups in the low redshift subsample, the slope is no longer
consistent with the intermediate and high redshift subsamples.

In addition to the cluster sample with X-ray spectroscopic data, we
present the remainder of the optically confirmed cluster sample with
their X-ray parameters based on the given flux in the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue. We used the 2XMMi-DR3 flux because of their low quality X-ray
data, which is not sufficient to perform the spectral fitting. This
sample comprises 185 groups and clusters with their fluxes and
luminosity in the energy band 0.5-2.0 keV and their physical parameters
( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ).

This is the largest X-ray selected cluster catalogue to date based on
XMM-Newton observations. It comprises 530 clusters with their optical
and X-ray properties, spanning the redshift range @xmath . More than 75
percent of the cluster sample are newly discovered clusters in X-ray
wavelengths. About 40 percent of the sample are new systems to the
literature according to current entries in the NED.

In the future we plan to study the remainder of the X-ray cluster
candidates, which were not detected by the current detection algorithm.
They are either poor or at high redshifts. For the distant clusters, we
plan follow-up by imaging and spectroscopy. For those X-ray cluster
candidates that have galaxy members detected in SDSS imaging and not be
identified by the current algorithm, we plan to improve the current
finding algorithm to constrain their redshifts. The new sample from the
survey especially the distant ones will allow us to investigate the
evolution of @xmath relation and X-ray-optical relations.

## Chapter 4 III. Clusters associated with spectroscopically targeted
LRGs in SDSS-DR9***This chapter will be submitted to Astronomy &
Astrophysics

### Abstract

We present a sample of 324 X-ray selected galaxy groups and clusters
with spectroscopic redshift measurements (up to @xmath ) from the
2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The X-ray cluster candidates were
selected as serendipitous extended sources from the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue
in the foot print of the Sloan Digital Sky survey (SDSS-DR7). The
cluster galaxies with available spectroscopic redshifts are selected
from the SDSS-DR9. We developed an algorithm to identify the cluster
candidates associated with spectroscopically targeted Luminous Red
Galaxies (LRGs) and to measure the cluster spectroscopic redshift. A
cross correlation of the identified cluster sample with published
optically selected cluster catalogues shows that 241/324 sources were
previously identified with available redshifts. The present redshift
measurements are consistent with the published ones. The current cluster
sample extends the optically confirmed cluster sample from our cluster
survey by 44 objects and provides spectroscopic confirmation for 49
clusters among the published sample with only photometric redshifts.
Among the extended cluster sample, about 80 percent are newly X-ray
discovered systems and 55 percent are newly discovered as galaxy
clusters in optical and X-ray wavelengths. Based on the measured
redshifts and the fluxes given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue we estimated
the X-ray luminosities and masses of the cluster sample.

### 4.1 Introduction

Galaxy clusters are the largest gravitationally bound objects in the
universe. They have been formed from the densest regions in the
large-scale matter distribution of the universe and have collapsed to
form their own proper equilibrium structure. Their form can be well
assessed by observations and well described by theoretical modelings
(e.g. Sarazin, 1988 ; Bahcall, 1988 ; Voit, 2005 ; Böhringer, 2006 ) .
X-ray and optical observations show that clusters of galaxies are well
defined connected structural entities where the diffuse X-ray emission
from the hot intracluster medeium (ICM) trace contiguously the whole
structure of the cluster. They are excellent giant laboratories sites
for several astrophysical studies, for example investigation of galaxy
evolution in their dense environments (e.g. Dressler, 1980 ; Goto
et al., 2003 ) , evolution of the dynamical and thermal structure (e.g.
Balestra et al., 2007 ; Maughan et al., 2008 ; Anderson et al., 2009 ) ,
chemical enrichment of the intracluster medium (e.g. Cora, 2006 ; Heath
et al., 2007 ) , to study lensed high redshift background galaxies (e.g.
Metcalfe et al., 2003 ; Santos et al., 2004 ; Bartelmann, 2010 ) , and
to investigate the evolution of the universe in order to test the
cosmological models (e.g. Rosati et al., 2002 ; Reiprich & Böhringer,
2002 ; Voit, 2005 ; Vikhlinin et al., 2009b ; Allen et al., 2011 ) .

Due to the multi-component nature of galaxy clusters, they can be
observed and identified through multiple observable signals across the
electromagnetic spectrum. Tens of thousands of galaxy clusters have been
identified through detecting their galaxies in optical and NIR band
(e.g. Abell, 1958 ; Abell et al., 1989 ; Zwicky et al., 1961 ; Gladders
& Yee, 2005 ; Merchán & Zandivarez, 2005 ; Koester et al., 2007 ; Wen
et al., 2009 ; Hao et al., 2010 ; Szabo et al., 2011 ; Geach et al.,
2011 ; Durret et al., 2011 ; Wen et al., 2012 ; Gettings et al., 2012 )
. Recently, several galaxy cluster surveys have been conducted at mm
wavelength through the Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ) effect (e.g. Vanderlinde
et al., 2010 ; Marriage et al., 2011 ; Planck Collaboration et al., 2011
; Reichardt et al., 2013 ; Planck Collaboration et al., 2013 ) , which
provided hundreds of SZ selected clusters.

X-ray cluster surveys provide pure and complete cluster catalogues, in
addition the tight correlations between X-ray observables and masses of
clusters (e.g. Allen et al., 2011 ) . Hundreds of galaxy clusters were
detected in X-rays based on previous X-ray missions mainly from ROSAT
data (e.g. Ebeling et al., 1998 ; Böhringer et al., 2004 ; Reiprich &
Böhringer, 2002 ; Ebeling et al., 2010 ; Rosati et al., 1998 ; Burenin
et al., 2007 ) . The current X-ray telescopes (XMM-Newton, Chandra,
Swift/X-ray) provide contiguous surveys for small areas (e.g. Finoguenov
et al., 2007 , 2010 ; Adami et al., 2011 ; Šuhada et al., 2012 ) , in
addition to serendipitous cluster surveys (e.g. Barkhouse et al., 2006 ;
Kolokotronis et al., 2006 ; Fassbender et al., 2011 ; Takey et al., 2011
; Mehrtens et al., 2012 ; Clerc et al., 2012 ; Tundo et al., 2012 ; de
Hoon et al., 2013 ; Takey et al., 2013a ) . So far these surveys
provided a substantial cluster sample of few hundreds up to redshift of
1.57.

We have conducted a systematic search for X-ray detected galaxy clusters
based on XMM-Newton fields that are in the footprint of the SDSS-DR7.
The catalogue of XMM-Newton serendipitous extended sources detected in
EPIC images was the basic database to select the X-ray cluster
candidates, which comprises 1180 objects. The redshifts of about half of
the cluster candidates were measured based on the galaxy redshifts given
in the SDSS-DR8. By having an optically confirmed groups/clusters with
redshift measurements, we derived their X-ray luminosities and
temperatures and investigated the X-ray luminosity-temperature relation.
The selection criteria, redshift measurements, and the X-ray properties
of the optically confirmed sample were described in more detail by Takey
et al. ( 2011 , 2013a , Paper I, Paper II, hereafter) .

In this work we compile a new sample of X-ray detected galaxy clusters
that are associated with LRGs, which have spectroscopic redshifts in the
SDSS-DR9 data. We present the procedure used to construct a cluster
sample among the X-ray cluster candidates that have spectroscopic
confirmation based on the spectroscopic redshifts of LRGs and then to
measure their redshifts. We also present the measurements of X-ray
luminosity and luminosity-based mass of the constructed cluster sample.

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we describe briefly the
selection procedure of the X-ray cluster candidates. In Section 3 we
describe the cluster sample associated with LRGs and their redshift
measurements. The X-ray parameters of the cluster sample are presented
in Section 4. The summary of the paper is presented in Section 5.
Throughout this paper, we used the cosmological parameters @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath km s @xmath Mpc @xmath .

### 4.2 Description of the X-ray cluster candidates

Galaxy clusters are simply identified among the X-ray sources as X-ray
luminous, spatially extended, extragalactic sources (Allen et al., 2011
) . The so far largest X-ray sources catalogue (2XMMi-DR3, Watson
et al., 2009 ) was comprised based on all XMM-Newton observations (till
October 2009) taken by the EPIC (PN, MOS1, MOS2) cameras, which
comprises 353191 detections corresponding to 262902 unique sources.
Among these detections, 30470 extended detections that are including
both real and spurious extended sources as well as multiple detections
of same sources.

We selected the X-ray cluster candidates from the reliable extended
sources (with no warning about being spurious) in the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue at high galactic latitudes, @xmath . The survey was
constrained to those XMM-Newton fields that are in the footprint of the
SDSS-DR7 in order to be able to measure the optical redshifts of the
possible optical counterparts. The overlap area of XMM-Newton fields and
imaging area of the SDSS-DR7 is 210 deg @xmath . After excluding
possible spurious X-ray detections and low redshift galaxies that appear
resolved at X-ray wavelengths through visual inspections of X-ray images
and X-ray-optical overlays, the X-ray cluster candidates list comprised
1180 objects. The selection procedure was described in more detail in
Papers I and II.

The X-ray cluster candidates have a wide range of the net photon counts
from 80 up to few thousands. For the X-ray bright candidates in the list
(about 4 percent with 2000 counts or more), the X-ray spectroscopy
provides a tool to measure the X-ray redshift (Lamer et al., 2008 ; Yu
et al., 2011 ) . We defer measuring X-ray redshifts for those clusters
to a future work. The alternative and the main way to obtain the cluster
redshifts is based on the optical data. This can by done by either
cross-matching the X-ray cluster candidates with the available optically
selected galaxy clusters catalogues in the literature (see Paper I) or
by measuring the cluster photometric redshifts based on galaxy redshifts
given in the SDSS catalogues (see paper II). Using those methods we
could establish an optically confirmed cluster sample comprising 530
groups/clusters with redshift measurements.

In the current work we are going to identify a subsample of the X-ray
cluster candidates associated with LRGs that have spectroscopic
redshifts in the SDSS-DR9 in order to construct a sample with
spectroscopic confirmations. As an example, Figure 4.1 shows a newly
X-ray discovered galaxy cluster associated with two LRGS as cluster
galaxies with available spectroscopic redshift of 0.5446. We use this
cluster to show the procedure of the redshift measurements in the next
section.

### 4.3 Clusters associated with spectroscopically targeted LRGs in
SDSS-DR9

Generally, the brightest cluster galaxies (BCGs) are elliptical massive
galaxies and reside near the cluster center of mass. The BCGs tend to be
very luminous and red galaxies (LRGs) (e.g. Postman & Lauer, 1995 ;
Eisenstein et al., 2001 ; Wen et al., 2012 ) , therefore LRGs with
available spectroscopic redshifts give spectroscopic confirmations for
clusters that are associated with them (e.g. Goto et al., 2002 ;
Mehrtens et al., 2012 ) .

We identify LRGs from SDSS-DR9 data that are cluster members of any of
the X-ray cluster candidates. The spectroscopic redshifts of these
cluster members are used to measure the cluster redshifts. In the next
subsection we describe how to select the LRGs from the recent data of
the SDSS and the procedure used to measure the cluster redshifts. We
also present some statistical properties of the constructed cluster
sample, e.g. the redshift distribution and the linear offsets from the
X-ray positions. Then a comparison of the current redshift measurements
with the published ones is presented.

#### 4.3.1 Luminous Red Galaxy sample

The so far latest data release from the SDSS is Data Release 9 (DR9, Ahn
et al., 2012 ) , which provides the first spectroscopic data from the
SDSS-III’s Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS) as well as
imaging and spectroscopic data from the previous SDSS data releases.
BOSS is an ongoing project and its first data release includes more than
800,000 spectra of galaxies, in addition to thousands of quasar and
stellar spectra over 3,300 deg @xmath . One aim of BOSS is to obtain
spectra of 1.5 million galaxies with @xmath over 10,000 deg @xmath ,
therefore it will be a valuable resource to obtain spectroscopic
confirmation for luminous cluster galaxies.

For each X-ray cluster candidate, we created a sample of galaxies that
are located within 10 arcmins from the X-ray source position. The search
radius corresponds to a physical radius of 500 kpc at a redshift 0.04,
which is about our low redshift limit. The galaxies were selected from
the galaxy view table in the SDSS-DR9, which contains the photometric
parameters measured for resolved primary objects, classified as
galaxies. Also, the photometric redshifts ( @xmath ) and, if available,
the spectroscopic redshifts ( @xmath ) of the galaxy sample were
selected from the Photoz and SpecObj tables, respectively. The SpecObj
table includes spectroscopic redshifts that were measured from clean
galaxy spectra taken by the new and old spectrographs in the SDSS
projects. The extracted parameters of the galaxy sample include the
coordinates, the (model and composite model) magnitudes in @xmath and
@xmath band, the photometric redshifts, and, if available, the
spectroscopic redshifts. We used the magnitudes in the galaxy table that
are corrected for Galactic extinction following (Schlegel et al., 1998 )
. To clean the galaxy sample from faint objects beyond the detection
limits of SDSS, we only deal with galaxies that have @xmath mag, @xmath
mag, and @xmath .

BOSS data includes two main target galaxy samples; first the BOSS @xmath
LOWZ @xmath galaxy sample with @xmath ; second the BOSS constant-mass,
@xmath CMASS @xmath , galaxy sample with @xmath . The target selection
algorithms for galaxies in BOSS are significantly different from those
used in the previous SDSS projects due to the different scientific goals
(Ahn et al., 2012 ) . BOSS targets significantly fainter galaxies than
galaxy targets in the previous SDSS projects with the aim of measuring
large-scale clustering of galaxies at higher redshifts. To select a
homogeneous luminous red galaxy sample from BOSS and previous SDSS data
releases, we apply the same selection criteria on both data. We selected
the LRGs with available spectroscopic redshifts from the constructed
galaxy sample within 10 arcmin from the X-ray positions. The applied
selection criteria of LRGs are based on the colour and magnitude cuts
that are described by Padmanabhan et al. (2013, in preparation) and
given in Appendix B. We also made sure that the selected objects are
confirmed galaxies using the spectroscopic class parameter given in
SpecObj table in order to exclude those objects targeted as galaxies but
turned out to be stars or quasars. The selected LRG sample is used to
identify the BCGs of the X-ray cluster candidates as described in the
next subsection.

#### 4.3.2 Optical identifications and redshift measurements

We identify the optical counterparts of the X-ray cluster candidates
based on the spectroscopic and photometric redshifts of galaxies from
SDSS-DR9. To measure the redshifts of cluster candidates, we firstly
identify the BCG candidates, then we select cluster member candidates
with available similar @xmath of the BCG’s spectroscopic redshift. The
procedure is described as follows:

1.  identify a BCG candidate as a LRG within 200 kpc (computed based on
    the @xmath of the LRG) from the X-ray position of the X-ray cluster
    candidate. If there is only one LRG, we consider it as the BCG
    candidate. If there are many LRGs we create groups of galaxies with
    similar redshift. For each group, we select the brightest galaxy as
    a BCG candidate. Then we select the nearest BCG candidate to the
    X-ray position. At low redshifts the search radius 200 kpc subtends
    a large angle on the sky and might cause a wrong association of LRGs
    with the X-ray cluster candidates. Therefore, we put a maximum
    angular separation limit of the BCGs offset from the X-ray emission
    peak of 90 arcsec. The search radius of 200 kpc is used since we
    found 90 percent of the BCGs in Paper II are located within 200 kpc
    from the X-ray positions.

2.  identify the cluster member candidates within 500 kpc from the X-ray
    peak based on the spectroscopic redshift of the identified BCG
    candidate. The cluster galaxies with available @xmath are selected
    within a small redshift interval of @xmath . While the cluster
    member candidates with only @xmath are selected within a slightly
    larger redshift interval of @xmath . The distribution of the
    redshifts of the cluster member candidates and field galaxies for
    the example cluster is shown in Figure 4.2 . The redshift interval
    used to identify the cluster members with @xmath gives 80 percent of
    the cluster members (Wen et al., 2009 ) . They also showed that a
    radius of 500 kpc gives a high overdensity level and a low false
    detection rate. The identified BCG candidate could be the second or
    third brightest cluster galaxy, thus we re-identify the likely BCG
    as the brightest galaxy among the cluster member candidates within
    500 kpc.

3.  compute the spectroscopic, @xmath , and photometric, @xmath ,
    redshift of a cluster as a weighted average of the spectroscopic and
    photometric redshifts of the cluster member candidates within 500
    kpc, respectively. The weighted redshift errors are also computed.
    If there is only one cluster galaxy with available spectroscopic
    redshift, we consider its redshift as the cluster redshift.

4.  We consider the optical counterpart and the redshift measurement of
    an X-ray cluster candidate if the optical detection passed the
    quality assessment that are done through the following visual
    inspection process.

The current procedure yields an initial list of optical counterparts
that comprises 350 systems. To accept the optical detection we compare
the identified BCG and cluster member candidates with the corresponding
SDSS colour image of the same field. The distribution of cluster members
on the sky of the example cluster is shown in Figure 4.3 while Figure
4.4 shows the corresponding SDSS colour image. From both images, it is
clearly obvious that the algorithm picked the right associated LRGs (and
thus the BCG too) and the cluster member candidates. Since SDSS provides
a shallow survey the fainter cluster galaxies are not detected in SDSS
imaging.

For a few cases about 7 percent of the initial resulting optical
counterparts sample, we found miss-matched association of LRGs and
consequently lead to wrong redshift estimations. These wrong cases
resulted due to the overlapping clusters along the line of sight or due
to identifying a field galaxy as BCG candidate.

Figure 4.5 shows a case of overlap of two clusters along the line of
sight of the X-ray peak. There is a slight overdensity of relatively
distant galaxies with similar colour around the X-ray emission peak,
which was detected as a cluster with photometric redshift = 0.58 by
Szabo et al. ( 2011 ) . For this system, there is no cluster galaxy (as
LRG) with available @xmath in the current SDSS release. In addition to
that distant cluster there is another nearby galaxy group at redshift =
0.1. The current procedure picked the nearby galaxy group with a BCG
candidate (LRG) at @xmath with angular and linear separation from the
X-ray position equal 21 arcsec and 40 kpc, respectively. In such
difficult cases, it is likely impossible to associate the X-ray emission
to one of the two optical detected clusters following the current
procedure. Therefore we excluded similar cases from the initial compiled
cluster list using the present algorithm described above. The final list
of the optically validated cluster sample includes 324 systems with
spectroscopic confirmations.

#### 4.3.3 The optically validated cluster sample

The current procedure yielded 324 galaxy groups and clusters with
spectroscopic redshifts based on at least one LRG with available @xmath
from the SDSS-DR9. The redshift of the sample spans a wide range from
0.05 to 0.77 with a median of 0.31. The redshift distribution of the
current cluster sample as well as the optically confirmed cluster sample
(530 systems) in Paper II is shown in Figure 4.6 . The common objects
between the two samples are 280 systems, see the next subsection for the
redshift comparison. It is clearly shown that the current cluster sample
includes a handful of clusters beyond @xmath thanks to the first data
release of BOSS in the SDSS-DR9. Additionally, the current sample
extends the sample in paper II by 44 systems, of which about 55 percent
are newly discovered systems as clusters of galaxies. The majority of
the clusters in the sample have one or two LRGs with @xmath while few
cluster have three LRGs or more with available @xmath . The distribution
of the cluster galaxies with @xmath per a cluster of the cluster sample
is shown in Figure 4.7 .

Based on the cluster redshift and the angular separation of the BCGs to
the X-ray peaks, we computed their linear offsets. The distribution of
the linear separations between the likely BCGs and the X-ray emission
peaks is shown in Figure 4.8 . We found the majority of the BCGs (about
90 percent) have offsets smaller than 200 kpc, which is in agreement
with the offsets of BCGs sample in paper II. By using the current
selection procedure of the BCGs, the maximum offset is of about 500 kpc.
The large offset of the BCGs from the X-ray centroids might appear in
systems with an ongoing merger or in dynamically active clusters (Rykoff
et al., 2008 ) .

#### 4.3.4 Comparison with published redshifts

The so far largest optically selected galaxy cluster sample was compiled
by Wen et al. ( 2012 , WHL12 hereafter) , based on overdensities of
galaxies in photometric redshift space from the SDSS-DR8 data. It
comprises 132,684 clusters with photometric redshift measurements in the
range of @xmath . Cross-matching our sample with the WHL12 catalogue
yielded 174 common clusters. We also queried the NASA Extragalactic
Database (NED) for available redshift measurements for the remainder of
the cluster sample. As a result, 67 clusters with redshift estimations
from different projects were found. In total, 241 clusters are
previously known in the literature mostly as optically confirmed galaxy
clusters.

Figure 4.9 shows the comparison between the present redshift
measurements and the WHL12 ones as well as the available redshifts from
the NED. The good agreement between the current redshift measurements
and the published ones is clearly obvious. The differences between the
two measurements, @xmath , have a mean and standard deviation of 0.0001
and 0.0166, respectively.

We also compared the current redshift measurements with the published
ones of the optically confirmed cluster sample from our ongoing survey
(Paper II). There are 280 common clusters between the two samples, of
these 231 have spectroscopic redshifts for at least one cluster galaxy
in Paper II. The current procedure provided spectroscopic confirmation
for the remainder of the common sample with only photometric redshifts
(49 systems). We noted that the current procedure did not identify the
whole sample in Paper II with spectroscopic confirmations (310
clusters). This is due to using the criterion of having a LRG with
@xmath within 200 kpc. In addition we used in Paper II the spectroscopic
data from the SDSSI/II projects, which comprises a galaxy sample with
@xmath including LRGs as well as a magnitude-limited galaxy sample that
are not necessarily LRGs.

Figure 4.10 shows the comparison of the present redshift measurements
with the ones from Paper II of the common sample. It shows a good
agreement between the two measurements. The mean and standard deviation
of the differences between the measured values, @xmath , are 0.0035 and
0.0136, respectively. There is only 3 percent with redshift differences
of @xmath , where @xmath the uncertainty of the measured photometric
redshifts in Paper II. These redshift differences were found for the
subsample with only photometric redshifts in our previous work.

We also noted that the present spectroscopic redshifts are not identical
with the spectroscopic redshifts in Paper II for a few cases. There are
11 clusters with redshift differences of @xmath . This is due to the
selection of cluster galaxies in Paper II was based on their photometric
redshifts within a redshift interval of @xmath , then the cluster
spectroscopic redshift was measured as the weighted average of the
available spectroscopic redshifts of the identified cluster galaxies.
This led to selecting galaxies with available @xmath that have redshift
outside the redshift interval used in this work ( @xmath , see Section
3.2).

### 4.4 X-ray parameters

Among the current optically validated cluster sample there are 280
clusters were published in Paper II together with their X-ray properties
( @xmath and @xmath ). The current sample extends the optically
confirmed cluster sample from our survey by 44 objects and adds a
handful of clusters at higher redshift up to @xmath . Among the extended
sample, about 80 percent are new X-ray detected galaxy groups/clusters.
Since we found a good agreement between the measured redshifts of the
common sample (see Sec. 3.4), there are no expected significant changes
of their X-ray parameters.

In paper II we provided two subsamples of clusters; the first one with
X-ray spectroscopic parameters since their X-ray data is sufficient to
measure the parameters from X-ray spectral fits; the second subsample
with X-ray parameters based on the X-ray flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3
catalogue since they have low quality X-ray data. We found a good
agreement between the X-ray parameters measured from the two procedures.

In the current work, we measured the X-ray parameters for the present
optically validated cluster sample (324 systems) based on the 2XMMi-DR3
flux. We computed the X-ray luminosities in (0.5-2 keV) using the
catalogue fluxes in the same energy band and the measured redshifts.
Then we extrapolated the computed luminosities to the bolometric
luminosities, @xmath , based on well established scaling relations in
the literature through an iterative procedure that was described in
detail in Paper I and Paper II. The derived @xmath was used to compute
@xmath .

The inputs of this method are redshift, an optimal aperture, and the
enclosed bolometric luminosity within this aperture. The first input,
redshift, is measured based on the current redshift procedure as
described above. The other inputs are not available for the extended
cluster sample. Therefore, we use the properties of the cluster sample
with reliable X-ray parameters from spectral fits in Paper II in order
to estimate the values of these input parameters. The optimal aperture
radius is the cluster radius that represents the maximum signal-to-noise
ratio. We used the linear relation between the optimal aperture radii
and the core radii given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue in order to estimate
an optimal aperture radius based on the core radii available in the
2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. Figure 4.11 shows the relation between the optimal
aperture radii and the core radii.The slope and the intercept of the
best fit line obtained using the BCES orthogonal regression methods
(Akritas & Bershady, 1996 ) are 2.00 and 14.71, respectively.

The third input is the aperture bolometric luminosity. For the extended
cluster sample (44 systems), we only have the X-ray luminosity in
[0.5-2.0] keV computed based on the integrated @xmath model flux in
[0.5-2.0] keV. We also used the linear relation between the aperture
bolometric luminosities and luminosities in [0.5-2.0] keV in order to
convert the computed band luminosities to aperture bolometric
luminosities, see Section 4.2 in Paper II for more information about
this conversion. Based on these inputs, the iterative method provided
the measurements of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for each cluster.

We compared the current measurements of @xmath based on the flux given
in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue and the corresponding luminosities of the
common cluster sample (280 systems) in Paper II. Figure 4.12 shows the
comparison between the two measurements of @xmath . It shows good
agreement between the measured values except a few cases (about 4
percent) that are contaminated by point sources. The median value of the
ratios of the present @xmath measurements to the ones from Paper II is
1.03. Since there is such a good agreement between the measured
luminosities from the current work and the previous one, we trust the
current procedure to measure the X-ray parameters for the extended
cluster sample.

The first data release of the XMM-Newton Cluster Survey (XCS, Mehrtens
et al., 2012 ) comprises about 500 clusters. Cross-matching the cluster
sample with the XCS sample that have redshift and X-ray luminosity
measurements within 30 arcsec yields 97 common objects. Among these, 89
clusters are included in the optically confirmed cluster sample from our
survey (Paper II). Figure 4.13 shows the comparison of the current
@xmath measurements and the corresponding ones from the XCS project. The
median ratio between the two measurements is 0.94. In Paper II we showed
a better agreement of @xmath values for the common sample if we
constrain the comparison to the parameters derived from the spectral
fits. Among the common sample, 29/97 have only photometric redshifts in
the XCS sample, therefore our cluster sample provides spectroscopic
confirmation for these systems.

The mass range of the cluster sample is @xmath M @xmath and luminosity
range is @xmath erg s @xmath . Figure 4.14 shows the distributions of
@xmath as a function of redshift for the extended cluster sample and the
common objects in Paper II as well as for 1730 clusters ( @xmath ) from
MCXC catalogue that was comprised based on published X-ray selected
cluster catalogues from ROSAT data (Piffaretti et al., 2011 ) . Due to
the sensitivity of XMM-Newton and deeper exposures for some fields the
current cluster sample includes low luminosity groups and clusters at
each redshift as shown in Figure 4.14 .

Since the current X-ray luminosities are comparable with the previous
measurements in Paper II, we only present a catalogue of the extended
cluster sample (44 systems) listing their optical and X-ray parameters.
In addition to this sample we also provide the spectroscopic redshifts
and the X-ray properties for 49 clusters among the common sample in
paper II that had only photometric redshifts. These two subsample are
compiled together in Table 4.1 with a note refers to each subsample.

Table 4.1 , available at the Appendix C, lists the first 10 entries of
the extended cluster sample (44 objects) from the current work in
addition to a subsample (49 systems) that have only photometric
redshifts in Paper II and have spectroscopic confirmations in the
current work. The X-ray parameters are measured based on the flux given
in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. Cols. [1] and [2] report the cluster
identification number (detection Id, detid) and its name (IAUNAME),
cols. [3] and [4] provide the coordinates of X-ray emission in equinox
J2000.0, col. [5] the XMM-Newton observation Id (obsid), col. [6] the
cluster spectroscopic redshift, col. [7] the scale at the cluster
redshift in kpc/ @xmath , col. [8] the @xmath in kpc, cols. [9], and
[10] the 2XMMi-DR3 X-ray flux @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV and its error in
units of @xmath erg cm @xmath s @xmath , cols. [11], and [12] the
estimated X-ray luminosity @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV and its error in units
of @xmath erg s @xmath , cols. [13] and [14] the cluster bolometric
luminosity @xmath and its error in units of @xmath erg s @xmath ,
cols. [15] and [16] the cluster mass @xmath and its error in units of
@xmath M @xmath , col. [17] the objid of the likely BCG in SDSS-DR9,
cols. [18] and [19] the BCG coordinates in equinox J2000.0, col. [20]
the apparent magnitude m @xmath of the BCG, col. [21] and [22] the
weighted average spectroscopic redshift and the number of cluster
members within 500 kpc with available spectroscopic redshifts that were
used to compute the average redshift, col. [23] and [24] the weighted
average photometric redshift and the number of identified cluster member
candidates within 500 kpc based on their photometric redshifts,
col. [25] the linear separation between the cluster X-ray position and
the BCG position, and col. [26] a note indicating the object status,
@xmath extended @xmath refers to a new system detected using the current
procedure, and @xmath Paper II @xmath refers to a previously known
system from Paper II with photometric redshift and confirmed
spectroscopically in the current work.

### 4.5 Summary

We present a sample of 324 X-ray selected galaxy groups and clusters
associated with at least one Luminous Red Galaxy (LRG) that has a
spectroscopic redshift in the SDSS-DR9. The redshifts of the associated
LRGs are used to identify the BCGs and the other cluster galaxies with
spectroscopic redshifts. The cluster spectroscopic redshift is computed
as the weighted average of the available spectroscopic redshifts of the
cluster galaxies within 500 kpc. The cluster sample spans a wide
redshift range @xmath with a median of @xmath . Among the cluster
sample, 241 are previously known as optically selected galaxy clusters.
The measured redshifts are consistent with the available redshifts in
the literature. In addition to re-identify and confirm the redshift
measurements of 280 clusters among the published cluster sample from our
survey, we extend the optically confirmed cluster sample by 44 systems.
Among the extended sample, 55 percent are newly discovered groups and
clusters and 80 percent are new X-ray detected clusters. The measured
redshifts and the X-ray flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue are used
to determine the X-ray luminosity of the cluster sample. We also derived
X-ray-luminosity-based mass of the sample. Comparing the current
estimation of the X-ray bolometric luminosity, @xmath , with the
available ones from Paper II and the XCS project, we found a good
agreement between the two measurements. The distribution of X-ray
luminosities of our cluster sample and ROSAT clusters with redshifts
showed that we detected less luminous groups and clusters at each
redshift.

## Chapter 5 IV. The correlation of X-ray and optical properties***This
chapter will be submitted to Astronomy & Astrophysics

### Abstract

We present the absolute magnitude and the optical luminosity in the
@xmath band of the BCGs of the optically identified cluster sample (574
systems) from the 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The cluster sample
spans a wide redshift range 0.03-0.77 (median @xmath =0.33). The
correlation between the absolute magnitudes of the BCGs and the cluster
redshifts is investigated. We also present the relation between the
optical luminosity of the BCG and the cluster mass. For a subsample of
214 systems below a redshift of 0.42 with measured X-ray spectroscopic
temperatures, we determined the optical richness and luminosity within
@xmath . We found a tight relation between the cluster richness and
optical luminosity. This subsample is used to perform a comparison of
the appearance of galaxy clusters in the X-ray and optical bands. The
X-ray parameters and the masses at the radius @xmath are obtained from
the published cluster catalogue from our survey. We investigate the
correlation between the X-ray properties (temperature @xmath ,
luminosity @xmath , and X-ray-luminosity-based mass @xmath ) and optical
properties (richness and luminosity). The relation between the cluster
richness and @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath has an orthogonal scatter of
41 @xmath , 51 @xmath , and 41 @xmath , respectively while the relation
between the optical luminosity and the same properties has an orthogonal
scatter of 38 @xmath , 48 @xmath , 38 @xmath , respectively.

### 5.1 Introduction

Galaxy clusters are the largest clearly defined objects in the universe.
Their baryonic matter has two components: first, the individual galaxies
that can be studied through optical or infrared imaging and
spectroscopy; the second, a hot diffuse intracluster medium (ICM) that
can be observed with X-ray and microwave instruments. Clusters of
galaxies are ideal laboratories to study the cosmic evolution of the ICM
and the cluster galaxy population. Precise observations of large cluster
samples provide a powerful tool to constrain the cosmological parameters
(e.g. Sarazin, 1988 ; Rosati et al., 2002 ; Voit, 2005 ; Böhringer &
Werner, 2010 ; Allen et al., 2011 ) .

Solid observational evidence indicates a strong interaction between the
two baryonic components of galaxy clusters. The evolution of galaxies in
clusters is influenced by the hot diffuse gas in the ICM. The observed
metal abundance in the ICM is produced by the pollution metals expelled
from galaxies via galactic winds (Finoguenov et al., 2001 ; De Grandi &
Molendi, 2002 ) . To understand the complex physics of galaxy cluster
baryon components, it is required to combine X-ray and optical
observations of a large sample of these systems (Popesso et al., 2004 )
.

Several cluster surveys have been conducted in optical/IR wavelengths
(e.g. Abell, 1958 ; Abell et al., 1989 ; Zwicky et al., 1961 ; Gladders
& Yee, 2005 ; Merchán & Zandivarez, 2005 ; Koester et al., 2007 ; Wen
et al., 2009 ; Hao et al., 2010 ; Szabo et al., 2011 ; Geach et al.,
2011 ; Durret et al., 2011 ; Wen et al., 2012 ; Gettings et al., 2012 )
or in X-rays based on data from previous missions mainly from ROSAT
(e.g. Ebeling et al., 1998 ; Böhringer et al., 2004 ; Reiprich &
Böhringer, 2002 ; Ebeling et al., 2010 ; Rosati et al., 1998 ; Burenin
et al., 2007 ) or using the current X-ray telescopes (XMM-Newton,
Chandra, Swift/X-ray) (e.g. Finoguenov et al., 2007 , 2010 ; Adami
et al., 2011 ; Šuhada et al., 2012 ; Barkhouse et al., 2006 ;
Kolokotronis et al., 2006 ; Fassbender et al., 2011 ; Takey et al., 2011
; Mehrtens et al., 2012 ; Clerc et al., 2012 ; Tundo et al., 2012 ; de
Hoon et al., 2013 ; Takey et al., 2013a , b ) . So far, tens of
thousands clusters have been optically detected while only a few
thousands of clusters have been identified in X-rays.

We have initiated a serendipitous search for galaxy clusters in
XMM-Newton observation fields that are located in the footprint of the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, SDSS-DR7. The main aim of the survey is to
construct a large catalogue of newly discovered X-ray selected groups
and clusters up to high redshifts in order to investigate the X-ray
scaling relations as well as X-ray-optical relations. Recently, we have
published the optically confirmed cluster sample that comprises 530
galaxy groups and clusters from our survey based on the SDSS-DR8 (Takey
et al., 2013a ) . In addition, we have extended the optically confirmed
cluster sample by 44 objects based on the recent SDSS-DR9 (Takey et al.,
2013b ) . The published catalogues provide the optical redshift as well
as the X-ray luminosity and X-ray luminosity-based mass for all systems.
The X-ray data allowed to measure the X-ray temperatures for 60 percent
of the sample. The published cluster sample with X-ray temperature
measurements, which spans a wide redshift range up to 0.7, was used to
investigate the X-ray luminosity-temperature relation (Takey et al.,
2013a ) .

In the present paper, we investigate the correlation between the cluster
X-ray and the optical parameters that have been determined in a
homogenous way based on the current optically identified cluster sample
from our survey. Firstly, we investigate the correlations between the
BCG properties (absolute magnitude and optical luminosity) and the
cluster global properties (redshift and mass). Secondly, we compute the
richness and the optical luminosity within @xmath (the radius at which
the cluster mean density is 500 times the critical density of the
universe) of a nearby subsample ( @xmath , with a complete membership
detection from the SDSS data) with measured X-ray temperatures from our
published catalogue. The relation between the estimated optical
luminosity and richness is also presented. Finally, the correlation
between the cluster optical properties (richness and luminosity) and the
cluster global properties (X-ray temperature, luminosity, mass) are
investigated.

Several studies have presented the correlations between the X-ray
observables such as luminosity and temperature as well as the cluster
mass with both optical richness and luminosity (e.g. Popesso et al.,
2004 , 2005 ; Lopes et al., 2006 ; Rykoff et al., 2008 ; Lopes et al.,
2009 ; Wen et al., 2009 ; Szabo et al., 2011 ) based on known massive
X-ray galaxy clusters in the literature apart from RASS-SDSS sample that
comprised galaxy groups and clusters compiled by Popesso et al. ( 2004 )
. These correlations show the ability to predict the X-ray properties of
galaxy clusters, the most expensive to observe, and the cluster mass,
the most important parameter for the cosmological studies, from the
optical properties, and vice versa within a certain accuracy. These
predictions are important for future galaxy cluster surveys conducted
only in only one band of the electromagnetic spectrum. Here we
investigate these correlations based on our large cluster sample
including the newly discovered X-ray groups and clusters from the
survey, which are in low and intermediate mass regime.

The presentation of the paper is as the follows. In Section 2, we
describe the cluster sample and their X-ray properties. In Section 3, we
present the properties of the BCGs against the cluster properties. The
strategy to compute the richness and optical luminosity as well as their
correlations with X-ray properties and masses are presented in Section
4. We summarise our results in Section 5. The cosmological parameters
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath km s @xmath Mpc @xmath were used throughout
this paper.

### 5.2 The study sample and their X-ray properties

The 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey as well as the so far optically
confirmed cluster sample are presented in Takey et al. ( 2011 , 2013a ,
2013b ) . Here we present a brief summary about the full optically
confirmed cluster sample from the survey, which is used in the present
work.

The survey comprises 1180 X-ray cluster candidates selected from the
second XMM-Newton serendipitous source catalogue (2XMMi-DR3), which are
in the footprint of the SDSS-DR7 that was available at the initiating of
our survey. The total overlap area of the XMM-Newton fields at high
galactic latitudes, @xmath , in the sky coverage by the SDSS-DR7 is 210
deg @xmath . To measure the X-ray properties of these candidates, their
redshifts need to be determined. The X-ray data quality of these
candidates do not permit to measure their redshifts from the emission
lines in the X-ray spectrum apart from very bright X-ray sources (about
4 percent with more than 2000 photon counts). Therefore, the main
resource to measure their redshifts is the optical data. The so far
largest optical survey is the SDSS, which covers a sky area of 14,555
deg @xmath and provides positions, magnitudes, and photometric redshifts
of galaxies, in addition to spectroscopic redshifts for about one and
half millions galaxies (Ahn et al., 2012 ) .

Based on the photometric redshifts of galaxies in the SDSS-DR8, we have
optically identified the counterparts of 530 galaxy groups/clusters
(Takey et al., 2013a ) . Then we constructed a cluster sample of 324
systems with spectroscopic confirmations based on the available
spectroscopic redshifts of the Luminous Red Galaxies (LRGs) in the
SDSS-DR9 (Takey et al., 2013b ) . The spectroscopic confirmed cluster
sample extends the optically confirmed cluster sample by 44 objects and
provides spectroscopic confirmations for 49 systems. Therefore, the full
cluster list with optical counterparts and redshift measurements
comprises 574 galaxy groups/clusters. This is the so far largest X-ray
selected galaxy clusters catalogue based on XMM-Newton observations.

The redshifts of the cluster sample span a wide range from 0.03 to 0.77
with a median of 0.33. The distribution of the redshifts of the cluster
sample is shown in Figure 5.1 . Among the confirmed cluster sample, 70
percent have spectroscopic redshifts for at least one cluster galaxy.
About 40 percent of the cluster sample are newly discovered systems as
galaxy clusters, while more than 70 percent are new X-ray detections of
clusters.

For each system in the sample, we have derived the X-ray bolometric
luminosity, @xmath , based on the measured luminosity from the spectral
fits or based on the flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue and the
measured redshift. The distribution of the measured luminosities of the
cluster sample as well as for identified clusters from ROSAT data
(Piffaretti et al., 2011 ) as a function of redshift is shown in Figure
5.2 . The distribution shows that our X-ray detected groups and clusters
are in the low and intermediate luminosity regime apart from few
luminous systems, thanks to the XMM-Newton sensitivity and the available
XMM-Newton deep fields. The measured luminosities are used to measure
the cluster mass, @xmath , based on the published @xmath relation by
Pratt et al. ( 2009 ) . The mass range of the cluster sample is @xmath M
@xmath . For a sub-sample of 345 systems with good X-ray data quality,
we measured their X-ray spectroscopic temperatures within an aperture
with a radius chosen to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio. The measured
temperatures ranges from 0.5 keV to 7.5 keV (Takey et al., 2013a , b ) .

In the current study, we use the whole optically confirmed sample to
investigate the relation between the absolute magnitude of the BCGs and
the cluster redshift as well as the relation between the BCG luminosity
in @xmath band and the cluster mass, see the following section. The
systems at redshift below 0.42 with X-ray spectroscopic temperatures are
used to investigate the correlation between the optical properties
(richness and total luminosity) and the X-ray properties (temperature,
luminosity, mass), see Section 4.

### 5.3 Correlations of the BCG and cluster properties

To determine the optical properties of the cluster sample, we created a
galaxy sample from the SDSS-DR9 for each object by selecting the
surrounding galaxies within 4 Mpc from the X-ray source position. The
galaxies were selected from the Galaxy view table, which contains the
photometric parameters measured for resolved primary objects, classified
as galaxies. Also, the photometric redshifts and, if available, the
spectroscopic redshifts of the galaxy sample were obtained from the
Photoz and SpecObj tables, respectively. The extracted parameters of the
galaxy sample include the coordinates, the apparent dereddened (model
and composite model) magnitudes, K-correction, the photometric
redshifts, and, if available, the spectroscopic redshifts. When the
spectroscopic redshifts of galaxies are available, we use them instead
of the photometric ones. To clean the galaxy sample from faint objects
and from galaxies with large photometric redshift errors, we apply a
magnitude cut of @xmath mag, @xmath mag, and a fractional error cut of
the photometric redshift, @xmath .

For the whole optically confirmed cluster sample we identify the BCG as
the brightest galaxy among the cluster luminous member candidates that
are selected within the measured @xmath and redshift interval from the
cluster redshift of @xmath . The luminous member galaxies are selected
based on their evolution-corrected absolute magnitude that are brighter
than @xmath . The strategy for selecting the cluster luminous member
galaxies is similar to that used by Wen et al. ( 2012 ) . For each
cluster galaxy, we computed its absolute magnitude in the @xmath band, M
@xmath , as the follows :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where m @xmath is the dereddened model magnitude of the cluster galaxy.
@xmath is the K-correction in the @xmath band derived from the templates
and given in the Photoz table in the SDSS-DR9 catalogue data (Csabai
et al., 2003 ) . D @xmath is the luminosity distance that was calculated
based on the cluster redshift. Then, we corrected the absolute magnitude
for a passive evolution as :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where Q = 1.62 represent the evolution of the luminosity in units of
magnitude per unit redshift, which means that the galaxy was more
luminous in the past (Blanton et al., 2003 ) .

Based on the cluster redshift and the angular separation of the BCG from
the X-ray peak, we computed its linear separation. The distribution of
the linear separations of the BCGs from the X-ray centroids of the
sample is shown in Figure 5.3 . About 80 percent of the BCGs reside
within 200 kpc from the X-ray positions. This percentage is lower than
what we found in our published catalogue (90 percent). This is due to
selecting the BCG in the previous work as brightest galaxy among the
cluster member candidates within one arcmin from the X-ray peak. The
systems with large offset of the BCGs might have an ongoing merger or
are dynamically active clusters (Rykoff et al., 2008 ) .

The BCGs are in general elliptical massive galaxies and tend to be
luminous red galaxies (LRGs) (e.g. Postman & Lauer, 1995 ; Eisenstein
et al., 2001 ; Wen et al., 2012 ) . We compared the BCGs magnitudes and
colours with the magnitude and colour cuts of the spectroscopically
targeted LRGs in the SDSS-III project, BOSS survey ^(†) ^(†) †
http://www.sdss3.org/dr9/algorithms/boss_galaxy_ts.php , (Padmanabhan et
al. 2013, in preparation). We found 74 percent of the BCGs satisfy the
LRGs criteria in the BOSS survey. Wen et al. ( 2012 ) constructed a
catalogue of 132,684 clusters based on the photometric redshift of
galaxies in the SDSS-DR8. They found 66 percent of the BCGs in their
cluster sample fulfill the colour cuts of the SDSS LRG selection
criteria.

Several studies (e.g. De Lucia & Blaizot, 2007 ; Stott et al., 2008 )
showed that the BCGs were formed at high redshift, @xmath , and have
been passively evolving to the present day. The stellar population of
the BCGs becomes old with cosmic time and consequently the BCGs become
fainter at low redshifts. For each BCG we computed its absolute
magnitude in the @xmath band, M @xmath using Eq. 1. Figure 5.4 shows the
relation between M @xmath and the cluster redshift, @xmath . It shows a
weak relation indicating the higher redshift of the cluster, the
brighter the BCG is.

We derived the best-fit-linear relation between M @xmath and @xmath
using the BCES regression method (Akritas & Bershady, 1996 ) . The BCES
algorithm provides several kinds of linear regression. Here we only show
the results of BCES(Y @xmath X) fitting method, which minimises the
residuals in Y, and the BCES orthogonal fitting method, which minimises
the squared orthogonal distances. The linear relation between M @xmath
and @xmath is shown in Figure 5.4 and given by :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fitted parameters (intercept and slope) derived from both BCES
methods are listed in the first row of the upper part of Table 5.1 . The
best-fit-lines are also plotted in Figure 5.4 . The slope derived by the
BCES(Y @xmath X) algorithm, -2.36 @xmath 0.16, is much steeper than the
published one, -1.74 @xmath 0.03, by Wen et al. ( 2012 ) based an
optically cluster sample at @xmath . This disagreement might be due to
our cluster sample includes less massive clusters and extends to higher
redshifts than the sample used by Wen et al. ( 2012 ) . In addition to
using a different fitting method in both projects.

To estimate the orthogonal scatter in the relation, we compute the
differences between the measured absolute magnitudes and the predicted
ones from the best-fit relation (the fit residuals) based on the cluster
redshift from Eq. 3. The residuals of the fit and the slope of the
relation are used to compute the orthogonal distances from the best-fit
line. The standard deviation of these orthogonal distances was
considered as the orthogonal scatter in the relation. The scatter error
was computed as the standard error of the measured scatter value. The
orthogonal scatters derived from the BCES(Y @xmath X) and the orthogonal
routines of the @xmath relation are 0.22 @xmath 0.01 and 0.13 @xmath
0.01, respectively and are listed in Table 5.1 .

Several groups (e.g. Lin & Mohr, 2004 ; Brough et al., 2008 ; Popesso
et al., 2007 ; Hansen et al., 2009 ; Mittal et al., 2009 ) investigated
the relation between the optical luminosity of the BCGs and the cluster
masses. They found a relation with different exponents as @xmath . We
measured the optical luminosity of the BCGs in @xmath band, @xmath , of
the cluster sample. The absolute magnitude of each BCG was transformed
to absolute luminosity in units of solar luminosities as :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solar absolute magnitude, @xmath , was transformed from the
Johnson-Morgan-Cousins system to the SDSS system using the
transformation equations by Jester et al. ( 2005 ) . The best fit
relation between the logarithms of @xmath and the mass of the host
cluster, @xmath , is shown in Figure 5.5 and given by :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The slope, intercept, and the orthogonal scatter of the relations
derived from both BCES fitting algorithms are listed in Table 5.1 . The
scatter is computed in a similar way as in @xmath relation but in a
logarithmic scale since the fit of the @xmath relation is performed in
log-log scale. Mittal et al. ( 2009 ) investigated the @xmath relation
based on the HIFLUGCS sample that comprises 64 bright clusters ( @xmath
) observed with Chandra . They found a slope derived from the BCES
bisector linear regression routine of 0.62 @xmath 0.05, which is
consistent with the present slope 0.57 @xmath 0.03 obtained using BCES(Y
@xmath X). The present slope is much steeper than the ones (around
@xmath ) published by Lin & Mohr (e.g. 2004 ); Brough et al. (e.g. 2008
); Popesso et al. (e.g. 2007 ); Hansen et al. (e.g. 2009 ) .

### 5.4 Correlations of the cluster X-ray and optical properties

We present the performance of the cluster richness and optical
luminosity as predictors of the global X-ray properties (temperature and
luminosity) as well as the cluster mass. Popesso et al. ( 2007 )
reported that there is no significant difference among the results of
the relation between the cluster global properties and the cluster
optical luminosity in the different SDSS bands, therefore we will only
present the relations for the optical luminosity in the @xmath band.
Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) found that the relations based on parameters
extracted within @xmath had smaller scatter than the relations based on
parameters derived within a fixed radius or within @xmath . Therefore we
only show here the relations between the X-ray and optical properties
that were measured within @xmath except the X-ray temperature that was
measured within an optimal aperture, which maximises the signal-to-noise
ratio.

#### 5.4.1 The cluster richness and optical luminosity

We use a method similar to that described by Wen et al. ( 2012 ) to
estimate the richness and optical luminosity of the study sample. To
estimate the cluster richness, we identify the luminous member
candidates within @xmath and a redshift interval from the cluster
redshift of @xmath and with evolution-corrected absolute magnitude
@xmath . To compute @xmath , we first determine the absolute magnitude
of each galaxy using Eq. 1, then we correct it for a passive evolution
using Eq. 2. The bright end of the cluster member candidates is the
absolute magnitude of the BCG, M @xmath . The BCG was identified as the
brightest galaxy among the cluster luminous galaxies within @xmath .

The cluster luminous member galaxies with @xmath are complete for
clusters up to a redshift of @xmath . This is due to the magnitude limit
of the SDSS photometric data and the faint limit absolute magnitude used
for identifying the luminous member galaxies (Wen et al., 2012 ) .
Therefore, we only consider clusters below @xmath in investigating the
correlation between both the richness and the optical luminosity with
the X-ray properties (temperatures, luminosity, and mass). We also
include only those clusters with good quality X-ray data that permitted
to measure the X-ray temperatures. The subsample includes 214 systems
with a temperature @xmath range of 0.5-6.8 keV and mass
(X-ray-luminosity-based mass) range of @xmath M @xmath .

The net cluster member galaxies in the region with a radius of @xmath
after subtraction the expecting foreground and background galaxies is
defined as the cluster richness, @xmath . To estimate the number of
local foreground and background galaxies, we need to count the number of
galaxies within a nearby region of the cluster with same redshift and
absolute magnitude range of the luminous cluster member candidates. To
do this, we divide the annuals between 2-4 Mpc from the X-ray position
into 4 sectors. The number of foreground and background galaxies is
determined as the mean value of the normalized number of galaxies to
@xmath region in the 4 sectors within the used redshift and absolute
magnitude intervals. We also compute the standard deviations @xmath of
the galaxy counts in these sectors. If a sector has a number of
background galaxies larger than 3 @xmath deviation from the mean galaxy
count of the 4 sectors, we discard it and re-calculate the mean of
galaxy counts in the remaining sectors. This was done in order to avoid
any filaments or substructures belonging to the system.

The optical luminosity of a cluster @xmath is determined in a similar
way as the estimation of the richness. It is computed as the sum of the
cluster member luminosities within @xmath after subtraction the
contamination of the background galaxies luminosity. The luminosity of
background galaxies is computed as the mean of the summed optical
luminosity of the galaxies with same redshift and absolute magnitude
intervals of member galaxies in the 4 sectors. The optical luminosity of
the cluster member candidates and the background galaxies are determined
for the final galaxy counts resulting from the richness measurements.
The absolute magnitude of a galaxy was transformed to absolute
luminosity in units of solar luminosities using Eq. 4.

Figure 5.6 shows the relation between the summed @xmath band
luminosities and richness that were computed within @xmath of the
subsample below @xmath . We found a strong correlation between the
measured optical luminosity and the richness. The best linear fits using
the BCES regression methods between their logarithms are shown in Figure
5.6 and are expressed by :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The slope of the relation is 1.13 @xmath 0.04 and 0.99 @xmath 0.03
obtained from the BCES orthogonal and the BCEX(Y @xmath X) algorithms,
respectively. The slopes, intercepts, and orthogonal scatters are given
in first raw of the lower part of Table 5.1 . The scatter is computed in
a similar way as described above and given in a logarithmic scale.

Popesso et al. ( 2007 ) investigated the relation between the cluster
@xmath band optical luminosity within @xmath and the net count of
cluster galaxies (richness) based on an optically and X-ray selected
group and cluster sample of 217 systems at @xmath . They found the
relation slope is 1.00 @xmath 0.03 derived from an orthogonal regression
method, which is shallower than the present slope 1.13 @xmath 0.04
(orthogonal) but it is consistent with the slope 0.99 @xmath 0.03
derived using the BCEX(Y @xmath X) algorithm. The linear fit derived
from the BCES orthogonal method is affected by the two points with large
scatter from the best-fit line. Wen et al. ( 2009 ) found a slope of
0.97 @xmath 0.01 between @xmath and @xmath that were estimated within 1
Mpc from the BCG position for a large optically selected cluster sample
at @xmath , which is consistent with the present slope 0.99 @xmath 0.03
derived from the BCEX(Y @xmath X) algorithm.

#### 5.4.2 The correlation of the cluster richness and optical
luminosity with the cluster global properties

The linear relation between the logarithms of the X-ray and optical
properties are fitted using the BCES(Y @xmath X) and orthogonal
algorithms and are expressed by :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the X-ray property (aperture temperature @xmath , X-ray
luminosity @xmath , and X-ray-luminosity-based mass @xmath ) and @xmath
is the optical property (richness @xmath and total optical luminosity
@xmath ). Table 5.1 lists in the lower part the fitting parameters as
well as the scatter of each relation. These correlations are shown in
Figure 5.7 , Figure 5.8 , and Figure 5.9 . The figures also show the
best-fit-lines derived from both BCES(Y @xmath X) and BCES orthogonal
fitting methods.

If we consider the observed relations @xmath and @xmath (BCES
orthogonal) derived from the REXCESS sample that comprises 31 nearby (
@xmath ) galaxy clusters (Pratt et al., 2009 ) and a mass-to-light
ratio, @xmath (Girardi et al., 2002 ) , we expect a relation between the
X-ray temperature and optical luminosity as @xmath , a relation between
the X-ray and optical luminosity as @xmath , and a relation between the
cluster mass and optical luminosity as @xmath . Since there is a tight
relation between the measured optical luminosity and richness with an
exponent deviated slightly from the unity as @xmath (orthogonal), we
expect a slight variation of the exponents of the correlations between
the cluster richness and the other cluster properties. The expected
relations are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (orthogonal). Regarding the
relations derived from the BCES(Y @xmath X) algorithm, we expect that
the relations between each cluster global parameter with both @xmath and
@xmath have consistent slopes since the slope of @xmath relation is
approximately the unity, 0.99 @xmath 0.3, as shown in Table 5.1 .

The current slope of the @xmath relation, 0.85 @xmath 0.05 derived from
the BCES orthogonal method is consistent with the expected one, 0.83.
Popesso et al. ( 2005 ) investigated the same relation based on a sample
of 49 groups and clusters ( @xmath ) with available ASCA temperature.
Their optical luminosities were estimated within @xmath in the @xmath
band. They found the slope of the @xmath relation obtained using a
numerical orthogonal distance regression method is 0.59 @xmath 0.03,
which is much shallower than the present slope 0.85 @xmath 0.05. This
difference in the slope might be introduced from the cluster sample
since their sample is small and contained systems with high temperatures
apart from few objects (12 systems) with @xmath keV, in addition to the
different procedures used in estimating the optical luminosities and
different aperture used in measuring the temperatures. It is the same
case when comparing our relation with the relation published by Lopes
et al. ( 2009 ) who investigated it based on a small sample of 21
clusters at @xmath with @xmath keV obtained from the X-Ray Galaxy
Clusters Database (BAX).

Wen et al. ( 2009 ) found a slope of 0.83 @xmath 0.08 derived from a
cluster sample of 67 systems with ASCA temperature. However, they
estimated the optical luminosity within a fixed radius of 1 Mpc and used
another fitting method, there is good agreement between the two slopes.
The BCES(Y @xmath X) gives a shallower slope 0.61 @xmath 0.04 than the
one derived from the orthogonal algorithm. The expected relation @xmath
(orthogonal) is consistent with the derived one based on our cluster
sample @xmath (orthogonal). Again we found disagreement between the
present slope and the published one 0.5 @xmath 0.07 (orthogonal) by
Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) due to the differences in the size and mass regime
between the two samples. The present slope 0.59 @xmath 0.06 (BCES(Y
@xmath X)) agrees with the one, 0.61 @xmath 0.05, published by Wen
et al. ( 2012 ) who estimated the richness within @xmath .

The observed relation, @xmath (orthogonal), is in good agreement with
the expected one, @xmath (orthogonal), from the scaling relations.
Popesso et al. ( 2005 ) investigated the relation based on a sample of
69 clusters with optical mass, a sample of 49 clusters with mass
estimated from the temperature with an overlap of 16 clusters, and the
combined sample of 102 systems at @xmath , they found the slopes derived
from the orthogonal algorithm are 1.59 @xmath 0.10, 1.89 @xmath 0.11,
and 1.79 @xmath 0.10, respectively. Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) found a slope
of 1.62 @xmath 0.11 derived from a sample of 104 clusters at @xmath .
The X-ray luminosities in their works were obtained from ROSAT data and
were not estimated within a fixed aperture but were calculated from the
X-ray luminosity profile. Their optical luminosities were estimated
within @xmath based on the SDSS data. Once again the present slope is
not consistent with the ones derived in those studies due to using
different procedure to estimate the X-ray and optical luminosities in
addition to the different luminosity regime of the samples.

The present slope 2.71 @xmath 0.17 of @xmath relation agrees well with
the published one 2.67 @xmath 0.12 by Wen et al. ( 2009 ) based on a
sample of 146 clusters at @xmath . The BCES(Y @xmath X) slope, 1.53
@xmath 0.11, is shallower than the slope obtained by the BCES orthogonal
algorithm. We note that the BCES(Y @xmath X) slope is consistent with
the slopes (orthogonal) published by Popesso et al. ( 2005 ); Lopes
et al. ( 2009 ) . Regarding the X-ray luminosity-richness relation, the
present exponent @xmath is consistent within 1.2 @xmath with the
expected one @xmath (orthogonal) and it is higher than the observed one,
2.79 @xmath 0.13, by Wen et al. ( 2009 ) . Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) found
much shallower slope 1.64 @xmath 0.10 (orthogonal) than the present one
and this might be due to the same reasons mentioned above. The BCES(Y
@xmath X) slope, 1.50 @xmath 0.14, is consistent with the published one,
1.64 @xmath 0.10 (orthogonal), by Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) .

The current slope of @xmath relation, 0.97 @xmath 0.07 (orthogonal), is
shallower than the expected one, 1.33 @xmath 0.12, from the scaling
relations. Popesso et al. ( 2005 ) investigated the same relation based
on the three samples mentioned above and they found slopes (orthogonal)
of 1.25 @xmath 0.06, 0.93 @xmath 0.06, 1.09 @xmath 0.04, respectively.
Similarly, Lopes et al. ( 2009 ) found slopes of 1.09 @xmath 0.07, 0.99
@xmath 0.10, and 1.06 @xmath 0.04 derived from an optically selected
sample of 127 systems, X-ray selected sample of 53 clusters, and the
combined sample of 180 clusters at @xmath , respectively. The two
parameters (mass and the optical luminosity in the @xmath band) were
estimated within @xmath in these investigations as our measurements. The
current slope is consistent with the slope values from those studies.
The BCES(Y @xmath X) provides a shallower slope of 0.70 @xmath 0.05.

Regarding @xmath relation, we found a relation of @xmath (orthogonal)
that is shallower than the expected one, @xmath (orthogonal). Lopes
et al. ( 2009 ) found the slope (orthogonal) of the relation derived
from the three samples mentioned above are 1.01 @xmath 0.07, 0.95 @xmath
0.09, 1.04 @xmath 0.04, respectively. Their richness and mass were
estimated within @xmath . The later value is consistent within 1.2
@xmath from the present slope. The slope derived from the BCES(Y @xmath
X) method 0.71 @xmath 0.06 is shallower than the one derived from the
BCES orthogonal regression method.

The orthogonal scatter (in a logarithmic scale) of these relations was
computed in a similar way as mentioned in the previous section. We note
that the BCES orthogonal algorithm provides smaller scatter than the one
derived using the BCES(Y @xmath X) routine. Using the same fitting
algorithm, we found the relation between the cluster properties and the
optical luminosity have slightly smaller scatter than the relations with
the cluster richness. This means that the cluster optical luminosity
correlates slightly better than the richness with the cluster global
properties ( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ).

The cluster richness and optical luminosity show a correlation with the
cluster X-ray temperature, luminosity and mass. The relation between the
cluster richness and @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath has an orthogonal
scatter of 41 @xmath , 51 @xmath , and 41 @xmath , respectively while
the relation between the optical luminosity and the same properties has
an orthogonal scatter of 38 @xmath , 48 @xmath , 38 @xmath ,
respectively.

The most important parameter of galaxy clusters to be used in
cosmological studies is the mass. We showed that the cluster mass can be
estimated using a very cheap estimator (richness or optical luminosity)
that can be determined from ground-based photometric data. The optical
luminosity correlates with the cluster mass with an orthogonal scatter
of 38 @xmath . Popesso et al. ( 2005 ) showed that the optical
luminosity correlates with the cluster mass much better than the X-ray
luminosity. They found an orthogonal scatter in the range 20-30 @xmath
of @xmath relation and an orthogonal scatter 38-50 @xmath of @xmath
relation. Here we found a slightly higher scatter 38 @xmath of @xmath
relation and this is due to including many galaxy groups among our
sample, which are the main source of the scatter (Popesso et al., 2004 )
.

### 5.5 Summary

We re-identified the BCGs of the optically confirmed cluster sample (574
systems) from the 2XMMi/SDSS galaxy cluster survey as the brightest
galaxy among the luminous cluster member galaxies within @xmath . We
found that about 74 percent of the identified BCGs are fulfill the
magnitude and colour cuts of the spectroscopically targeted LRGs in the
SDSS-III’BOSS. For each BCG, we determined its absolute magnitude and
optical luminosity in the @xmath band based on the cluster redshift and
the SDSS photometric data. We presented the relation between the
absolute magnitude of the BCGs with the cluster redshift. The relation
between the optical luminosity of the BCGs with the cluster mass was
investigated, which shows that the massive clusters have luminous BCGs.
We determined the net count of the luminous cluster member galaxies,
richness, and their summed luminosity in the @xmath band, cluster
optical luminosity, within @xmath , of 214 galaxy groups and clusters in
the redshift range of 0.03-0.42 with available X-ray temperatures from
our survey. This subsample comprises systems in low and intermediate
mass regime. The estimated optical luminosity is tightly correlated with
the cluster richness. We investigated the correlations of the X-ray
temperature, luminosity, and the cluster mass with both the optical
richness and luminosity of this subsample. The orthogonal scatter in
these relations was measured, which indicates that the optical
luminosity correlates slightly better than the richness with the cluster
global properties. The relation between the cluster richness and @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath has an orthogonal scatter of 41 @xmath , 51 @xmath
, and 41 @xmath , respectively while the relation between the optical
luminosity and the same properties has an orthogonal scatter of 38
@xmath , 48 @xmath , 38 @xmath , respectively.

## Chapter 6 Summary, Conclusions, and Outlook

### 6.1 Summary and Conclusions

In this thesis I have conducted a serendipitous search for galaxy
clusters based on the largest X-ray serendipitous source catalogue,
2XMMi-DR3, and the largest optical survey, SDSS. The aims of my survey
are to identify new X-ray detected clusters, to trace the evolution of
their X-ray scaling relations, and to investigate the correlations
between their X-ray and the optical properties. The X-ray cluster
candidates are selected among the extended X-ray sources in the
2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. To study the properties of these cluster
candidates, the redshifts need to be determined. Therefore, the survey
is constrained to those candidates that are in the footprint of the
SDSS-DR7 in order to measure their optical redshifts. However, the X-ray
spectroscopy provides a tool to measure the X-ray redshift,
unfortunately it is only possible for very bright X-ray sources (about 4
percent of the cluster candidates list). Optical redshifts can be
obtained from the literature (Takey et al., 2011 ) , using the
photometric redshift of the cluster galaxies (Takey et al., 2013a ) , or
using the spectroscopic redshift of the cluster luminous red galaxies
(LRGs) from the SDSS data base (Takey et al., 2013b ) . The optically
confirmed cluster sample with redshift measurements can be used to
investigates various scaling relations e.g. the X-ray
luminosity-temperature relation (Takey et al., 2011 , 2013a ) ,
relations between the BCG and the cluster properties as well as the
correlations between the X-ray and optical properties of the clusters
(Takey et al., 2013c ) . The summary of the main contributions from the
thesis work is as the follows:

1.  In Chapter 2 I described the 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The
    X-ray cluster candidates are selected from extended sources
    classified as reliable detections (with no warning about being
    spurious) in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue (Watson et al., 2009 ) at high
    galactic latitudes, @xmath . The overlap area between the XMM-Newton
    fields and SDSS imaging is 210 deg @xmath . After excluding possible
    spurious X-ray detections and low redshift galaxies that appear
    resolved at X-ray wavelengths through visual inspections of X-ray
    images and X-ray-optical overlays, the X-ray cluster candidates list
    comprised 1180 objects with at least 80 net photon counts, of which
    more than 75 percent are new X-ray discoveries. We have demonstrated
    that the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue that was based on the archival
    XMM-Newton data is a rich resource for identifying new X-ray
    detected clusters (Takey et al., 2011 ) .

2.  A quarter of the X-ray cluster candidates had been previously
    published in optical cluster catalogues based on the SDSS data.
    Cross-correlations of the X-ray cluster cluster candidates with the
    recent and largest optical cluster catalogues constructed by Hao
    et al. ( 2010 ); Wen et al. ( 2009 ); Koester et al. ( 2007 ); Szabo
    et al. ( 2011 ) within a matching radius of one arcmin confirmed 275
    clusters and provided us with the photometric redshifts for all of
    them and the spectroscopic redshifts for 120 BCGs. Based on the
    cluster redshifts given in those catalogues, we extracted all
    available spectroscopic redshifts for the cluster members from
    recent SDSS data (SDSS-DR8). Among the confirmed cluster sample, 182
    clusters have spectroscopic redshifts for at least one cluster
    galaxy. More than 80 percent of the confirmed sample are newly
    identified X-ray clusters and the others had been previously
    identified using ROSAT, Chandra, or XMM-Newton data (Takey et al.,
    2011 ) .

3.  I have reduced and analysed the X-ray data of the optically
    confirmed cluster sample with redshifts from the literature in an
    automated way following the standard pipelines of processing the
    XMM-Newton data. In this pipeline, I extracted the cluster spectra
    from EPIC(PN, MOS1, MOS2) images within an optimal aperture with a
    radius representing the highest signal-to-noise ratio. The spectral
    fitting procedure provided the X-ray temperature for 175 systems,
    which was published as the first cluster sample from our survey. In
    addition, I derived the physical properties ( @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath ) of this sample from an iterative procedure using the
    published scaling relations (Takey et al., 2011 ) .

4.  In Chapter 3 I described a finding algorithm developed to detect the
    optical counterparts of the X-ray cluster candidates and to measure
    their redshifts using the photometric and, if available, the
    spectroscopic redshifts of surrounding galaxies from the SDSS-DR8
    data. The cluster is recognized if there are at least 8 member
    galaxies within a radius of 560 kpc from the X-ray emission peak
    with photometric redshift in the redshift interval of the redshift
    of the likely identified BCG, @xmath . The BCG was identified as the
    brightest galaxy among those galaxies within one arcmin from the
    X-ray position that show a peak in the histogram of their
    photometric redshifts.

    The cluster photometric and spectroscopic redshift is measured as
    the weighted average of the photometric and the available
    spectroscopic redshifts, respectively, of the cluster galaxies
    within 560 kpc from the X-ray position. The measured redshifts are
    in a good agreement with available redshifts in the literature, to
    date 301 clusters are known as optically selected clusters with
    redshift measurements. Also, 310 clusters of the optically confirmed
    cluster sample have spectroscopic redshifts for at least one cluster
    member galaxy. The measured photometric redshifts are in a good
    agreement with the measured spectroscopic ones from the survey. The
    cluster redshifts of the optically confirmed cluster sample span a
    wide redshift range from 0.03 to 0.70 (Takey et al., 2013a ) .

5.  I reduced and analysed the X-ray data of this sample in a similar
    way as described above. We presented a cluster catalogue from the
    survey comprising 345 X-ray selected groups and clusters with their
    X-ray parameters derived from the spectral fits including the
    published sample by Takey et al. ( 2011 ) . In addition to the
    cluster sample with X-ray spectroscopic data, we presented the
    remainder of the optically confirmed cluster sample with their X-ray
    parameters based on the flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. We
    used the 2XMMi-DR3 flux because of their low quality X-ray data,
    which is not sufficient to perform spectral fitting. This sample
    comprises 185 groups and clusters with their fluxes and luminosities
    in the energy band 0.5-2.0 keV.

    For both subsamples, we estimated the physical properties ( @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath ) from an iterative procedure based on published
    scaling relations. The measured temperatures and luminosities are in
    good agreement with published values for the sample overlap (114
    systems) with the XMM Cluster Survey (XCS, Mehrtens et al., 2012 ) .
    Comparison of the cluster luminosities of the sample with the
    luminosities of the identified clusters from ROSAT data (Piffaretti
    et al., 2011 ) shows that our X-ray detected groups and clusters are
    in the low and intermediate luminosity regimes apart from few
    luminous systems, thanks to the XMM-Newton sensitivity and the
    available XMM-Newton deep fields (Takey et al., 2013a ) .

6.  As a first application of the confirmed cluster sample with measured
    X-ray temperatures, we investigated the @xmath relation for the
    first time based on a large cluster sample of 345 systems with X-ray
    spectroscopic parameters drawn from a single survey. The current
    sample includes groups and clusters with wide ranges of redshifts,
    temperatures, and luminosities. The slope of the relation is
    consistent with the published ones of nearby clusters with higher
    temperatures and luminosities (Pratt et al., 2009 ; Mittal et al.,
    2011 ) . The derived relation is still much steeper than that
    predicted by self-similar evolution (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4.4).

    We also investigated the evolution of the slope and the scatter of
    the @xmath relation with the cluster redshift. After excluding the
    low luminosity groups, we find no significant changes of the slope
    and the intrinsic scatter of the relation with redshift when
    dividing the sample into three redshift bins. In addition the slopes
    of the relations of the three subsamples are in agreement with the
    corresponding published slopes of the XCS subsamples (Hilton et al.,
    2012 ) . When including the low luminosity groups in the low
    redshift subsample, we found its @xmath relation becomes flatter
    than the relation of the intermediate and high redshift subsamples
    (Takey et al., 2013a ) .

7.  In Chapter 4 I presented a sample of 324 X-ray selected galaxy
    groups and clusters associated with at least one Luminous Red Galaxy
    (LRG) that has a spectroscopic redshift in the SDSS-DR9 (Ahn et al.,
    2012 ) . The redshifts of the associated LRGs are used to identify
    the BCGs and the other cluster galaxies with spectroscopic
    redshifts. The cluster spectroscopic redshift is computed as the
    weighted average of the available spectroscopic redshifts of the
    cluster galaxies within 500 kpc. The cluster sample spans a wide
    redshift range from 0.05 to 0.77 with a median redshift of @xmath .
    In addition to re-identify and confirm the redshift measurements of
    280 clusters among the published cluster sample from our survey by
    Takey et al. ( 2013a ) , we extended the optically confirmed cluster
    sample by 44 systems. Among the newly constructed sample, 55 percent
    are newly discovered systems and 80 percent are new X-ray detected
    galaxy groups and clusters. The measured redshifts and the X-ray
    flux given in the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue were used to determine the
    X-ray luminosity and mass of the cluster sample (Takey et al., 2013b
    ) .

8.  In Chapter 5 we investigated the correlations between the optical
    properties of the BCGs with the cluster properties, as a second
    application of the optically confirmed cluster sample from our
    ongoing survey. To check those correlations, I re-identified the
    BCGs of the whole optically confirmed cluster sample (574 systems)
    as the brightest galaxy among the luminous cluster member galaxies
    within @xmath . We found that 74 percent of the re-identified BCGs
    fulfill the magnitude and colour cuts of the spectroscopically
    targeted LRGs in the BOSS (SDSS-III). For each BCG, we determined
    its absolute magnitude and optical luminosity in the @xmath band. We
    investigated the relation between the absolute magnitude of the BCGs
    with the cluster redshift. It shows a linear relation indicating the
    BCGs are brighter in the high redshift clusters, which is consistent
    with the result obtained by Wen et al. ( 2012 ) . The relation
    between the optical luminosity of the BCGs with the cluster mass was
    also investigated, which indicated that the more massive the
    cluster, the more luminous the BCG is. The slope of this relation is
    consistent with the published one by Mittal et al. ( 2009 ) (Takey
    et al., 2013c ) .

9.  As a third application of the optically confirmed cluster sample, we
    investigated the correlation between the optical properties
    (richness and luminosity) and the X-ray properties (temperature,
    luminosity, mass). To investigate these relations, we determined the
    net luminous cluster member galaxies within @xmath , richness, and
    their summed luminosity in the @xmath band, cluster optical
    luminosity, of 214 galaxy groups and clusters in the redshift range
    of 0.03-0.42 with available X-ray temperatures from our survey. This
    subsample comprises systems in low and intermediate mass regime. The
    estimated optical luminosity is tightly correlated with the cluster
    richness.

    We investigated the correlations of the X-ray temperature,
    luminosity, and the cluster mass with both the optical richness and
    luminosity of this subsample. The orthogonal scatter in these
    relations was measured. According th the measured scatters, the
    optical luminosity correlates slightly better than the richness with
    the cluster global properties. The relation between the cluster
    richness and @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath has an orthogonal scatter
    of 41 @xmath , 51 @xmath , and 41 @xmath , respectively, while the
    relation between the optical luminosity and the same properties has
    an orthogonal scatter of 38 @xmath , 48 @xmath , 38 @xmath ,
    respectively (Takey et al., 2013c ) .

10. Finally, the constructed sample from our ongoing survey is the
    largest X-ray selected cluster catalogue to date based on X-ray data
    from the current X-ray observatories (XMM-Newton, Chandra, Suzaku,
    and Swift/XRT). It comprises 574 groups and clusters with their
    optical and X-ray properties, spanning the redshift range @xmath .
    More than 75 percent of the cluster sample are newly discovered
    clusters at X-ray wavelengths. About 40 percent of the sample are
    new systems to the literature according to current entries in the
    NED (Takey et al., 2013c ) .

### 6.2 Future perspectives

I have presented the optically confirmed cluster sample (574 systems)
from the 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey, which is about half of the
X-ray cluster candidates list (1180 objects). In the future I plan to
study the remainder of the X-ray cluster candidates, which were not
identified by the current detection algorithms since they are either
poor or at high redshifts. For the distant clusters, we plan follow-up
by imaging and spectroscopy. For those X-ray cluster candidates that
have member galaxies detected in the SDSS imaging and not be identified
as groups or clusters by the algorithms used in this thesis, I plan to
improve these algorithms to constrain their redshifts. By confirming the
remainder of the X-ray cluster candidates, especially distant ones, and
measuring their redshifts, we will be able to trace the evolution of
@xmath relation and X-ray-optical relations as well as to asses the
selection effects on those relations.

Since the current survey was successful, a natural extension is to
continue to enlarge the catalogue of X-ray selected galaxy groups and
clusters based on the upcoming version (not yet published) of the
XMM-Newton serendipitous source catalogue, 3XMM. The 3XMM catalogue is
about 30 percent larger than the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. The cluster
redshifts will be measured based on the available large optical surveys
e.g. the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), the Canada-France-Hawaii
Telescope Legacy Survey (CHFTLS), the European Southern Observatory
(ESO) archive and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) archive, and Infrared
surveys by UKIDSS, the NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) and the
Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE). This extension will be in
the frame work of the ARCHES (Astronomical Resource Cross-matching for
High Energy Studies) project, which is funded by the 7th Framework of
the European Union.

## Appendix A Appendix A

Gallery

We present a gallery of four galaxy clusters from the first cluster
sample with different X-ray fluxes and data quality at different
redshifts covering the whole redshift range of the sample. For each
cluster, X-ray flux contours (0.2-4.5 keV) are overlaid on combined
image from @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath -SDSS images. The upper panel in
each figure shows the X-ray-optical overlays. The field of view is
@xmath centred on the X-ray cluster position. In each overlay, the
cross-hair indicates the position of the brightest cluster galaxy (BCG),
while in Figure A.4 the cross-hair indicates the cluster stellar mass
centre although it is obvious that the BCG is located at the X-ray
emission peak. In each figure, the bottom panel shows the X-ray spectra
(EPIC PN (black), MOS1 (green), MOS2 (red)) and the best fitting MEKAL
model. The full gallery of the first cluster sample is available at
http://www.aip.de/groups/xray/XMM_SDSS_CLUSTERS/17498.html .

## Appendix B Appendix B

Selection criteria of LRGs

We used the colour and magnitude cuts that were used to select the
spectroscopic targets to construct BOSS galaxy sample in the SDSS-III
project. The selection criteria of galaxies targeted in BOSS were given
in (Padmanabhan et al. 2013) and were provided in the BOSS homepage ^(*)
^(*) * http://www.sdss3.org/dr9/algorithms/boss_galaxy_ts.php .

The BOSS includes two samples of galaxies,

(i) The BOSS @xmath LOWZ @xmath Galaxy Sample, @xmath
The selection cuts are as follows:

1.  @xmath , to define the colour boundaries of the sample around a
    passive stellar population, where @xmath

2.  @xmath , to select the brightest galaxies at each redshift, where
    @xmath

3.  @xmath , to define the faint and bright limits

(ii) The BOSS @xmath CMASS @xmath Galaxy Sample, @xmath
The colour and magnitude cuts are as follows:

1.  @xmath , to isolate high-redshift objects, where @xmath

2.  @xmath , to select the brightest or more massive galaxies with
    redshift

3.  @xmath , to define the faint and bright limits

4.  @xmath , to protect from some outliers

Note that we did not apply the criteria that were used to perform a
star-galaxy separation since we dealt only with objects that were
classified as galaxies indicated by spectroscopic class parameters given
in the SpecObj table. Note also all colours are computed using model
magnitudes while the magnitude cuts are applied on composite model
(cmodel) magnitudes. All magnitudes are corrected for Galactic
extinction following Schlegel et al. ( 1998 ) .

## Appendix C Appendix C \tablefoot

The entire cluster catalogue of Table 4.1 . \tablefoottext aParameters
extracted from the 2XMMi-DR3 catalogue. \tablefoottext bSpectroscopic
redshift as given in col. (21). \tablefoottext c2XMMi-DR3 flux, @xmath
[0.5-2.0] keV, and its errors in units of @xmath erg cm @xmath s @xmath
. \tablefoottext dComputed X-ray luminosity, @xmath [0.5-2.0] keV, and
its errors in units of @xmath erg s @xmath . \tablefoottext eX-ray
bolometric luminosity, @xmath , and its error in units of @xmath erg s
@xmath . \tablefoottext fX-ray-luminosity-based mass @xmath and its
error in units of @xmath M @xmath . \tablefoottext gParameters obtained
from the current detection algorithm in the optical band. \tablefoottext
hA note about each system as @xmath extended @xmath : new cluster from
the current algorithm, @xmath paper-II @xmath : a cluster in paper II
and spectroscopically confirmed from the present procedure.